









defn Definition 

[ 
] 
( 
) 


 


hep-th/0301232

Jan. 28, 2003



 
  orbifolds of the  heterotic string:

  1 Wilson line embeddings 

 
Joel Giedt (E-Mail: giedt@physics.utoronto.ca ) 


 

Department of Physics, University of Toronto, 

60 St. George St., Toronto, ON, M5S 1A7, Canada 


 
Abstract 

We consider compactification of the 
heterotic string on a 6-dimensional 
orbifold with one discrete Wilson line.
A complete set of all possible embeddings is given.
The unbroken subgroups of  are tabulated.
The extended gauge symmetry , recently
discussed by J. E. Kim [hep-th/0301177] for semi-realistic
 heterotic string models,
occurs for several embeddings,
as well as other groups that may be of interest
in unified string models.
The extent to which extra gauge
group factors can be hidden is discussed and
compared to the  case.
Along flat directions where an effective
hidden sector exists, the embeddings described here provide
for hidden gauge groups that are
not possible in the  heterotic string.




Introduction 
One of the main motivations for starting
with the  heterotic string in semi-realistic
applications is that the second  factor
would appear  to provide a natural source of
a hidden sector in which to break supersymmetry
by, say, gaugino condensation .  Indeed, in
a field theoretic dimensional reduction of the
10-dimensional theory to 4 dimensions, one finds
only Planck mass suppressed operators communicating
between the sets of gauge-charged fields coming
from the two 's.



However, when the underlying string
theory is formulated with 6 dimensions compactified
on an orbifold , quantum consistency of the 2-dimensional
conformal field theory necessitates the
addition of twisted sector states.
These are states that would not be present in a field theoretic
dimensional reduction of the original 10-dimensional
theory.  Quite generally, these twisted states
are simultaneously charged under subgroups of both 
factors .  Thus these states can mediate supersymmetry
breaking through gauge interactions and the so-called
hidden sector is no longer hidden. Typically
one overcomes this difficulty by breaking the
gauge interactions (most often extra 's and 's)
at near the string scale so that their interactions
are more or less Planck scale suppressed.  This
requires a careful choice of flat direction;
for examples see .

Against this backdrop it is worth reconsidering
the aversion to the  heterotic string, since: (i)
with an appropriate orbifold embedding chiral
representations occur, and (ii) extra gauge
symmetries can be hidden the same way that they
are hidden in  heterotic orbifolds.  It will be
seen from the gauge groups obtained below that most
embeddings give rise to a product of nonabelian
simple groups and some 's.  Generically representations will
arise that "feel" any pair of factors.  However,
if we can choose a flat direction that renders these
states supermassive (say, near the string scale),
then it would seem that we can manufacture an effectively
hidden sector that is comparable to what may be
obtained from a 4-dimensional  heterotic
string construction via orbifold compactification.
Indeed, it is generic in such constructions that
many states do decouple near the string scale,
due to the presence of an anomalous ,
since the anomaly is cancelled by a counterterm
that induces a Fayet-Iliopoulos term.
The point is that in either case,  or ,
there exist difficulties hiding the hidden sector
and specific assumptions regarding flat directions
must be made.

It should be remarked however, that we may not want
to hide extra gauge groups.  Rather, one may have
in mind gauge mediation scenarios (seefor a review, and the extensive references
therein) with exotic messenger
states that feel both the strong dynamics of the
sector that breaks supersymmetry and the ordinary
gauge symmetries of the observable world.  In this
case the larger messenger representations that
are possible in the  string could be advantageous.(In
the  heterotic string only twisted states can "talk"
between the two 's.  The twisted
states must have smaller  root torus winding numbers
and hence tend to be in smaller representations
of the gauge group.) 

In either event, model builders might wish to enlarge
their vistas by considering orbifolds of the 
heterotic string.  In this regard it is useful to
have some idea for a good starting point.  Selecting
the string scale gauge symmetry is certainly an important
first step, and it is therefore worth knowing what is
possible and how to get it.  With this goal in mind,
in the present article we enumerate all inequivalent embeddings
with 1 discrete Wilson line for the 6-dimensional  orbifold of
the  heterotic string.  Thus we perform the
analogue of previous calculations in the 
heterotic string; most notably those in.

Models that contain unbroken gauge groups
such as  are starting points for higher
affine level models.  It has been described infor instance how the presence of 
 representations can be used to break to the
diagonal subgroup, which is realized at level 2,
with the requisite Higgses to break further to
the Standard Model gauge group.  However, the authors
ofhave also concluded that for the  orbifolds
it is not possible to get a chiral spectrum for the resulting level 
 GUT.  They argue that this is because the net number of
fermion generations vanishes in constructions
with the requisite  representations.
After some elementary calculations,
we have reached the same conclusion.  Therefore,
although some embeddings here do have 
and the requisite representations to obtain
a level  diagonal subgroup with adjoint Higgses,
they are not viable routes to semi-realistic string GUTs, and one
should look elsewhere.

Another sort of "unified" model has recently been studied
by J. E. Kim for the  heterotic  orbifold.
This is the group .  The advantages of this
approach over standard-like constructions are
notable (see for further
details).  We would like to point out that several
of the embeddings listed here also give  in
the surviving group; we leave as a topic for further
investigation the phenomenology of these models,
which should share in the advantages noted in.

In Section 2 we describe the embeddings of the orbifold
action into the sixteen internal bosons responsible for
gauge symmetry in the low-energy theory.  In Section 3
we discuss equivalence relations that are used to reduce
the number of embeddings.  In Section 4 we summarize the
key elements used in constructing all consistent embeddings.
In Section 5 we address the various possible Wilson
lines and our results.  In Section 6 we state our conclusions.
In Appendix A we discuss an important set of equivalence
relations.  In Appendix B we present tables of the
159 embeddings found here.

Abelian  embeddings 
The sixteen internal left-moving bosons -the gauge
degrees of freedom-are compactified on the 
lattice, which we will denote by .  This
lattice consists of all 16-vectors of the form
(n_1,,n_16 ), (n_1 + ,,n_16 +),
subject to the constraints  and
.  We remind the reader
that  is the covering group for .
The  roots are
(1, 1, 0^14  ).
Here, signs are not correlated.  Underlining
indicates all permulations are to be taken.
The "exponent" indicates that the entry is
repeated 14 times.  Analogous notations will
be used below.

The  orbifold is obtained as the quotient
of the 6-dimensional  root torus
by simulataneous  rotations in each of
the three complex planes labeled by
complex coordinates .  This twist  in
the 6-dimensional compact space is embedded into
internal gauge degrees of freedom in an abelian
manner-through a shift:
z^i e^2i/3  z^i
X^I() X^I() + V^I.
In addition we allow for the possibility of discrete Wilson lines   which embed translations
in the 6-dimensional compact space.  It suffices
to specify this embedding for three such shifts,
due to constraint arising from the torus construction:
z^i z^i + 1 X^I() X^I() + a_i^I  i=1,3,5.
The four embedding vectors are subject to consistency
relations that follow from world-sheet modular
invariance:
3V,3a_i , 3V^2 , 3a_i^2 , 3Va_i , 3 a_i a_j .
An infinite number of solutions to these conditions
exist.  Fortunately only a finite number of
inequivalent possibilities are contained in this
set, due to equivalence relations that we discuss
in Section .

The massless gauge-charged states are
characterized by 16-dimensional winding vectors.
In the untwisted sector we have for states
with nontrivial weights with respect to the
Cartan subalgebra:
K , K^2 = 2.
The Wilson lines enforce a projection on these
states.  Only those that satisfy
a_i K  i=1,3,5
survive.  Those that do survive fall into three
categories:
3 V K = 
 
.
In truth this is a further projection onto states
with differing right-moving quantum numbers.

For the twisted states, corresponding to string states
with nontrivial monodromy, we have weights  which
satisfy
^2 = 4 3  - 2N_L, = K + V + _i=1,3,5  n_i a_i, K .
If left-moving oscillators are excited
in the 6-dimensional compact space, we can
have  or .  (However, 
only has a solution to tms  if the
embedding is equivalent to the trivial one;
i.e., .)
The integers  label fixed
point locations in each of the 3 complex planes.
Each twisted state is labeled by a triple
.  Note that ccd 
implies .

Equivalence relations 
The equivalence relations are essentially those
already alluded to in and discussed
in detail in for  orbifolds
of the  heterotic string.

Lattice group equivalence. 
This merely states that 
and  yield equivalent
embeddings for any choice .

Weyl group equivalence. 
This states that for any  root  (given
in oiy ) the
simultaneously Weyl reflection
V V - (V e) e, a_1 a_1 - (a_i e) e,
gives an equivalent embedding.
It is easy to check that the Weyl group here consists
of permutation of entries, pair-wise sign flips, and
compositions of these operations.  This is a considerable
simplification over the  case where half-integral
roots exist that lead to a more complicated Weyl group.
(The half-integral  weights are not roots.)

Fixed point label equivalences. 
First, we have  for any of the Wilson
lines.  This is just a relabeling 
of the fixed points.  Second, we have 
for any choice .  This is a relabeling
 of the fixed points.  For instance
the twisted sector winding vector is rewritten
= K + V + _j n_j a_j =
K + (V a_i) + (n_j 1) a_i
+ _j i  n_j a_j
to display that this is nothing but a relabeling
of fixed points, keeping in mind
.  The complete twisted sector
spectrum will be the same; only the labeling will be
different.

Building blocks 
Recall from ccd  that the
embedding vectors  must satisfy
.  Taking
into account vfb , the entries of
 are either all integral or all
half-integral.  We easily
restrict to integral weight lattice vectors
 using the lattice group equivalence;
simply add  where  is any half-integral
lattice vector.  Repeatedly adding 's, where 's are
the roots in oiy , allows us to lower
the magnitudes of entries of  until no entry
has magnitude greater than 2.
We can restrict to no more than one 
appearing in  using the lattice group
equivalence:  addition of some , where  is
one of the roots oiy , can be used to
eliminate any pair of 's.
The self-consistency constraints in ccd ,
which we find it convenient to write
(3V)^2 = 0 3, (3a_i)^2 = 0 3,
provide a further restriction, and since 
implies  even, we only get even  multiples of 3.
Thus,
(3V)^2 = 0 6, (3a_i)^2 = 0 6.
Therefore we find that  can only
belong to the set
(0^16 ), (1^6,0^10 ), (1^12 ,0^4), (2,1^2,0^13 ), (2,1^8,0^7), (2,1^14 ,0),
up to ordering and sign permutations.  It follows
that these 6 vectors form the basis of all subsequent analysis.

We fix ordering and signs for the twist embeddings using
the Weyl group equivalence.  Then the
inequivalent twist embeddings 
together with their unbroken subgroups of 
and untwisted matter are given in Table .
We find it convenient in what follows to concentrate
on how Wilson lines further break the gauge
group in the two distinct parts of the 16-dimensional
space, emphasized by the placement of a semicolon
in the entries for  in Table .  The
first subspace, where , we will refer
to as the nonzero sector.   The second
subspace, where , we will refer to
as the zero sector.   These are not to be
confused with the usual sectors of the Hilbert
space of the underlying conformal field theory.

 
 
 
Inequivalent twist embeddings. 


Wilson line embeddings 
Inequivalent Wilson lines  are obtained by taking
sign and ordering permutations of the six vectors jat 
subject to the  constraint in ccd ,
which we find it convenient to write
3V 3a_1 = 0 3 .
In the case of  we have only the six possibilities
listed in Table .

For the effects of Wilson lines when  it
is convenient to focus on the nonzero sector and the
zero sector separately.  Condition yut  constrains
the entries of  in the nonzero sector, whereas
it places no constraint on the entries of  in the
zero sector.  As an example we consider 
in some detail.  For the other cases we merely state
our results, except as regards some none-too-apparent
equivalences.

 












Entries in the nonzero sector for . 

In the nonzero sector the possibilities that exist for the
corresponding 6 entries of  are given in Table .
We have indicated how the  factor surviving
 is broken by the Wilson line.  Equivalence relations
have been used to eliminate obvious redundancies.  In
an appendix we show that embeddings with  are
equivalent to embeddings with .  This
is why we have dropped the former possibility.
For the zero sector we have the set
(1^9,-1) and  (1^n,0^10-n ) n=0,1,,10 .
Note that the sign in the first vector cannot
be removed by the pairwise sign flips without
disturbing .  In all other cases signs can
be removed in the zero sector.  In the case where
we have for  entries  in the nonzero sector
of , we must
also include the possibilities of
(-2,1^2,0^7) and  (-2,1^8,0)
in the zero sector of  since,
lacking 's in the nonzero sector, we cannot
push the  into the nonzero sector using
lattice group equivalence.
That is, in the other cases we can eliminate an entry of 
from the zero sector using the lattice group
equivalence  where
.

It is simple to determine the possibilities that
are consistent with a given choice for the nonzero
sector, by comparing to the vectors in jat 
and requiring that the total  be one of these
up to sign and ordering permutations.  For example
if we choose  in the nonzero sector
then we have only
(1,-1,0^4)  (1^4,0^6), (1^9,1)  ,
corresponding the second and third vectors in jat .
These are Embeddings 2.5-2.7 of Table .
As another example if we choose  in the
nonzero sector then we have only
(-2,1^2,^3)  (1^3,0^7), (1^9,0) ,
corresponding to the last two vectors in jat .
These are Embeddings 2.21 and 2.22 of Table .

The possibilities for the zero sector lead
to breakings of the  that survives
.  These are given in Table .
Of course they are correlated to what is
occurs in the nonzero sector.  Thus we obtain
as a complete list of consistent embeddings
for  the entries of Table .
We also list the nonabelian part  of the surviving
gauge group .  One should add as many 's are
are needed to have  a rank 16 group.

 













Entries in the zero sector for . 

Including the cases with , it can be seen
from Tables - that we have a total
of 159 different embeddings when one discrete Wilson line is
permitted.  Although it is plausible some redundancy may
yet exist, most of it has been removed using the
equivalence relations described above.  Certainly
the list is complete, meaning that any consistent
embedding with one discrete Wilson line is equivalent
to one of the embeddings presented here.

Conclusions 
We have argued that the  heterotic string provides
an interesting starting point for semi-realistic
string phenomenology.  We have worked out
a complete list of all embeddings with one discrete
Wilson line for the symmetric  orbifold.
To our knowledge this calculation has not been
presented previously in the literature.
We have addressed most of the equivalences that
relate embeddings.  Some of the less obvious
equivalences have been described in detail
in an appendix.

We have commented briefly on the prospects for
obtaining a hidden sector and for softly broken
supersymmetry via gaugino condensation in this sector.
It is our conclusion that there is every reason
to believe that some of the models described here
will be viable in this respect subject to an
appropriate choice of flat direction.  We leave
explicit explorations of this conjecture for
future investigation.

Many avenues for future research present themselves.
One interesting possibility has to do with the
phenomenology of the  embeddings, along the lines of.
Research in this direction is in progress and
we hope to report on it shortly.
Another issue worth exploration is flat directions
that might lead to a level   GUT
for the embeddings that contain  as a proper subgroup,
such as those embeddings with .
In this case, an important question is whether
or not it is possible to obtain a chiral spectrum
with respect to the diagonal subgroup.
A final issue we would like to mention
is whether or not gauge mediation is viable
for any of these models.

It is our hope that we have convinced the reader
that the  heterotic string can provide
intriguing unified models.  Further research
on the phenomenological possibilities when
this is taken as the starting point would certainly
be welcome a supplement to what is a comparatively
sporadic examination in the existing literature.



Acknowledgement 



This work was supported by NSERC.

Technical aspects of embedding equivalences 
In this appendix we address some of the more technical
details in uncovering the equivalence between different
embeddings.

One type of equivalence is particularly important,
since it is easy to overlook, but removes a good
deal of redundancy.  It is used on the nonzero sector
embeddings with a .  We show the intermediate step
which sketches out the proof of the equivalence:
(-2,1^m+2 ,^m+3n ) (1^m+3 ,2,^3n+m-1 )
(-2,1^3n+m-1 ,^m+3 ).
In the first step we add a pair of 's using
lattice equivalence.  In the second step we send
.  Whatever signs we had in the
zero sector can be restored by pairwise sign flips
there.

For example, an equivalence of the form
lur  exists in the embeddings with
.  In the nonzero sector
we have:
(-2,^4,0) (-2,1^3,-1,0).
It is for this reason that  does
not appear in our tables.

As a second example, consider the embeddings
with .  In this case when there
is a  present in the nonzero sector part of
, we have the range .
However, equivalences of type lur 
need to be accounted for.  It is not too hard
to check that:
[(i)]
all cases of 
are equivalent to one of the cases of ;
[(ii)]
all cases of 
are equivalent to one of the cases of ;
[(iii)]
all cases of 
are equivalent to one of the cases of ;
Then we can restrict to .
It is easy to check that the possibilities are
those listed in Table .

Embedding Tables 



 



 



 



 






































 



 

 99 

D. J. Gross, J. A. Harvey, E. Martinec and R. Rohm,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 54 (1985) 502.

H.-P. Nilles,
Phys. Lett. B 115 (1982) 193;
S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, H.-P. Nilles,
Phys. Lett. B 125 (1983) 457.

L. Dixon, J. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys. B 261 (1985) 678.

L. Dixon, J. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys. B 274 (1986) 285.

J. Giedt,
Ann. of Phys. (N.Y.) 297 (2002) 67hep-th/0108244 .

A. Font, L. E. Ibanez, F. Quevedo and A. Sierra,
Nucl. Phys. B 331 (1990) 421;
J. A. Casas and C. Munoz,
Phys. Lett. B 209 (1988) 214;
B 214 (1988) 63;
G. B. Cleaver, A. E. Faraggi and D. V. Nanopoulos,
Phys. Lett. B 455 (1999) 135;
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16 (2001) 425;
G. B. Cleaver, A. E. Faraggi, D. V. Nanopoulos, and
J. W. Walker, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 15 (2000) 1191;
Nucl. Phys. B 593 (2001) 471; hep-ph/0104091.

M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz,
Phys. Lett. B 149 (1984) 117;
M. Dine, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys. B 289 (1987) 585;
J. J. Atick, L. Dixon and A. Sen,
Nucl. Phys. B 292 (1987) 109;
M. Dine, I. Ichinose and N. Seiberg,
Nucl. Phys. B 293 (1987) 253.

M. K. Gaillard, J. Giedt,
Phys. Lett. B 479 (2000) 308hep-ph/0001219 ;
Nucl. Phys. B 636 (2002) 365hep-th/0204100 ;
Nucl. Phys. B 643 (2002) 201hep-th/0206249 ;
J. Giedt, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17 (2002) 1465hep-ph/0204017 ;
hep-ph/0208004.

G.F. Giudice, R. Rattazzi,
Phys. Rept. 322 (1999) 419hep-ph/9801271 .

G. Aldazabal, A. Font, L. E. Ibanez, A. M. Uranga,
Nucl. Phys. B 452 (1995) 3hep-th/9410206 ;
Nucl. Phys. B 465 (1996) 34 (1995) hep-th/9508033 .

L. E. Ibanez, H.-P. Nilles and F. Quevedo,
Phys. Lett. B 187 (1987) 25;
L. E. Ibanez, J. Mas, H.-P. Nilles and F. Quevedo,
Nucl. Phys. B 301 (1988) 157.

J. A. Casas, M. Mondragon and C. Munoz,
Phys. Lett. B 230 (1989) 63.

J. Giedt,
Ann. of Phys. (N.Y.) 289 (2001) 251hep-th/0009104 .

J. E. Kim, hep-th/0301177.








