 
Cosmological torsion background inhomogeneities  and Lorentz violation from QED 



 
By L.C. Garcia de Andrade(Departamento de Fisica Teo rica - IF - UERJ - Rua Sa o Francisco Xavier 524, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Maracana , CEP:20550.e-mail:garcia@dft.if.uerj.br ) 

 
A non-minimal photon-torsion axial coupling in the quantum electrodynamics (QED) framework is considered. The geometrical optics in Riemann-Cartan spacetime is considering and a plane wave expansion of the electromagnetic vector potential is considered leading to a set of the equations for the ray congruence. Since we are interested mainly on the torsion effects in this first report we just consider the Riemann-flat case composed of the Minkowskian spacetime with torsion. It is also shown that in torsionic de Sitter background the vacuum polarisation does alter the propagation of individual photons, an effect which is absent in Riemannian spaces. It is shown that the cosmological torsion background inhomogeneities induce Lorentz violation and massive photon modes in this QED.

Introduction 
A renewed interest in nonlinear electrodynamics has been recent put forward in the papers of Novello and his group specially concerning the investigation of a Born-Infeld electrodynamics in the context of general relativity (GR). The interesting feature of these non-linear electrodynamics and some Chern-Simons electrodynamics is the fact as shown previously by de Sabbata and Gasperini which consider a perturbative approach to QED and ends up with a generalized Maxwell equation with totally skew torsion. The photon-torsion perturbation obtained by this perturbative calculation allows the production of virtual pairs which is the vacuum polarization effect or QED. In this paper we consider the non-minimal extension of QED, given previously in Riemannian spacetime by Drummond and Hathrell to Riemann-Cartan geometry. We should like to stress here that the photon-torsion coupling considered in the paper comes from the interaction of a Riemann-Cartan tensor to the electromagnetic field tensor in the Lagrangean action term of the type  where . Therefore here we do not have the usual problems of the noninteraction between photons and torsion as appears in the usual Maxwell electrodynamics. The plan of the paper is as follows : 
In section II we consider the formulation of the Riemann-Cartan (RC) nonlinear electrodynamics and show that in de Sitter case the vacuum polarisation does alter the propagation of individual photons. In section III the Riemann-flat case is presented and geometrical optics in non-Riemannian spacetime along with ray equations are given. Section IV deals with the establishment of Lorentz violation from the presence of a tiny inhomogeneity in the torsion cosmological background in QED. Section V presents the conclusions and discussions. 
De Sitter torsioned spacetime and nonlinear electrodynamics 
Since the torsion effects are in general two weak as can be seen from recent evaluations with K mesons (kaons) which yields , we consider throughout the paper that second order effects on torsion can be drop out from the formulas of electrodynamics and curvature. In this section we consider a simple cosmological application concerning the nonlinear electrodynamics in de Sitter spacetime background. The Lagrangean used in this paper is obtained from the work of Drummond et al 
The constant values  may be obtained by means of the conventional Feynman diagram techniques. The field equations obtained are 
 
where  is the Riemannian covariant derivative,  is the electromagnetic field tensor non-minimally coupled to gravity, and  is the electromagnetic vector potential, R is the Riemannian Ricci scalar,  is the Ricci tensor and  is the Riemann tensor. Before we apply it to the de Sitter model, let us consider several simplifications. The first concerns the fact that that the photon is treated as a test particle , and the second considers simplifications on the torsion field. The Riemann-Cartan curvature tensor is given by 
 
the last term here shall be dropped since we are just considering the first order terms on the contortion tensor. Quantities with an upper asterix represent RC geometrical quantities. We also consider only the axial part of the contortion tensor  in the form
 
to simplify equation () we consider the expression for the Ricci tensor as
 
where  is the totally skew symmetric Levi-Civita symbol. By considering the axial torsion as coming from a dilaton field  one obtains
 
Substitution of expression () into formula () yields
 
Thus expression () reduces to
 
Therefore note that in the Riemann-flat case we shall be considering in the next section,  and  which strongly simplifies the Maxwell type equation. In this section the de Sitter curvature 
 
contraction of this expression yields
 
and substitution of these contractions into the Maxwell-like equation 
one obtains
 
Here  where  is the electron mass and  is the fine structure constant. This equation shows that the vacuum polarisation alters the photon propagation in de Sitter spacetime with torsion. This result may provide interesting applications in cosmology such as in the study of optical activity in cosmologies with torsion such as in Kalb-Ramond cosmology.
Riemann-flat nonlinear torsionic electrodynamics 
In this section we shall be concerned with the application of nonlinear electrodynamics with torsion in the Riemann-flat case, where the Riemann curvature tensor vanishes. In particular we shall investigate the non-Riemannian geometrical optics associated with that. Earlier L.L.Smalley have investigated the extension of Riemannian to non-Riemannian RC geometrical optics in the usual electrodynamics, nevertheless in his approach was not clear if the torsion really coud coupled with photon. Since the metric considered here is the Minkowski metric  we note that the Riemannian Christoffel connection vanishes and the Riemannian derivative operator  shall be replaced in this section by the partial derivative operator . With these simplifications the Maxwell like equation () becomes
 
which reduces to
 
we may also note that when the contortion is parallel transported in the last section the equations reduce to the usual Maxwell equation
 
Since we are considering the non-minimal coupling the Lorentz condition on the vector potential is given by
 
with this usual Lorentz condition substituted into the Maxwell-like equation one obtains the wave equation for the vector electromagnetic potential as
 
Now to obtain the equations for the Riemann-Cartan geometrical optics based on the nonlinear electrodynamics considered here we just consider the plane wave expansion
 
Substitution of this plane wave expansion into the Lorentz gauge condition one obtains the usual orthogonality condition between the wave vector  and the amplitude  up to the lowest  order given by 
 
note that by considering the complex polarisation given by  expression () reduces to 
 
 
this equation describes the expansion or focusing of the ray congruence and the influence of contortion inhomogeneity in it. The last equation is
 
note however that the RHS of () vanishes identically due to the symmetry in the product of the  vector contracting with the skew Levi-Civita symbol, and finally we are left with the null vector condition . 
Cosmological torsion background inhomogeneities and Lorentz violation 
In this section we investigate the structure of the electromagnetic wave equations and show that Lorentz violation and massive photon modes are induced by tiny temporal variations of the cosmological torsion background. This effect seems to be a torsionic Lenz-like effect. From expressions () we can split the Maxwell modified equations in the electric and  and magnetic equations 
 
 
 
 
By making use of equation () and the form  (where ) we obtain
 
which shows that there are massive photon modes induced by the presence of torsion, since in this case there are longitudinal propagation modes caused by the fact that the electric field is not orthogonal to the propagation direction of the electromagnetic waves. Here  represents the basis vector along the  in the inertial frame. From the Maxwell modified equations one is able to obtain the electric and magnetic waves equations
 
 
From the electric wave equation () one obtains
 
 
where  is the photon frequency. This last expression reduces to
 
Splitting this expression into its real and imaginary parts and taking the ansatz  we are able to obtain the following equation
 
The imaginary part of the equation imposes that the electric field be propagated in space parallel to the z-direction. This dispersion relation reads
 
where  is the angle between the wave vector  and the z-direction. By solving the algebraic second order equation () and keeping only first order terms in the variation of contortion we obtain
 
 
From these expressions one is able to compute the group velocities
 
 
As pointed out earlier by Carroll, Field and Jackiw in the context of the torsion-free Maxwell-Chern-Simons (MCS) electrodynamics, the two polarization modes propagates at different velocities which is evidence for Lorentz violation, this time due to a tiny torsion cosmological background inhomogeneity. Recently we have also show that a minimal coupling between the electromagnetic field and torsion may turn a Maxwell electrodynamics into a MCS one which allows us to place torsion upper and lower bounds on this tiny cosmological torsion background. Certainly the same could be done here.
Discussion and conclusions 
The geometrical optics discussed in the last section allows us to build models to test torsion effects on gravitational optical phenomena such as gravitational lensing and optical activity. Besides the geometrical optics investigated in the last section could be reproduced in the case of de Sitter cosmology. This approach can be considered in near future.
Acknowledgements 
 I would like to express my gratitude to Prof. R. Soldati for helpful discussions on the subject of this paper. Financial support from CNPq. is grateful acknowledged.
 10 
 M. Novello and J. M. Salim,Phys. Rev. D (2000).
 M. Novello and J. M. Salim,Phys. Rev. D (1979).
 V. de Sabbata and M. Gasperini, Introduction to Gravitation (1980) World scientific.
 V. de Sabbata and C. Sivaram, Spin and Torsion in Gravitation (1995) world scientific.
 I. T. Drummond and S.J. Harthrell, Phys. Rev. D (1980)22,343.
 L.C. Garcia de Andrade,Gen. Rel. and Gravitation (1990)622.
 U. Mahanta and P. Das, Torsion constraints from the recent measurement of the muon anomaly (2002) hep-th/0205278. 
 S. Kar,P. Majumdar,S. SenGupta and S. Sur, Cosmic optical activity from an inhomogeneous Kalb-Ramond field,arxiv hep-th/0109135 v1.
 L. Smalley,Phys. Lett. 117 A (1986) 267.
 S. M. Carroll, G.B. Field and R. Jackiw, Phys. Rev. D,41,4,1231.
 L.C. Garcia de Andrade, Cosmological background torsion limits from Lorentz violation (2001) hep-th/0105011.
 

