arabic 
 
Supersymmetry in Spaces of 

Constant Curvature 
 
D.G.C. McKeon

Department of Applied Mathematics

University of Western Ontario

London

CANADA  N6A 5B7

T.N. Sherry

Department of Mathematical Physics

National University of Ireland

Galway

IRELAND
email: DGMCKEO2@UWO.CA

email: TOM.SHERRY@NUIGALWAY.IE
Abstract 

Supersymmetry is considered in spaces of constant curvature (spherical, de Sitter
and Anti-de Sitter spaces) of two, three and four dimensions.

Introduction 

The expectation that supersymmetry will soon be shown to be a symmetry of nature motivates
us to analyze its properties in spaces of constant curvature. We view these 
dimensional spaces as being surfaces, in a flat embedding space
of dimension , that satisfy the (constraint) equation

For spherical space times , 
, for de Sitter space , 
 and for anti de Sitter space, 
, . The symmetry 
(or isometry) transformations on this surface
are generated by operators  which satisfy the algebra


(We use anti-Hermitian generators.) Depending on the metric, this is the
algebra of the groups ,  and  for ,
 and  respectively. We do not necessarily include Bosonic translation
generators , in contrast to ref [1].

The isometry group of flat space-times is a 
semi-direct product of an  group, such as the above,
with the Abelian group of translations; for example 
in  dimensions the Poincare  group is . 

The supersymmetry
generators  in flat space-time occur as "square roots" of the 
translation generators  (). The translation
generators  commute with the supersymmetry generators  and the 
generators .

In the case of the spaces of constant curvature translations are not isometries. The
supersymmetry generators  must then occur as "square roots" of the 
(); the  do not commute
with . Closure of the algebra requires in many cases extra Bosonic generators.
These do not necessarily commute with
everything and consequently are not "central charges" but rather
"internal symmetry generators". This is in contrast to the central
charges considered in [2].

In section 3 we consider a number of different possible supersymmetry
algebras which extend the algebra of (2) for these spaces of constant
curvature for  and . In each case we have identified
extensions with the least possible number of Fermionic generators. (We
consider cases in which the simplest Fermionic generator is a Dirac
spinor, unlike ref. [1].)

In Sections 4, 5 and 6 we focus our attention on the simplest
supersymmetry algebras in the spaces  and .  In Section 4 we
examine the representations of the algebras.  For  we classify the
states which carry an irreducible representation of the algebra and we
show that there is an upper bound on the angular momentum for these
states. For  we generalise the previous treatment of the 
supersymmetry algebra [8, 9, 16] to the  case. The 
algebra in  resembles closely the simplest supersymmetry algebra
in . In section 5 we provide examples of supersymmetric models on
 and  containing interacting scalar and spinor fields. In
section 6 we provide a realization in appropriate superspaces of the
minimal supersymmetry algebra in  and  using the Bosonic
coordinates of the 3-dimensional embedding spaces. In the  case
we define scalar superfields and we write down a number of distinct
supersymmetric actions in terms of them. In terms of the component
fields these actions correspond to realistic models on .

Notation and Dirac matrix identities are given in an appendix.

Supersymmetry Algebra 
 

As noted after eq. (A.36), in  dimensions the simplest spinor is necessarily
Dirac[3]; we consequently employ a Dirac spinorial generator .
It is necessary to include a
scalar internal symmetry generator  in addition to  in order
to define a closed supersymmetric extension of the algebra of eq. (2) for
. The two superalgebras whose non-vanishing (anti-)commutators are




satisfy the Jacobi identities. (Eq.
(A.34) is useful in proving this.)

Another pair of superalgebras associated with  is given by










It too is consistent with the Jacobi identities. 
The superalgebras of equations (4) differ from those of equations (3)
through the inclusion of an  vector bosonic generator  which
does not commute with  and a distinct anti-commutator 
.   plays the role of a
translation operator as in ref. [1].
In (3) and (4), the
 are anti-Hermitian while  and  are Hermitian.

 

In  dimensions also the simplest spinors are
Dirac [3]. Consequently one can obtain a superalgebra associated with
 by "dimensional reduction" of the superalgebras of eq. (3) and
eq. (4). One identifies the generators  with an 
vector generator . The superalgebra of (3) is then rewritten as















in addition to eq. (2).  Again,  is a translation operator, as in [1].

When "dimensionally reducing" the superalgebra of eq. (4), we again
identify  with ; in addition  becomes the
 scalar . It is straightforward to effect the "dimensional
reduction" of the superalgebra of eq. (4); the approach employed in
obtaining the superalgebra of eq. (5) from that of eq. (3) is followed.

Of more interest, there are two superalgebras associated with  which cannot
be obtained by "dimensional reduction". These superalgebras are the analogues of
equations (3). They require two internal symmetry generators  and
 to satisfy the Jacobi Identities. The superalgebras are given by







in addition to eq. (2). This superalgebra can be further decomposed into two decoupled 
subalgebras, using the chiral decomposition of the generators  into 
.

 

Superalgebras with one Fermionic generator associated with a two dimensional spherical
surface embedded in  dimensions cannot be obtained by
dimensional reduction of the superalgebras associated with , as in
 dimensions irreducible spinors are two component Dirac spinors while in  dimensions
they are four component Dirac spinors. Superalgebras, with one
Fermionic generator, similar in form to those of (3) and (6) can however be
written down on . If  is a
two-component Dirac spinorial generator, then we find two superalgebras
consistent with the Jacobi identities, namely






In addition there is in two dimensions a third superalgebra associated with
. It can be shown that (with )













is consistent with Jacobi identities. This algebra does not appear to
have an analogue on  or . 
If we define the symplectic Majorana spinors


then it follows from (8a,b) that




 is akin to the translation operator appearing in [1].
A similar decomposition of (7) (with the upper sign)
leads to 




 

By exploiting some of the properties of spinors in  dimensions (as given in
the appendix) we are able to formulate a supersymmetric algebra
associated with . We introduce two 4-component Dirac spinorial
generators  related by the symplectic Majorana
condition (A.15),


The generator  is defined to be

with  given by eq. (A.38). It is
evident that  is a Lorentz scalar in 
 dimensions.

A consistent superalgebra employing these spinors that involves
a translation operator  is given by










Showing that the Jacobi identities are satisfied involves using the
properties of Dirac matrices (A.28 - A.34). In addition, to analyze the
Jacobi identity associated with ,
(A.41) is useful.  The algebra of eq. (11) is closed under Hermitian
conjugation with the symplectic Majorana condition (9), provided
,  and 
.  Of course, one could always use a single 4-component 
Dirac spinor in place of the symplectic
Majorana spinors (9). In that case, an analogue of either (3) and (4) could
be introduced in ; similarly (11) has an analogue on . A
mapping between these two algebras in the latter case between the
algebras of (11) and (4) is provided by
, 
, .

 

In the case of , one can use spinorial
generators which are Majorana rather than Dirac, as the Majorana
condition can be consistently applied in  dimensions.

If now  with  defined by eq. (A.40), then we can
have




as a consistent supersymmetric generalization of the algebra associated with 
.
Again, (A.41) is crucial for establishing that the Jacobi identities are
satisfied.

We note that (12a) is consistent in the sense that 
; vectorial and scalar internal symmetry
generators cannot consistently be introduced into (12a) as
, .

 

Using the notation employed in the appendix  we note that the usual supersymmetry 
algebra for  dimensional
Minkowski space, is given
by 














Since no anticommutator of the form 
,  
 or 
 can consistenty be related to ,
this algebra cannot be viewed as a superalgebra in . 
However, as in [1] if
we relax the condition  and identify  with an internal
symmetry generator , then we can consistently relate

 and 
 to  so that the resulting
superalgebra
can be associated with . It is
























It can easily be shown that all Jacobi identities associated with the triples
, , , , 
, ,  and  are satisfied
by the algebra of (13b).  This can be viewed as a supersymmetric extension of the algebra
considered in [4].

 

In  dimensions, a spinorial generator  can be simultaneously Majorana
and Weyl. For the simplest supersymmetric extension of the isometry algebra of
, we consider a spinorial generator in  dimensions which is Majorana-Weyl. 
Using the notation of [5] with




we find that




is a superalgebra which is consistent with the Jacobi identities.

 

There is a degeneracy between two dimensional Anti-de Sitter space and
two dimensional de Sitter space. We begin by relating supersymmetry in  space to
superconformed symmetry in  dimensions [6].  The  superconformal algebra in
 dimensions is given
by [7-9]














(This can be derived by projecting the  superconformal algebra in
 dimensions  along the light cone [9].)  By setting 
 in (16), a consistent  version of this superconformal algebra can be obtained. We note
that , , , ,  and 
 are Hermitian.

The generators ,  and  ("Hamiltonian",
"dilitation" and "special conformal" generators respectively) have a
relationship with those of  space given in [6]. We follow this
prescription, defining the symmetry generators  in
 space by


In addition, we define the two component spinor



The  limit of supersymmetry algebra of (16) implies that 






If now we look at the full  superalgebra of (16) with



then (16) implies that





From (18) and (20) it is apparent that the spinor generators in the
algebras (19) and (21) each possess two degrees of freedom, and so are
not true Dirac spinors.  In the algebras (19) and (21)  and  can
be interpreted as being Majorana spinors.
The two Majorana spinors in (21) can be combined to form a
Dirac spinor

in this case (21) becomes






Using a Dirac spinor generator , we can formulate another consistent
superalgebra that is an extension of the 
algebra.











This superalgebra is analogous to the  superalgebra of eq. (8). It
 can be shown to satisfy the
Jacobi identities. On ,  can be decomposed into two
Majorana spinors

The algebra of (24), in terms of , becomes








where .
It is evident from (26) that  and  both belong to a subalgebra with the
structure of eq. (19).

Representations in Two Dimensions 
 

The analysis of the representations of the superalgebra of eq. (7) which is associated
with  closely follows the discussion of the  superalgebra in [10].
(The  superalgebra considered in [10] is not self-adjoint.) We
first note that there are two Casimirs associated with (7) (with the
upper sign)




and


The subalgebra of (7d) has the usual Casimir .

If  with



subject to the requirement

we then define



From (7) it follows that



furthermore


(The two signs in (33) correspond to the two algebras in (7).)

It is possible to show that

and hence

however,  is a linear combination of states which are
eigenfunctions of  corresponding to eigenvalues 
 and .

(The operators appearing in (7) are related to those appearing in the
discussion of  in [11] by , 
, , 
,
, 
when the upper sign in (7) is used.)

Norms of states can be computed; we find




as


For the norm of these states to be positive definite, we must have 

so that  forms an upper bound on .  This is similar to the
way in which the central charge forms an upper bound on the magnitude of
the momentum in the supersymmetric extension of the Poincare  group
in  dimensions and  dimensions [3,12].  By way of contrast, in the supersymmetric
extension of the Poincare  group in  dimensions or  dimensions, the central
charge forms a lower bound on the magnitude of the momentum [2,13-15,12].

 

Representations of the  superalgebra of (22) and (19) (and
consequently of (16)) can be worked out applying techniques used in [8]
for the  superalgebra.  The  superalgebra is also
considered in [9] and [16]; in the latter there is no analogue of the
operator  which is essential for the Jacobi identities.

Working directly with the operators of (16) (using the upper sign), the
subalgebra of (16a) has a Casimir


while the full superalgebra of (16) has the Casimir

where

with

Since

we see that


A general discussion of the  group of (16a) appears in [17].
The  subgroup of  has a Casimir

We can now classify states  by eigenvalues of ,
,  and  (taken to be , ,
 and  respectively).  From (43) we see that



where ; thus by (41)


Ladder operators for  are given by


in addition, there are Fermionic ladder operators

These operators are related by
















If now we define


then it follows that




as well as







(The  invariant  is easier to work with than
 itself as  is 
non-trivial while  is easily
evaluated.)  One can now diagonalzie the  matrices on the
right side of (53c) and (53d).

Using (50h) and (50i), it follows that


and


The forms for  and  are [17]



with the permitted values of  and  falling into four distinct
classes.  (In [8] the allowed values of  and  are restricted
by an additional  symmetry present in the physical system being
considered.)

Models in Two Dimensions 

It is possible to write down component field models in two dimensions
that are invariant under the supersymmetry transformations associated
with the superalgebras of (7), (19) and (21).  They bear a certain
resemblance to the hyperspherical models considered in [18-30].

 

It is possible to present a model invariant under transformations
associated with the algebra of eq. (7) (with the upper sign). We
consider the action







In (56),  and  are complex scalars, and  is a Dirac
spinor, defined on the surface of a sphere of radius  in three
dimensions. The angular momentum operator is 
 and  and  are arbitrary real
parameters. 

By using the identities of eqs. (A.1 - A.4), one can verify that for
arbitrary , (56) is invariant under both the supersymmetry
transformation





and the special transformations





where  is a constant Grassmann spinor and  is a
constant.  These transformations are generated by 
 using
the commutators
















(All other commutators vanish.) Jacobi identities involving (7) (upper
sign) and (59) are satisfied.

Other models on  also exist which possess a Fermionic symmetry. For
example let us consider



This differs in form from the action considered in [21] by the factor of
 in the first term (needed to ensure Hermiticity as 

). The action of eq. (60) possess the
superinvariance


where  is again a Grassmann spinor. This symmetry however does not
appear to be consistent with the superalgebra of (7).

As a second model, let us take


This is invariant under



as 
, but once again this
symmetry does not appear to be consistent with (7).   We note that
 has many of the properties of 
in Euclidean space [31,32].

 

Models associated with the superalgebras of (19) and (21) can also be
devised.  The model





is invariant under




if . (Note that

.) The superalgebra of (19) is consistent with the
transformations of (65).

In conjunction with the superalgebra of (21), (an  supersymmetry
algebra), one has an invariant model whose action is



with now




In (64)  is a Majorana spinor and  and  are real scalars;
in (64)  is a Dirac spinor
and  and  are complex spinors.

Superspace for Two Dimensions 

We can realize the two dimensional
superalgebras of eqs. (7) and (19) in superspace. Superspace models
invariant under (19) can be formulated.
 

In conjunction with the two superalgebras of (7), we consider a
superspace with coordinates ,  and 
where  is a two component Dirac Grassmann spinor. In addition,
we employ an auxiliary constant . The two superalgebras of (7)
have a representation [33]













Two quantities that commute with  are

 and 


. The changes induced by  and
 on  and  are








The physical interpretation of  is not clear. Also, it is not
apparent how to construct a superfield containing component fields (such
as appear in (56)) that constitute an irreducible representation of the
supersymmetry transformation induced by (68). This may be due to an
inability to find a Grassmann operator that anticommutes with  and
 as represented in (68).

 

In conjunction with the superalgebra of (19) we have a superspace
composed of Bosonic coordinates  and Fermionic coordinates
 where  is a two component Majorana spinor. A suitable
representation of this superalgebra in superspace is provided by






No analogue of the variable  appearing in (68) is needed. Two
quantities that commute with  appearing in (70) are

and



We also can define




Several useful relations are








From (72), we see that one can define a supersymmetric invariant
condition

on a scalar superfield  . This is analogous to the homogeneity
condition used in  space in [33].  A suitable invariant action can
be taken to be 


If now


then by (75)


Noting that








and


we see that the component form of (76) is









Upon integrating over , we find that the action on the
 surface is





If , then it follows
that





There is no immediate connection between the actions of (64) and (81),
although the changes of (82) can be identified with those of (65)
provided , 
 and  in (82).

In place of (76) one could also consider the supersymmetric invariant
actions






as well as supersymmetric invariant interactions


(Actually, (83a) and (83c) are identical as .)

Establishing supersymmetric invariance of  in (76) and
(83) is not easily done if one works directly in terms of component
fields as in (81). However one can argue as follows to establish this
invariance. The expansion  is itself a scalar
superfield given by





and hence the change in the product of two scalar fields is given by










Since this is the divergence of a current at order
, , ,  and  are all
supersymmetric invariant actions.

Discussion 

In this paper we have presented the simplest superalgebras associated
with spaces of constant curvature in two, three and four dimensions. In
this way, some of the superalgebras considered in [35] are exhibited
explicitly.  In addition, some novel superalgebras (eg, that of (13))
have been noted whcih do not fall into the categories considered by
Nahm [37] or Pilch et al. [38].

We have also considered the two dimensional models in more detail. In
particular, we have examined their representations. One peculiar result
occurs in the case of the superalgebra of eq. (7) associated with , namely 
the requirement that states
have positive definite norm restricts the angular momentum to be less
than a value given in terms of 
the eigenvalues of the internal symmetry generator (cf eq. (38)). In
addition, component field models associated with superalgebras related
to  and  have been devised, and superfield models invariant
under the  superalgebra are given.

Clearly more work remains to be done. Formulating models in three and
four dimensions is a high priority. Considering spaces of constant
curvature in dimensions higher than four also merits attention. It may
also be possible to relate the algebra of (13) to non-commutative
geometry [39].
These questions currently are under consideration.

Appendix 
Three Dimensions 

In  dimensions, the Dirac matrices can be identified with the Pauli spin
matrices . These satisfy







Charge conjugation of a spinor  is given by 
 where

 is taken to be


In  dimensions, we use the metric  and
choose
, ,  so that

as . We take also


Since


both  and  are invariant under the
transformation


where


The matrix  is defined by (A.5) and (A.6) in both  and ; in
 .

If in  dimensions, ,  and  are all Majorana (viz. 
, , ) then we have






In  dimensions,  so one cannot impose the Majorana
condition; spinors can be Dirac, or 
alternatively, one can have a pair of "symplectic Majorana" spinors
 satisfying

where , .

Four Dimensions 

In  dimensions, we choose the following representation for the Dirac matrices












so that








Contracting the expansion




with , , , 
and  in turn leads to 



so that




Similarly, one has




Together, (A.20) and (A.21) give









For charge conjugation, we now take

and with ,

If , then  so a spinor
cannot be Majorana; it can be Dirac, or we can have a pair of
symplectic Majorana spinors.

In  dimensions, where , we choose










The charge conjugation matrix  is taken to be  and so that if


then it is apparent that the Majorana condition can be imposed. 

One can also
use 2-component notations for spinors in  dimensions, using the conventions
of [35].  However, we find it convenient to avoid 
distinguishing between upper and lower case indices and to not use the
dot notation for indices; rather we choose to strictly employ matrix notation.

We first define






These satisfy the relations


















Consider now 2-component spinors  and  and define


It follows from the above relations that if


then









It is apparent then that the following structures are Lorentz invariant:





A suitable candidate for a pair of relativisticly invariant wave equations
are


Together, these equations imply that


For  dimensions we employ












with . If now

and , then
it is
apparent that a spinor can now be both Majorana  and
Weyl ( where 
).
The 2-component notation we use for  dimensions is defined in [5].

Five Dimensions 

In  dimensions, we use the matrices of (A.16); the analogues of (A.17)
continue to hold. The following equations
are useful













Just as (A.18) can be used to derive (A.19), we can show









Together, (A.31) to (A.33) can be used to demonstrate that




In  dimensions we have









and hence it is appropriate to define  and to have
 so that

We hence take ;  cannot be Majorana, 
but may be Dirac or symplectic Majorana.
In  dimensions we employ









define  and  with


so that . Since ,
spinors can be either Dirac or symplectic Majorana, but not Majorana.

In  dimensions, we have









so that it is appropriate that we take

and  where

so that  as in  dimension. The Majorana
condition  is consistent as  in  dimensions.

An additional identity that is useful in five dimensions is




this holds in  dimensions,  dimensions and  dimensions.  It is proven by
expanding the left side of (A.41) in the form 
;
contraction with ,  and
 leads to .
Acknowledgement 
We would like to thank NSERC for financial support. R. and D. MacKenzie had a 
number of helpful suggestions. 

 99 
 J.W. van Holten and A. Van Proyen, J. Phys. A15,
3763 (1982).
 A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Nucl. Phys. B80, 317 (1974).
 T. Kugo and P.K. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B221, 357 (1983)

P. Freund, "Introduction to Supersymmetry" Cambridge U. Press,
Cambridge (1986)

D.G.C. McKeon and T.N.Sherry, Ann. of Phys. (NY) 28, 2 (2001); ibid 285, 
221 (2000).
 M.S. Snyder, Phys. Rev. 71, 38 (1947); Phys. Rev. 72, 68 (1947).
 F. Brandt, D.G.C. McKeon and T.N. Sherry, Mod. Phy. Lett. A
15, 1349 (2000).
 G. Mack and A. Salam, Ann. of Phys. 53, 174 (1969).
 V.P. Akulov and A. Pashnev, Theor. Math. Phys. 56, 862
(1984)

A. Bohm and M. Kmiecik, J. Math. Phys. 29, 1163 (1988).
 E. D'Hoker and L. Vinet, Phys. Lett. 137B, 72 (1984).
 F.A. Dilkes and D.G.C. McKeon, Int. J. of Mod. Phys. A 14,
761 (1999).
 M. Scheunert, W. Nahm and V. Rittenberg, J. Math. Phys. 18,
155 (1977).
 L. Frappat, P. Sorba and A. Sciarrino, hep-th9607161.
 D.G.C. McKeon, Nucl. Phys. B591, 591 (2000).
 E.B. Bogomol'nyi, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 24, 449 (1976).
 M.K. Prasad and C. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 760
(1975).
 D. Olive and E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 78B, 97 (1978).
 V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and G. Furlan, Nuovo Cimento A34,
569 (1976).
 D.G. Wybourne, "Classical Groups for Physicists" (John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1973).
 S. Adler, Phys. Rev. D6, 3445 (1972).
 S. Adler, Phys. Rev. D6, 2400 (1973).
 I. Drummond, Nucl. Phys. B94, 115 (195).
 I. Drummond and G. Shore, Ann. of Phys. 117, 89 (1979).
 G. Shore, Ann. of Phys. 117, 121 (1979).
 I. Drummond, Phys. Rev. D19, 1123 (1979).
 I. Drummond and G. Shore, Phys. Rev. D19, 1134 (1979).
 I. Drummond and S. Hathrell, Phys. Rev. D21, 958 (1980).
 G. Shore, Phys. Rev. D21, 2226 (1980).
 R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, Phys. Rev. D14, 517 (1976).
 A. Belavin and A. Polyakov, Nuc. Phys. B123, 429 (1977).
 D.G.C. McKeon, Phys. Rev. D42, 1250 (1990).
 M. Leblanc, R.B. Mann, P. Madsen and D.G.C. McKeon, Mod.
Phys. Lett. A5, 2031 (1990).
 P. O'Donnell and B. Wong, Phys. Lett. 138B, 274 (1984).
 D.G.C. McKeon, Can. J. Phys. 68, 54 (1990).
 D.G.C. McKeon and T.N. Sherry - UWO/NUIG report,
unpublished (2001).
 P.A.M. Dirac, Ann. of Math. 36, 657 (1935).
 D. Balin and A. Love, "Supersymmetric Gauge Field Theory
and String Theory" IOP Publishing, Bristol 1994.
 V.G. Kac, Comm. Math. Phys. 53, 31 (1977)

W. Nahm, V. Rittenberg and M. Scheunert, J. Math. Phys. 17, 1629 and
1640 (1976)

A. van Proyen, hep-th9910030.
 W. Nahm, Nucl. Phys. B135, 149 (1978).
 K. Pilch, P. Van Nieuwenhuizen and M.F. Sohnius,
Commun. Math. Phys. 98, 105 (1985).
 R. Szabo, hep-th 0109162

M. Douglas and N. Nekrasov, hep-th 0106048.








