equation section 
















Geometry and Topology
 of
 Relativistic Two-Particle Quantum Mixtures 
S. Hunzinger, M. Mattes, and M. Sorg
 II. Institut fur Theoretische Physik der
Universitat Stuttgart
 Pfaffenwaldring 57 
 D 70550 Stuttgart, Germany 

 
Within the framework of Relativistic Schrodinger Theory (an alternative form of quantum mechanics for relativistic many-particle systems) it is shown that a general N-particle system must occur in one of two forms: either as a "positive" or as a "negative" mixture, in analogy to the fermion-boson dichotomy of matter in the conventional theory. The pure states represent a limiting case between the two types of mixtures which themselves are considered as the RST counterparts of the entangled (fermionic or bosonic) states of the conventional quantum theory. Both kinds of mixtures are kept separated from dynamical as well as from topological reasons. The 2-particle configurations () are studied in great detail with respect to their geometric and topological properties which are described in terms of the Euler class of an appropriate bundle connection. If the underlying space-time manifold (as the base space of the fibre bundles applied) is parallelisable, the 2-particle configurations can be thought to be generated geometrically by an appropriate () splitting of the local tangent space.
Introduction and Survey 

Surely one of the most striking features of matter refers to the fact that one encounters two distinct types of particles: fermions and bosons. As safely as this fact is established from both the conceptual and experimental point of view (for a review see ref. ), it seems unclear for most people what is the precise theoretical origin of this matter dichotomy and why there do not exist more than two kinds of material particles. In view of the lack of a right understanding of the reason why there are only two particle species, some people hold that one must first "understand why nature makes such a particular choice from among a host of other possibilities " . Consequently for that purpose, they believe, one should "pursue every theoretical possibility we may conceive at present "  and these endeavours should refer to the rather general framework of paraquantization. Other people do not trouble themselves about the true origin of the fermion-boson dichotomy but take this simply as an experimentally based fact, and consequently they are content with rephrasing this fact in mathematical terms (i.e. the postulates of symmetrization for bosons and anti-symmetrization for fermions). In this sense, e.g., Dirac simply states that "other more complicated kinds of symmetry are possible mathematically, but do not apply to any known particles " (ref. , p. 211). 

One could go even one step further by resorting to the well-known anthropic principle   which may be evoked whenever a well-established observation cannot be based upon a sound theoretical foundation. Such a situation typically occurs in cosmology  but the present fermion-boson dichotomy could also evoke that principle, e.g. by asking: "Did God - for lack of a better word - build a series of failed worlds which spottered and died, or exploded and disintegrated, before discovering the stabilizing effect of anti-commutation relations for half-integral spin fields? " (ref. , p. 4). However it rather seems reasonable to assume that the fermion-boson dichotomy "could conceivably be an essential ingredient of a more fundamental view of the world This could be the case in fundamental string theories or their successors  " .

In any case, such an unclarified situation with the matter dichotomy should provide sufficient motivation for studying this problem also within the context of non-standard quantum theories. In this sense the present paper is devoted to the study of the matter dichotomy within the framework of Relativistic Schrodinger Theory (RST), an alternative form of quantum theory being based upon fluid-dynamic concepts rather than probabilistic ones  -. Indeed it has turned out that a matter dichotomy emerges in this theory in the form of positive and negative mixtures  resembling very much the symmetrized (bosonic) and anti-symmetrized (fermionic) states of the conventional quantum theory: the positive mixtures imply a certain kind of fusion  of two particles into one charge density, and the negative mixtures describe the recession of the two charge densities from one another such that the density of one particle is zero in that region of space-time where the density of the other particle is non-zero (charge separation ). Consequently both particles in a negative-mixture configuration are forbidden to occupy the same space-time points which evidently yields a "stabilizing effect" for composite matter coming about in the conventional quantum theory through the anti-symmetrization postulate (or anti-commutation postulate for operators, resp.).

However before plunging deeply into the physical implications of this RST matter dichotomy, one first would like to understand better both the  differences and the common features of both types of RST mixtures from a purely mathematical  point of view.  In this sense, the present paper presents a detailed study of the geometric and topological properties of both types of mixture configurations, deferring the discussion of the physical implications to a separate treatment. For the purpose of a survey of the corresponding results, it is very instructive to first recall some of the basic (probabilistic) concepts of the conventional quantum theory and oppose these to the analogous kinematical elements of the (fluid-dynamic) RST. Since, on the conventional side, there exists no successful relativistic  quantum mechanics for many-particle systems (in contrast to the very successful quantum field theory), we have to restrict ourselves here to a comparison of the non-relativistic  conventional theory with RST (as a fully relativistic theory). Furthermore we are satisfied in the present paper with a treatment of 2-particle  systems (neglecting also the particle spin) which may be sufficient to display already the essential many-particle effects. (For including also the spin into RST see, e.g. ref. ).

Conventional Quantum Theory 

Since in the conventional theory the 2-particle Hilbert space is the tensor product of the two 1-particle spaces, a disentangled  2-particle state  is simply the product of two 1-particles states  and , i.e.
 
In contrast to this product construction, a disentangled 2-particle state  in RST is the direct sum of the two 1-particle states
 
or reformulated in mathematical terms: the 2-particle vector bundle (with the RST 2-particle wave function  as bundle section) is the Whitney sum of both 1-particle bundles. If some interaction between the particles is switched-on (e.g. the electromagnetic interactions, especially the static Coulomb interaction) the conventional state eq:prod  cannot retain its simple product form eq:prod  but develops into a general 2-particle state  obeying the symmetrization postulate
 
In contradiction to certain claims in the older literature, the modern textbooks clearly state that "this postulate  (expressing the matter dichotomy in the conventional theory) cannot be deduced from other principles of quantum mechanics"  (ref. , p. 475).

If the interparticle interactions are switched-off again, the generally entangled 2-particle state  eq:syp  does not return to the original disentangled form eq:prod  but develops to a simply entangled state  which is build up again by two 1-particle states but still obeys the symmetrization postulate eq:syp 
 
This form of the wave function persists even when the particles are localized at large spatial separation and thus gives rise to the well-known Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradoxes .

Relativistic Schrodinger Theory 

According to the Whitney sum construction eq:sum  (in place of the conventional product arrangement eq:prod ), the concept of entanglement  is defined in RST in a somewhat different way, namely by describing matter by means of a (Hermitian) intensity matrix  in place of a wave function . The disentangled RST states  eq:sum  can also be written in form of an intensity matrix  but here  adopts a special form, namely the tensor product of  and its Hermitian conjugate , see equation eq:IPsi  below. A disentangled RST state  eq:sum  obeys the Relativistic Schrodinger Equation eq:RSE  and an entangled RST configuration  (a "mixture") satisfies the Relativistic von Neumann equation eq:calI . The Hamiltonian , governing both these field equations eq:RSE  and (), is itself a dynamical object of the theory and has to be determined from its field equations eq:IntCond  and eq:ConEq . All these RST prerequisites, being indispensable for the subsequent mathematical elaborations, have been collected into Section II .

However, the crucial point with the matter dichotomy is now that it arises in RST as a direct consequence of the RST dynamics itself and not as an additional kinematical postulate as in the conventional theory eq:syp . This is proven in Section III   for an arbitrary number  of (scalar) particles. The RST dichotomy consists in the fact that the determinant of the  intensity matrix  is always of definite sign for any mixture type, see the corresponding discussion of the equation eq:DNdetIN  below, together with fig. 1. Thus, in RST there occur exactly two forms of matter, namely the positive and negative mixtures; this is in contrast to the conventional theory which has its problems with the theoretical  exclusion of the higher-order multiplets of the symmetric group of identical particle permutations, leaving  over only the symmetric and anti-symmetric states as its lowest-order representations.

After the matter dichotomy has thus been safely established for a general N-particle system, we restrict ourselves for the remainder of the paper to the 2-particle systems (N=2) . Therefore in Section IV  all relevant RST mathematics is specialized down to the 2-particle case which requires as the typical fibre of the vector bundle the two-dimensional complex space  (and its tensor-product associates). The interesting point with the RST 2-particle kinematics is here that one can reparametrize the whole field system by single-particle variables and by exchange fields. This is again in contrast to the conventional theory which (for an entangled state) does attribute one single 2-particle wave function  eq:syp -eq:syp2  to both particles but does not attribute a 1-particle wave function to either particle.

As a consequence of this kinematic peculiarity, one can clearly identify in RST the exchange forces (different from the gauge forces) which are responsible for the fusion effects of the positive mixtures ( bosonic states) and separation effects of the negative mixtures ( fermionic states). Indeed the mixture variable  enters the single-particle RST dynamics e4:44  together with the exchange fields   in form of a potential term so that one arrives at the disentangled 2-particle situation (i.e. pure RST state  eq:sum  analogous to the conventional  eq:prod ) when one puts the exchange fields to zero. Such a disentangled RST situation can then be described by two ordinary Klein-Gordon equations e4:46 , namely one equation for either particle. This RST picture of how the exchange forces produce the fusion and separation effects has no counterpart in the conventional theory, where it is not possible to trace back the Pauli exclusion principle to the action of some kind of force preventing, say, a fermion from occupying the same quantum state as an other identical fermion (see the discussion of this problem in ref. ).

But with a convenient parametrization of the 2-particle systems being now at hand, one can study the geometric and topological differences of both kinds of mixture configurations (Section V ). Here, the point of departure is the observation that the dynamical equations (of Section IV) ensure the existence of a closed 2-form  which is composed of the mixture variable  and the exchange fields  and , see equation e5:1  below. It is just the process of revealing the origin of the closedness of  which yields a detailed demonstration of the mathematical peculiarities of the mixtures:

First it can be shown that  is the Euler class of an appropriately constructed fibre bundle over space-time (density bundle) so that the closedness relation for  e5:3  appears as nothing else than the Bianchi identity for the bundle curvature. Next it is proven that the winding numbers of the Euler class  are always zero and thus  is an exact  2-form over space-time (E =de , see equation e5:5 ). The origin of the exactness of  lies in the fact that  is the pullback of the surface 2-cell of the one-parted hyperboloid  for the negative mixtures and of the two-parted hyperboloid  for the positive mixtures, see fig. 1. Since these two surfaces  carry different topologies ( is infinitely connected, the connected components of  are simply connected), a positive-mixture configuration can never be continously deformed into a negative mixture (and vice versa). This may be considered as the RST counterpart of the fermion-boson superselection rule of the conventional theory which is of purely phenomenological character.

The 2-particle configurations admit a concrete geometric realization if the underlying space-time manifold (as the base space of the applied fibre bundles) is parallelisable. As is well-known in differential geometry, any parallelisable manifold admits a global  frame of tangent vectors and thus admits the introduction of a flat  connection for its tangent bundle (though this does not imply in general the flatness of the tangent metric). On the other hand, the RST 2-particle mixtures require the existence of a trivial principal Lorentz bundle over space-time, whose sections generate a flat Lorentz connection via the (pullback of the) Maurer-Cartan form over the Lorentz group . The reduction of this 4-frame to a 2-frame then generates the bundle geometry of the 2-particle mixtures (Section VI ).
Relativistic Schrodinger Theory 

In order to present the subsequent discussions in a sufficiently self-contained form, we briefly sketch the RST fundamentals with emphasis of those aspects which lead to the emergence of the matter dichotomy, the main subject of the present paper. According  to the RST claim of representing a general theory of matter, we evoke the mathematical framework of fibre bundles over the pseudo-Riemannian space-time as the base space and we identify the corresponding bundle connection with the physical gauge potentials according to the principle of minimal coupling.

Thus the coordinate-covariant derivative  refers to the Levi-Civita connection   of the pseudo-Riemannian fibre metric  in the tangent bundle of space-time, the gauge potential   acts as the bundle connection in the complex vector bundles over space-time (with typical fibre ). The gauge-plus-coordinate covariant derivative of a bundle section is thus . The N-component wave function  represents a section of the vector bundle and the intensity matrix  (generalizing the concept of wave function) is a Hermitian section  of the product bundle whose typical fibre is the tensor product  of the vector fibres . Further examples of operator-valued sections are the anti-Hermitian field strength  as the curvature of the connection  
 
The Hamiltonian  (being neither Hermitian nor anti-Hermitian) may be split up into its (anti-) Hermitian parts as follows
 
Here, both the kinetic field  and the localization field  are Hermitian   and build up the (anti-)Hermitian constituents of the Hamiltonian .

RST Dynamics 

The basic  dynamical equations of the theory may be considered here in a purely formal view as mathematically consistent links between those RST objects mentioned above. The first equation to be mentioned is the relativistic Schrodinger equation (RSE) for the wave function  
 
or its generalization, resp., the relativistic von Neumann equation (RNE) for the intensity matrix :
   
Contrary to Schrodinger's non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the relativistic Hamiltonian  is here not a rigid object, to be fixed a priori, but is a dynamical variable obeying its own field equations. The first of these is the "integrability condition "
 
and the second is the "conservation equation "
 
with  being the mass operator, i.e. for identical particles of mass M
 

Conservation Laws 

The meaning of the integrability condition eq:IntCond  is to ensure the existence of (local) solutions for the RST dynamics, but the conservation equation eq:ConEq  implies the existence of certain conservation laws, such as the charge conservation for  particles 
 
or the energy-momentum law
 
Here the Lorentz force density  is being composed of the field strength  and the currents  as usual
 
where the (Hermitian) force operator  is given by  
 
Clearly if the energy-momentum content of the gauge field is included in the energy-momentum density , one has the usual energy-momentum conservation
law  for the total system
 

The last equation, closing the whole dynamical system, is taken as the (generally non-Abelian) Maxwell equation
 
(). 
Thus in the last step, it remains to specify the current operator  in terms of the matter variable  and then one has a closed dynamical system. The desired relationship between the intensity matrix  and current  is obtained by decomposing the current operator  with respect to the generators  of the gauge group
 
and then defining the current components  as
 
where the velocity operators read in terms of the Hamiltonian  for scalar particles
 
(the velocity operator for a spinning particle coincides with the Dirac matrices:  ). One can easily show that this arrangement automatically guarantees the validity of the charge conservation laws eq:chcon  as a consequence of the RST dynamics with no need of additional requirements.

Such a pleasant effect occurs also for the energy-momentum laws eq:enlaw  and eq:EnCon . Indeed it is possible to define the energy-momentum content of matter  in such a way that the laws eq:enlaw  and eq:EnCon  are automatically  obeyed again as an implication of the RST dynamics itself. More concretely, one defines the energy momentum density  as
 
with the energy-momentum operator  for scalar particles being given through
 
(see ref.  for the energy-momentum operator of Dirac particles). If the gravitational interactions are to be included, one adds the Einstein equations to the RST dynamics which however enforces the energy-momentum conservation law eq:EnCon  as a consistency condition, in place of  the weaker source equation eq:enlaw . The stronger condition eq:EnCon  is attained by adding the energy-momentum density of the gauge field to that of the matter field eq:TtrIT  which then yields a closed system with the strong law eq:EnCon  playing the part of a closedness condition .

Amplitude Field 

The preceding examples of automatic  conservation laws have been presented in such a great detail because, for the present purpose of demonstrating the emergence of a RST matter dichotomy, it is important to have a further such automatic consequence of the RST dynamics: namely the emergence of a scalar amplitude field  from the localization operator  eq:Hsplit .

In order to see more clearly the reason why the general RST dynamics gives rise to such an amplitude scalar , one first transcribes the integrability condition eq:IntCond  to the kinetic and localization fields  eq:Hsplit  and thus finds for the Hermitian part  of 
 
and similarly for the localization field 
 
By inspecting the trace of the localization field
 
one finds for the trace  of  the following curl relation from ():
 
Consequently, this vector field  must be a gradient field generated by some scalar (, say)
 
Here,  is chosen as the dimension of the typical vector fibre (i.e.  for two-particle systems, see below). The significance of this amplitude field   for the matter dichotomy will readily become evident.

Matter Dichotomy 

The very general features of RST mentioned up to now are already sufficient in order to conclude that the RST matter emerges in two different forms which are dynamically kept apart: the positive and negative mixtures, being separated by the pure states as a certain kind of borderline configuration. Indeed, as will become evident through the following arguments, we even need only the RNE eq:calI  together with the integrability condition eq:IntCond in the form eq:curlL -eq:Lscal  in order to establish the desired matter dichotomy. This will be readily proven explicitly for the lowest-order cases  and from here it becomes evident by means of some inductive arguments that the dichotomy must exist for any fibre dimension  (which is the minimal number of fibre dimensions necessary for the description of  scalar particles). 

Deviators 

The point of departure is the recursive construction of certain polynomials  of degree  for the intensity matrix . Introducing here the deviation densities   as the trace of the deviators   , i.e.
 
the deviators  are defined through
 
    n  = ((n-1)1 -n-1  )

  ( n = 2,3,4,5,). The starting point of the recursion is the lowest-order deviator  which we put identical to the intensity matrix  itself
 
   
Then comes the first (non-trivial) deviator 
 
    2  = - ^2

  ((2) = 1 2  ) ;correspondingly the second deviator reads 
 
And finally let us mention the third deviator 
  
     
    &= (1  - )

    &= -^4+^3-^2+  

  ( 1 3 ) .
 
It should be evident that this recursive construction of deviators becomes trivial when the deviation order  coincides with the fibre dimension , i.e. we have
 
Thus the last non-trivial deviator for fibre-dimension  is  and the next one vanishes,  , i.e. by means of equation eq:Devi 
 
However, for a regular intensity matrix  this implies for fibre dimension 
 
which is nothing else than the well-known Hamilton-Cayley identity  of matrix calculus . Thus for fibre dimension  we conclude for the -matrix 
 
with the deviation density  being identical to the determinant of the intensity matrix, i.e.
 
Similarly for the fibre dimension  one deduces from equation eq:D3  for the -matrix 
 
where the second deviation density  is now the determinant of the intensity matrix 
 
Or finally, for fibre dimension , the closing condition eq:DN  yields on account of equation eq:D4  the corresponding Hamilton-Cayley identity
 
with
 

These few examples (in place of a rigorous induction scheme) may be sufficient in order to see the general formalism working well for any fibre dimension . It will be used now in order to establish the desired dichotomy effect.

Matter Dichotomy 


The interesting point with the RST dynamics is now that it subdivides the configuration space of matter (i.e. the space of regular -matrices) into two dynamically separated subsets: the positive and negative mixtures, with the pure states appearing as an asymptotic limit of both kinds of mixtures. Here the criterium of membership refers to the determinant  of the intensity matrix  such that for  one has a "positive" ("negative") mixture. On the other hand the pure states are uniquely characterized by the well-known Fierz identity  for the intensity matrix, i.e.
 
which restricts  to the tensor product of some wave function :
 
Indeed, this is easily verified by simply substituting the latter form of  into the definition of the first deviator  D2 . For the special case of two fibre dimensions   the Hamilton-Cayley identity eq:DF  says that the Fierz identity upon  eq:DF0  is even equivalent to the one real condition of vanishing Fierz deviation  (see below for a detailed treatment of the two-particle systems).

However, by what circumstance does this dichotomic mixture effect come about? The answer comes from the combination of the RNE eq:calI  with the existence of the amplitude field  eq:Lscal . Here, the first step consists in splitting up the -order deviator  into the highest-power term of  and the remainder :
 
For instance from the definition of the first deviator  D2  we obtain
 
or similarly for the second deviator  eq:D3 
 
and finally for the third deviator  eq:D4 
 
The general procedure should be self-suggesting  from these few examples.

In the next step, one considers the derivative of the determinant  eq:Deltan  which is found to consist of two terms according to the splitting eq:DNY 
 
The first term on the right is due to the derivative of the first term  of the splitting eq:DNY  when the RNE eq:calI  has been used and after this that splitting eq:DNY  is applied again in the opposite direction leading back to . However since  is of that simple form eq:DN , namely proportional to the identity , the derivative of the determinant  eq:split  becomes
 
provided the second term on the right of eq:split  vanishes, i.e. concretely if we have the trace identity
 

But this identity actually does hold, from which one is easily convinced by the above mentioned examples  and the corresponding induction arguments. Indeed, one merely observes for the first term on the left of eq:trid 
 
with the trace of  being easily computed by means of the definition of the deviation densities  eq:Deltan  for . Thus for , e.g., one immediately finds from equation eq:Y4 
 
On the other hand, the computation of the second term on the left of eq:trid  just meets with this result because for the lower-order deviation densities  one also has
 
cf. eq:split , and this then validates definitively the trace identity eq:trid . Observe here that the latter relation eq:trDnL , though being seen now to hold for all deviation orders  up to the maximal value , had to be exploited only for the maximal order  (in order to yield the desired result eq:dDeltaN  because the closing relation eq:DN  does apply exclusively to this maximal order !

Once the decisive derivative relation eq:dDeltaN  is now firmly established, the matter dichotomy emerges by simply observing the former gradient property for the location field  eq:trL -eq:Lscal . Indeed the existence of the amplitude field  eq:Lscal  admits to formally integrate the differential equation eq:dDeltaN  for  to yield
 
Thus, at any event  of space-time the determinant of the intensity matrix  has the same sign as at the initial event  provided both events  and  can be connected by some path along which the amplitude field  is a regular scalar. The conclusion is that whenever the RST dynamics admits a regular solution over some region of space-time, then this field configuration must be either a positive mixture  or a negative mixture  or a "quasi-pure state" . The latter kind of mixtures are not ordinary pure states (which have , see eq:DF0 ) but they are not forbidden by the RST dynamics to decay to such an ordinary pure state (with vanishing deviator ); however the positive and negative mixtures must strictly preserve their mixture character over the whole domain of regularity in space-time ("matter dichotomy" ).



Two-Particle Systems 

When matter appears in two different forms, one clearly wants to see the common features and also the differences. For a study of such questions in the subsequent sections, we restrict ourselves to the two-particle systems () and we specialize first the general dynamical equations for this situation. Here it is important to parametrize the RST field system in such a way that a clear separation between single-particle variables and exchange fields comes about. Such a conceptual separation of the two field subsystems facilitates afterwards the discussion of the exchange effects occuring between the single-particle subsystems. 
Operator Kinematics 
As attractive as the covariant equations may look like in their abstract form, for concrete computations one mostly resorts to a special reference system and decomposes the covariant objects with respect to such a reference frame. The corresponding components of the (gauge and/or coordinate) covariant objects are then treated as the proper dynamical objects entering the component form of the abstract dynamical equations. For the present RST operator dynamics, one thus chooses first some orthonormal basis for the operators acting over the typical  vector fibre  of the two-particle systems. This may be done by choosing two single-particle projectors   ()   
 
 
 
and by complementing these by two permutators  ,  which obey the following algebraic relations:
 
 
 
The four (Hermitian) operators , ,  form a complete basis over the 2-particle fibre  and consequently the generators  () of the gauge group must be certain linear combinations in this basis set; for the (abelian) electromagnetic interactions one has 
and thus the (anti-Hermitian) bundle curvature  and its connection  are decomposed as follows
 
 
 

Once the reference section for the operators has been fixed, any operator-valued section can be decomposed with respect to this rotating basis  , , , e.g. for the intensity matrix 
 
Properly speaking, any Hermitian ()-matrix (such as ) in general has  components but the rotating basis is co-moving with the intensity matrix in such a way that one of the four components of  is kept zero permanently. Due to the orthonormality of the rotating operator basis the components ,  of  can be extracted from  in the usual way applicable to any Hilbert-space structure, namely the single-particle densities   as 
 
and the overlap density   as
 
Similarly, the decomposition of the kinetic field  () reads
 
or for the localization field 
 
The coefficients ,  in front of the projectors  are the single-particle  components and correspondingly the coefficient fields in front of the permutators ,  are the exchange fields . From () one immediately recognizes the former amplitude vector  () as the sum of the corresponding single-particle vectors
 

One could now write down the whole RST dynamics ()-() in component form referring to those component fields just introduced through ()-() but for the interpretation of the physical effects it is very favorable to pass over to a new combination of these component fields. 

Reparametrization 
The first hint upon the advantage of dealing with a new combination of the exchange fields  ()-() comes from the density dynamics, i.e. the component form of the RNE ()
 
 
 
Here we have made use of the total density  (b) as the trace of the intensity matrix  ()
 
and also of the relative density
 
as well as the difference () of localization fields 
 

The interesting point with the density system () is now that it admits a conserved quantity (, say) emerging from the following relation which is a consequence of that system: 
 
This may be formally integrated to yield 
 
Clearly this result is nothing else than the 2-particle specialization () of the general result (), since for two fibre dimensions the first deviation density  () is found as
 
In this way it is once more seen very clearly that the emergence of the RST matter dichotomy is an immediate consequence of the dynamical equations, not a kinematical postulate as in the conventional quantum theory.

Now the latter result () suggests to reparametrize the densities , ,  by means of the amplitude field  and certain renormalization factors , ,  as follows
 
 
 
As a consequence of this arrangement the following constraint upon the renormalization factors is obtained
 
with the mixing index   taking the values:  (positive mixtures),  (pure states), and  (negative mixtures) (fig.1). Thus, for such a small fibre dimension () the quasi-pure states coincide with the ordinary pure states, see the remarks below equation (). Clearly with that arrangement () for the renormalization factors, their dynamical equations are deduced from the original density dynamics () and are thus found to be of the following form:
 
 
 
 

The second step of reparametrization refers now to the exchange fields , . From the third equation (c) of the renormalization dynamics one concludes that the special combination of exchange fields ,  emerging there on the right-hand side must be a gradient field (, say):
 
This suggests to introduce a new combination (, ) in place of the original (, ) in the following way:
 
 
 
 
With respect to these new exchange fields, the renormalization dynamics () adopts now the corresponding new form
 
 
 

This reparametrization embraces different kinds of mixtures via the new scalar field  which is defined through
 
and which obeys the field equation
 
From its definition () one immediately concludes that  for the positive mixtures () and that  for the negative mixtures () while  for the pure states (). Since the different kinds of mixtures are kept separated for dynamical reasons (matter dichotomy), the field equation for the mixture variable   must have solutions which strictly respect this dynamical separation. However this requirement is easily seen to be satisfied because the new exchange field  (a) is found to be a gradient field, cf. ()
 
and thus the field equation for  () is easily integrated to yield
 
with  being an arbitrary integration constant. Though this result merely reproduces the original definition of  () through the identification
 
the differential version of which is just the former equation (), we thus can be sure that the matter dichotomy is correctly incorporated also into the dynamics of the new set of variables: the field equation for  () admits either solutions () with  ( positive mixtures: , ) or solutions with  ( negative mixtures: , ). This is the two-particle realization of the general result explained at the end of Section III, below equation ().  

A special situation is encountered for vanishing exchange fields, especially . For this case, the new scalar field  () must be a constant over space-time (, say) which then implies the constancy of the new variable  () through the present result () 
 
Thus, the vanishing of the exchange fields leaves us alone with the mixture configurations which then are found to be degenerate in the sense that they generate the same physics as the pure states (mixture degeneracy ). In this case there exists a group of mixing transformations (mixing group ) which admits to construct the mixture configurations from the pure states and the group parameter is just the present constant  (). Thus we clearly recognize the effect of switching-on the exchange fields, namely to make the mixing group parameter space-time dependent: . The resulting cooperation of mixture and exchange effects is just the essence of the RST quantum effects (see a separate paper).

Physical Densities 
The reparametrization of exchange fields () is not complete because it refers to only two of the four exchange fields. However a corresponding transformation for the remaining exchange fields  and  suggests itself when we consider now the physical densities. 

Turning first to the charge densities  (), one substitutes the decompositions of the intensity matrix  () and of the Hamiltonian  ()-() into that definition () for the currents  and then finds the following result 
 
 
The specific shape of this result suggests now to introduce two new fields , in place of , , namely in the following way
 
 
 
The reason for this arrangement is because both currents  () adopt a very simple form, namely
) 
 
 
and this form even simplifies further to 
 
 
 
when one simultaneously introduces the effective kinetic fields   () through
 
 
 
Thus the final form of the currents  () is the same which is obtained also by putting all the exchange fields to zero in the original version () and replacing the original kinetic fields  by their effective counterparts  (). Such an absorption of the exchange fields into the single-particle fields in order to build up the effective fields is not only a purely formal advantage but yields also a deeper insight into the physical essence of the theory. For the special case of pure states (), the present reparametrization of the exchange fields in terms of , , ,  has been described in a preceding paper where the new parametrization was helpful for a discussion of the exchange degeneracy.

Once the kinetic fields have been transcribed to a new form, it is strongly suggestive to try a similar transcription for the localization fields  (). The precise form of the desired transformation to the  effective localization fields   () comes from a closer inspection of the energy-momentum density  () which however proceeds along the same line of arguments as applied also to the currents . Thus one is led to introduce the effective localization fields  through
 
 
 
and these new fields build then up the energy-momentum density , albeit in a somewhat more complicated way as was the case with the kinetic fields in connection with the currents  (). In order to display the general structure of , it is convenient to split it up into three parts:
 
where the first two terms  () are the single-particle contributions and the third term  contains the exchange and mixture effect. Similarly as for the currents , the single-particle contributions  do no longer contain here explicitly the exchange fields since these have been absorbed into the effective single-particle fields , :

 
 
 
On the other hand, the exchange term  is built up itself from two contributions 
 
which do not contain the single-particle fields and thus look as follows
 
 
 

Observe here that, in contrast to the currents  (), the energy-momentum density  () contains an extra term (namely ) which even after the absorption of the exchange fields into the new single-particle fields ,  is built up explicitly by all the exchange fields (, , , ) together with the mixture variable . Such a term in  is necessary in order to validate the energy-momentum conservation law () (or (), resp.) whereas the charge conservation law () works without such an explicit  exchange term. Observe also that the latter term  is built up by both  the mixture variable  and  the exchange fields and thus represents the cooperation of both kinds of field degrees of freedom. 

Hamiltonian Dynamics 
If one wishes to convince oneself of the consistency of those conservation laws for the physical densities, one has to use the source and curl relations for the Hamiltonian component fields which of course are to be deduced from the abstract integrability condition () and conservation equation (). However, with the present reparametrization one will readily transcribe the field equations to the new variables, i.e. the single-particle fields ,  and exchange fields , , , . In this way there emerges a kind of exchange dynamics  for the latter fields and a single-particle dynamics  for the first fields.
Single-Particle Dynamics In fact, the integrability condition yields first for the original localization fields  ()
 
This once more verifies the previous claim ()-() that the total localization field 
 
actually is a gradient field, in contrast to the individual fields  (). Though this result forbids us to conceive the latter fields  as gradient fields, we nevertheless can introduce individual amplitude fields  () for the effective localization fields  () through putting
 
For the verification of this claim one merely recalls the density dynamics () and uses therein the new exchange fields  ,  in place of the old ones , , cf. (). In this way one finds for the single-particle densities  ()
 
 
 
which actually identifies the effective localization fields  as gradient fields
 
in agreement with the claim ().

Once the transition from the localization fields  to the amplitude fields  () has been made, one will not be satisfied with transcribing the abstract conservation equation () to the localization field  (or , resp.) but one will readily proceed to the corresponding wave equations for the scalar amplitudes  (amplitude equations )
 
 
 
Observe here that these single-particle amplitude equations degenerate to their trivial forms ()
 
when either  one deals with pure states () or  when one neglects the exchange fields (). For such a situation, the degenerate equations () can be shown to be equivalent to two decoupled Klein-Gordon equations for two single-particle wave functions  ():
 
().  
Evidently, the two particles are now disentangled and thus can interact exclusively via the ordinary gauge forces mediated by the corresponding gauge potentials . Either of the two wave functions  is then of the usual form
 
 
 
where the phases  are given by
  

But clearly the typical quantum effects are expected to occur in connection with the simultaneous presence of non-trivial exchange fields and mixtures (). Here the two independent Klein-Gordon equations ()-() become modified to their "entangled" forms () yielding a coupling of the single-particle amplitudes  to the exchange fields with the occurrence of certain exchange effects  (separate paper).

A similar coupling of single-particle and exchange fields is naturally to be expected also for the kinetic fields. Indeed, the following curl relations for the effective kinetic fields  () are deduced from the abstract integrability condition () in a straightforward manner: 
 
 
 
From here it becomes obvious that the effective kinetic fields  do not only "feel" the corresponding components  of the bundle curvature  (a) but they feel an additional exchange field strength , namely the second terms on the right of equation () which is built up essentially by the exchange fields , , , . However for the pure states () this exchange effect vanishes again and thus we arrive at the same result as mentioned previously in connection with the energy-momentum density  () and the amplitude equations (), namely that the exchange effects can become active only for the mixtures but not for the pure states. Observe however that the present exchange effect, occuring for the effective kinetic fields  (), is somewhat different in comparison to the preceding situations of energy-momentum density  () and amplitude equation (); the reason for this is that the kinetic exchange term () vanishes if one of the two exchange pairs ,  or ,  vanishes whereas the other two exchange effects can survive also with only one of the two exchange pairs being present.
 
In order to close the single-particle dynamics for the effective fields, one has to write down the source relations for the kinetic fields. The desired relations are obtained again in a straightforward way from the abstract conservation equation ():
 
 
 
 
Observing here the gradient property of the effective localization fields  (), one easily recognizes the present source relations () as nothing else than the former charge conservation laws () when the result () for the currents  is observed together with the density derivatives ().
Exchange Dynamics As the preceding single-particle dynamics demonstrates, there is a coupling of the single-particle fields to the exchange fields, see the amplitude equations () and curl relations () for the effective kinetic fields. This coupling shows that the single-particle dynamics decouples from the exchange fields only for the pure states () but not for the mixtures (). Thus, when dealing with the pure states, one can first solve the autonomous single-particle system and substitute this as a kind of rigid background into the exchange dynamics. However for the mixtures, one must solve the single-particle system in one step together with the exchange system because also the latter system couples back to the first system. This coupling is explicitly seen by writing down the source relations for the exchange fields (deducible again from the conservation equation ()):
 
 
 
Observe here that even for the pure states () the exchange fields do not decouple from the single-particle fields. Such a decoupling effect occurs exclusively for the curl relations (to be deduced from the integrability condition()):
 
 
 
Here, the first equation (a) says that  must always be a gradient field which however is clear from its very definition (). Furthermore the vector field  becomes also a gradient field for the pure states (), cf. (c).

Thus the new parametrization yields not only a formal simplification of the whole RST dynamics but makes also the theory more transparent by providing us with a clear subdivision of the field variables into single-particle and exchange objects. As a consequence, one becomes able to discuss the RST predictions in terms of single-particle concepts and exchange interactions.

Bundle Geometry 

Whenever a superselection rule is seen to be in action, such as the present dynamical separation of positive and negative mixtures, one tends to guess that such a strict rule might have to do something with the global topological features of the corresponding field configurations. Indeed it is easily seen from fig.1 that the one-parted hyperboloid , being infinitely connected, cannot be continuously deformed into the two-parted hyperboloid  whose individual parts are simply connected. Therefore it is self-suggesting to guess that this topological arrangement is somehow encoded into the field variables of positive and negative mixtures.  Thus there arises an attractive mathematical problem, namely to identify the place where the two different topologies are buried in the space-time dependence of the field variables.
 
 The answer to this question is the following: Take the renormalization factor  (c) and the mixture variable  () together with the 1-forms  and , cf. (), and construct the 2-form 
 
i.e. in components
 
Then use the field equations for the mixture variable  () and renormalization factor  (c) together with the curl relations for  and  () in order to show that the 2-form  is closed: , i.e. in components
 
Actually  is an element of the deRham cohomology group  over space-time (), and its value upon some 2-cycle  is a fixed integer 
 
being independent of continuous deformations of the closed 2-surface . Furthermore, for the present 2-particle case () the "winding numbers"  are found to be always zero for both types of mixtures, no matter which element  of the corresponding homology group of the underlying space-time is taken as the integral surface. Thus  turns out to be an exact 2-form: , in components
 
with  some appropriate (non-unique) 1-form.

Though both mixtures have the same (trivial) winding numbers , the 2-form  carries nevertheless different topological information. It can namely be shown that  is the Euler class  of appropriate fibre bundles (density bundles , to be constructed below). This means concretely that there exists a regular "density map" () from space-time to the hyperboloids  in 3-dimensional, pseudo-Euclidian density configuration space (fig.1)
 
 
such that the 2-form  () yields just the 2-volume form on those hyperboloids (up to an exact 2-form ):
 
Therefore the winding numbers () measure the surface content (on the hyperboloids ) of the image of the 2-cycle  with respect to the density map  (). But since both hyperboloids  as non-compact 2-surfaces have trivial second homotopy group (), the image of the compact  (e.g. 2-sphere ) under  yields a multiple covering (with alternative orientations) of some subspace of  and this must necessarily imply the vanishing of the winding numbers  (). Would the density map  lead into some image space with non-trivial second homotopy group  (, as it may be expected for particle number ), the winding numbers of positive and negative mixtures could well be different in a non-trivial way.

In what follows a proof is presented for all these claims, leading directly to the central result ().

Density Bundle 
For a deeper understanding of the mixture topology it is highly instructive to evoke the mathematical tool of fibre bundles. Within this framework, one recovers not only the decisive curl relation () (which one could find also by merely applying the dynamical equations in a straight-forward manner) but one becomes capable to identify that relation as the Bianchi identity  for the bundle curvature . In this way one arrives at the true origin of the winding numbers  ().

For the construction of the fibre bundle in question, recall first that the intensity matrix , as an Hermitian -matrix, properly speaking has four independent components. These however could be reduced to only three real components by resorting to a co-moving reference system (the RTB basis ), so that the intensity matrix  reappears as a 3-component object, cf. (). As the three remaining components one may take the overlap density  (), the total density  () and the relative density  () which obey the density dynamcis () and give rise to the introduction of the renormalization factors , ,  (). The interesting point here is now that the latter three objects may be collected into a 3-vector  () as an element of a 3-dimensional real vector fibre over any event  of space-time: 
 
 
 
This 3-dimensional vector fibre is equipped with a Minkowskian fibre metric  so that the normalization constraint (b) simply says that  () is a unit vector
 
namely either "time-like" () or "space-like" (), resp. "light-like" (). 

The next interesting point comes into play when one wishes to equip this density bundle () with a connection (, say). In order to preserve the normalization (), the connection 1-form  must take its values in the 3-dimensional Lorentz algebra . The latter algebra may be thought to be spanned by three anti-Hermitian generators  where the concept of Hermiticity refers here to the Minkowskian metric . This means that when  are the elements of the matrix  and  are the elements of  then we have 
 
The standard solution of this requirement for the generators is the well-known permutation symbol  as the completely antisymmetric unit tensor object of the third rank
 
The corresponding commutation relations are easily found as
 
Thus the desired bundle connection  of (), being defined through
 
(in components: ), 
may be decomposed with respect to the anti-Hermitian basis  as 
 
(in components: ). 

In order to explicitly determine the connection , one could think now that the connection coefficients  could simply be read off from the renormalization dynamics () which would yield the following result
 
 
 
However the problem is here that this connection is not unique since one can add to any  some  element (, say) which annihilates the 3-vector , i.e. :
 
Here, the -valued 1-form  is arbitrary and  is easily seen to decompose with respect to the standard basis () as follows
 

Gauges and Projections 
This non-uniqueness of the connection  in the density bundle () must not necessarily be considered as a deficiency of the theory but may rather be interpreted as the presence of a gauge degree of freedom inherent in the bundle formalism. This means that we admit -valued gauge transformations  which act homogeneously over the vector fibre in the following way
 
 
 
(i.e. in components ). 
These gauge transformations induce an inhomogeneous transformation law for the bundle connection :
 

Now we try to restrict the gauge group to a subgroup of  in such a way that the original non-uniqueness relation () becomes identical to the present gauge transformation (). This requirement fixes the elements  of the restricted gauge group as
 
i.e. the abelian rotations in the orthogonal 2-space of the density vector  which itself is invariant under the restricted gauge group:
 
Furthermore, it can be shown by some simple bundle analysis that the 1-form , emerging in the non-uniqueness relation (), is changed by the derivative of the group parameter  () into :
 
This analysis becomes quite easy by resorting to the fact that the generator of rotations  () is covariantly constant
 
(), 
or in components:
 
(). 

It is important to remark here that the restricted gauge transformations () change the 1-form  in the non-uniqueness relation () by a gradient field , cf. (), and therefore  can be gauged off exclusively when the original  is also a gradient field. On the other hand, one can take advantage of the non-uniqueness of  by letting vanish its component  relative to the gauge algebra 
  
In this way one is lead to an other connection (the projective connection  ) which is obtained from  the original  by subtracting off its non-unique  part, i.e. one puts
 
This does not change the topological properties of the bundle connection because the Euler class  () is modified merely by some exact 2-form  and this of course cannot change the winding numbers  (). The reason is that the integral of an exact 2-form over some cycle  always must vanish
 

Since this projective connection  () plays an important part for the subsequent method of bundle trivialization, it is convenient to display some of its geometric properties. First the projector  is defined by the usual relations
 
 
 
and furthermore it is related to the square of the rotation generator  () through 
 
It can also be expressed in terms of the 3-vector  as
 
and finally the corresponding projective connection  in the density bundle () can then be written down in terms of the projector  as 
 
from which it is immediately seen that  has vanishing component relative to the gauge algebra spanned by the generator :
 

The projector  is also helpful for considering the nature of the restricted gauge group generated by the elements  () which read in terms of  and 
 
This result says that the restricted gauge group for the positive mixtures () is the ordinary rotation group  and for the negative mixtures () it is the Lorentz group   of () dimensional Minkowskian space. But apart from this difference with respect to the gauge group, the projective bundle geometry is the same for both kinds of mixtures. 

Curvature 
Though the  preceding projection mechanism for constructing the density bundle () may tempt one to think that both kinds of mixtures share the same geometric structures, the subsequent discussion of the bundle curvature will clearly reveal some essential differences.

However in the first instance, the bundle curvature (, say) looks still identical for both situations. The general definition of the curvature operator is
 
and this operator measures the non-commutativity of the gauge covariant derivatives, e.g. in form of the bundle identity for the generator  ()
  
Now according to the well-kown Ambrose-Singer theorem, the curvature operator  spans the algebra of the holonomy group which in general is a subgroup of the gauge group. Since, for the present situation, the latter group does not have non-trivial subgroups, the curvature operator must take its values in the gauge algebra itself, i.e. in the rotation algebra  for the positive mixtures () and in the Lorentz algebra  for the negative mixtures (), see equation (). This however implies that the curvature is proportional to that generator (i.e. ); and indeed if one substitutes the present bundle connection  () into the general curvature definition (), a straightforward calculation yields with the help of the curl relations () and () the following result involving the Euler class  ()
 
Clearly this result makes the bundle identity () consistent with the covariant constancy of the generator  ().

Furthermore, the general structure of curvature  () implies the well-known Bianchi identity
  
which is immediately transcribed to the curvature coefficient  as shown by the former equation (). In this way one has revealed the true origin why that 2-form  must be closed. This closedness property must appear as a mere incident when one can resort exclusively to the dynamical equations.

The curvature result () says that the curvature 2-form  takes its values in the 1-dimensional algebra  of (pseudo-)rotations and thus sweeps out a more restricted range than its connection . The latter takes its values in the Lorentz-algebra  and therefore one can on principle apply -valued gauge transformations. The subgroup of gauge transformations  (), applied so far, thus turns out as the holonomy group  of the density bundle ().

Bundle Trivialization 
So far, there evidently appears no difference in the geometric structure of both types of mixtures, but actually the curvature coefficient  carries different topological characteristics for either case. In order to see this more clearly, one identifies that curvature coefficient  as the pullback (with respect to the density map  ()) of the volume cell on the hypersurface  in density configuration space (fig.1). The desired identification is obtained by embedding the non-trivial density bundle () into some higher-dimensional trivial  bundle such that () reappears as a reduced bundle.

According to this line of arguments, one adds to the non-trivial connection  in the density bundle () some element  of the embedding Lie algebra such that the resulting connection (, say) is trivial. More concretely, we put 
  
where  must transform homogeneously 
  
in order that the new connection  can transform inhomogeneously  as is generally required for bundle connections (see ())
  
The point with this change of connection is here that the new curvature (, say) 
 
is required to vanish (), i.e.
 
This allows us to recast the original bundle curvature  into the following form
 
(). 
This structure is then inherited also by the curvature coefficient  ().

Indeed, the general structure of  follows directly from the latter form () of the curvature ; this is immediately seen by inverting the former curvature relation () as
 
and then substituting herein the new form of  (). This procedure finally yields for the curvature coefficient 
 
with the 1-form  being given by () and expressed here in terms of 
 

This latter relation hints at the possibility of projective generation of the non-trivial  density bundle () from a trivial embedding bundle, namely through the fact that the component of the trivial connection  () with respect to the holonomy algebra  is zero:
 
just as was the case with the projective connection , see equation (). Evidently the present result () is nothing else than the former claim for  () provided we can prove the coincidence of both second terms on the right-hand sides of equations () and (), i.e. it remains to prove the following identity
 

Now it should be clear that this final step may well bring into play some differences between the positive and negative mixtures. Indeed, we will readily see that the expected difference consists in the specific way of embedding the density bundle () into some trivial  bundle of higher dimension.

Euler Class 
Thus the goal is now to find the bundle of smallest fibre dimension which can carry a trivial  but non-vanishing connection , whose curvature  () vanishes together with the projection of its connection  to the holonomy subalgebra, cf. ().

In order to get some ansatz for the desired , one recalls that any trivial connection can be written as a "pure gauge", i.e. the pullback of the Maurer-Cartan form over the gauge group:
 
Here  represents an element of that Lie group which is generated by the Lie-algebra valued range of . Of course the most simple guess for  would be just the element  () of the holonomy group itself (); in this case one would obtain for  () the following result for positive  mixtures ():
 
Thus, in order to obtain the desired bundle reduction requirement (), one fixes the group parameter  as a constant over space-time () such that 
 
and in this way one arrives at the desired result (for ) 
 
The -valued 1-form , emerging herein, is the desired complement  () of the density connection , i.e. more concretely
 
and thus it obeys the orthogonality condition in a trivial way
 
Indeed, this is necessary in order that our present result  () has vanishing component in the holonomy algebra, see the former constraints () and ().

In the last step, it remains to prove the surface relation () for the two-parted hyperboloid ; this however is easily achieved by simply comparing the general trivialization relation () for the change of connections with the present result (), being due to our guess () - () for the positive mixtures. This comparison immediately yields namely for the algebraic complement () of  in  
 
And finally it is a nice exercise to substitute this back into the left-hand side of the surface relation () in order to be convinced of the validity of this formula. Simultaneously, the present method of bundle trivialization demonstrates that the Euler class  is an element of the integral  cohomology group , since the winding numbers  () must necessarily appear as integers. The reason for this is that the winding numbers may be normalized by means of the surface content of the (compact) range of the density map (). (If the image space of  is non-compact, as for the present situation of fig.1, nomalization of the winding numbers is not possible and they become all zero).

Thus the validity of the topological claim () has been proven for the positive mixtures () but not for the negative ones ().

Negative Mixtures 
But why does the present mechanism of bundle trivialization not work for the negative mixtures in an analogous way?

The reason is that the negative-mixture bundle () cannot be embedded into an  bundle with trivial connection  (). This is most easily seen by trying for the principal-bundle section  () the same -valued ansatz  () but with the density vector  being now "space-like", i.e. one takes  for the normalization condition (). This would namely yield for the corresponding pure gauge  ()
 
From here it is immediately seen that one has to take again the group parameter  as a constant over space-time in order that the projection of  onto the holonomy algebra  be zero, cf. (). However one evidently can have no non-trivial value for this constant  so that the decomposition () does apply with both the connection forms  and  obeying the inhomogeneous  law () and  obeying the homogeneous  law ()! This is the true reason why the negative-mixture bundles cannot be embedded into a trivial  bundle, as is the case with the positive-mixture configurations, and therefore we have to look for an even higher-dimensional trivial bundle for the purpose of embedding.

The solution to this problem is obtained by considering a trivial Lorentz bundle over space-time which has the proper Lorentz group  as its structure group. The corresponding Lorentz algebra is easily obtained by simply complementing its  subalgebra, being spanned by the generators  () - (), by three additional generators  which obey the following algebra
 
 
 
The Lorentz algebra  is usually not referred to the present  basis  and its complement  but rather to the ordinary  rotation generators  ()
 
and the "boost operators" :
 
 
 
(the remaining commutators of any subset are obtained by cyclic permutation (cycl.) of the generators). However it is easy to see the correspondence between both basis sets, namely:
 
This embedding of the 3-dimensional  algebra into the 6-dimensional Lorentz algebra  leaves unchanged the bundle reduction formulae ()-() with the curvature being still given by () and the projector relation (); and thus it is merely the definition of Hermiticity () which must be extended to the four-dimensional  standard representation of the generators  and  (), i.e.
 
 
()). 

According to this bundle embedding we try now again to find a trivial connection form  which takes its values in the embedding Lorentz algebra  and whose projection to the  subalgebra just yields the -valued connection  () for the negative  mixture configurations (). In other words, the desired connection  is taken again as the Maurer-Cartan form () but with the global  section  now taking its values in the poper Lorentz group :
 
The associated Maurer-Cartan form  () is then easily computed as
 
and thus is obviously the  analogue of the former  result () for the positive mixtures. The projective connection  is defined here again by the same prescription as for the lower-dimensional case () whereas the complement , as the analogue of  () for the positive mixtures, is composed now of the complementary elements  alone:
 

Clearly, in order to get the connection  for the negative-mixure configurations as the  projection of the trivial  (), one resorts again to the former arrangement () for the group parameter , i.e. we have then the desired result for the negative mixtures
 
and thus we obtain for the algebraic complement  ()
 
If this is substituted back into the general Euler class  () one arrives again at the original claim () whose validity for both kinds of mixtures is thus ensured, together with the topological conclusions being implied by that claim.

It is thus true that both kinds of mixtures share the triviality of their Euler class , yet there are nevertheless some geometric differences being worth to be considered in some more detail now.

























Discussion 

It is just the emergence of trivial principal bundles in connection with the 2-particle configurations which admits a concrete geometric picture of these
configurations. This appears in form of a local fibre distribution in the
tangent bundle. 

Let us consider the negative mixtures first, for which a   global  section  () exists for the embedding Lorentz
bundle. However since the latter bundle has the same fibre space  as
the principal bundle associated with the tangent bundle of the underlying
space-time, one may look upon  also as a global section of the
(tangent) principal bundle, provided the existence of such global
sections is admitted by the topology of space-time. In order that this condition be satisfied, space-time must namely be a 
  parallelisable  manifold (such as, e.g. the closed Robertson-Walker universe 
 which is topologically the direct product of the 3-sphere 
and real line ). By virtue of their very definition, parallelisable
manifolds admit the existence of a global  frame, i.e. for
the present case of four-dimensional space-time a tetrad of linearly
independent vector fields . These can
be chosen to be orthonormal with respect to the presumed space-time metric

 

The tetrad  may further be taken to be a solution of the transport equations
 
with the connection coefficients  being due to the trivial connection  (), which in general will be a non-metric connection. The vanishing of the curvature  () of  then guarantees that any global tetrad solution  of () is unique over the whole space-time and thus it establishes a global isomorphism of all the tangent fibres. The restriction of the trivial Lorentz connection  to the non-trivial  connection  () geometrically means to omit one of the (space-like) tetrad vectors and to consider the remaining triad 
 
This triad defines a local (1+3) splitting of the tangent fibres. Since
however the curvature  () of  is
proportional to the  generator , it
annihilates the same vectors as does the projector  (), which is nothing else than the square of the generator . But this two-dimensional projector  itself
annihilates a 2-dimensional subspace of any tangent fibre and thus induces a local (2+2)-splitting. In the corresponding 2-distribution, as a sub-distribution of the former () splitting (), the projector  acts as the identity and if this 2-distribution is
integrable, there arises a foliation of space-time into a system of 2-surfaces. The Euler class  () appears then as the intrinsic curvature
of these 2-surfaces. In this sense, the negative two-particle mixtures are
geometrically represented by a system of 2-surfaces which are equipped with a Lorentzian tangent metric. The existence of such a metric is guaranteed by the vanishing of the Euler number  (); and its invariance group consists of the  tranformations being specified by equation ().

On the other hand, the positive mixtures are geometrically characterized by a trivial  connection  () and thus start
with a global triad of tangent vectors  from the very
beginning
 
However such a triad can always be complemented to a tetrad (by selection of
some linearly independent fourth vector) and then the same arguments do apply
as for the negative mixtures. The geometric difference between both mixtures
is that the representative 2-surfaces for the positive mixtures are space-like 
(such that the gauge element  () acts as an ordinary rotation of the
space-like tangent plane of the 2-surfaces) whereas the negative mixtures have 
a (1+1)-dimensional Minkowski plane as their tangent space. 


 99 

 T. Sudberry, Nature 348 , 193 (1990)

 Y. Ohnuki and S. Kamefuchi, Quantum Field Theory and
    Parastatistics , Springer, Berlin (1982)

 P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics , Clarendon
  Press, Oxford (1998)

 S. W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time , Bantam Books (1998)

 E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, The Early Universe ,
  Addison-Wesley (1990)

 F. Li Zhi and Li Shu Xian, Creation of the Universe , World
  Scientific (1989)

 I. Duck and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Pauli and the Spin-Statistics
    Theorem , World 
 Scientific (1998)

 M. Sorg, Nuov. Cim. B 112 , 23 (1997)

 M. Mattes and M. Sorg, Journ. Math. Phys. 40 , 71 (1999)

 M. Mattes and M. Sorg, Journ. Phys. A 32 , 4761 (1999)

  M. Mattes, S. Rupp and M. Sorg, Electromagnetic (Self-)
    Interactions in Relativistic Schrodinger Theory,  appearing in Can. Journ. Phys.

 S. Rupp and M. Sorg, Phys. Rev. A 63 , 022112 (2001)
 S. Rupp and M. Sorg, Positive and Negative Mixtures in Relativistic Schrodinger Theory , appearing in  Int. Journ. Theor. Phys.

 L. E. Ballentine, Quantum Mechanics. A Modern Developement , World
  Scientific (1998)

 F. Selleri, Quantum Paradoxes and Physical Reality , Kluwer Academic
  Publishers (1990)

 H. Margenau, The Nature of Physical Reality , New York (1950)
 
 D. Gromoll, W. Klingenberg and W. Mayer, Riemann'sche Geometrie im Grossen , Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 55 (1968)

 M. W. Hirsch, Differential Topology , Springer Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 33 (1997)

 U. Ochs and M. Sorg, Gen. Rel. Grav. 28 , 1177 (1996)

 S. Lang, Linear Algebra , Springer (1997)

 S. Rupp, S. Hunzinger and M. Sorg, Exchange Degeneracy of Relativistic Two-Particle Quantum States , Preprint (2001)

 S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry , vol. I, Intersc. Publ. (John Wiley), 1963 

 C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and A. J. Wheeler, Gravitation , W. H. Freeman Co., San Francisco (1973) 

C. Nash and S. Sen, Topology and Geometry for Physicists , Academic Press (1983)

 
file=fig1.eps 
The relativistic von Neumann equation () subdivides the density configuration
space into three subsets: the pure states  occupy the Fierz
  cone  , positive mixtures   are geometrically
represented by the two-parted hyperboloid and the negative mixtures 
 by the one-parted hyperboloid. The mixtures approach the
pure states for . The general RST dynamics forbids a
change of the mixture type, cf. (). The positive (negative)
mixtures may be considered as the RST counterparts of the symmetric 
(anti-symmetric) states of the conventional quantum theory.
 
    





