16cm 20cm

Irregular Hamiltonian Systems 

Olivera Mis kovic  and Jorge Zanelli

Centro de Estudios Cientificos (CECS), Casilla
1469, Valdivia, Chile.
 Departamento de Fisica,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile,
 Casilla 307, Santiago 2, Chile.


olivera@cecs.cl, jz@cecs.cl  
 
 
Hamiltonian systems with linearly dependent constraints (irregular
systems), are classified according to their behavior in the vicinity of the
constraint surface. For these systems, the standard Dirac procedure is not
directly applicable. However, Dirac's treatment can be slightly modified to
obtain, in some cases, a Hamiltonian description completely equivalent to
the Lagrangian one. A recipe to deal with the different cases is provided,
along with a few pedagogical examples.



Introduction 

Dirac's Hamiltonian analysis provides a systematic method for finding the
gauge symmetries present in a theory. The analysis identifies and classifies
the constraints, which are local functions of the phase space coordinates.
Consistency requires that the constraints be preserved in during the
evolution (for the review of the Hamiltonian analysis see Ref.-
). However, if the constraints are not
functionally independent, then Dirac's procedure is not applicable. The test
of functional independence are the so-called regularity conditions, and
those systems which fail the test are said to be irregular .

Irregular systems are not necessarily intractable or exotic. A simple
example is a relativistic massless particle (), which is
irregular at the origin of momentum space (). This point in
phase space is exceptional, as it is unclear whether this would be an
observable state for a photon, say. On the other hand, we know the
configuration  to be a very important one: the ground state.
There are other physical circumstances in which regularity is violated, and
not only for isolated states but on large portions of the region in phase
space where the system evolves. Chern-Simons theories in  spacetime
dimensions are examples where, for some initial configurations, regularity
can fail at all times and one is forced to live with this problem.

Here we discuss the possible ways in which the constraints can fail the test
of functional independence, and how the Hamiltonian treatment of Dirac must
be modified in each case.



Regularity Conditions 

If we call  () the coordinates in the
phase space , the constraints  (
define the constraint surface   given by
 

Regularity Conditions   (RCs): The constraints  
 are regular if and only if their small variations  
 evaluated  on  
 are   linearly independent functions of  . 
To first order in , the variation of the constraints are 
, where 
. Consequently, the
RCs can also be defined as:The set of constraints   is regular if and
only if the Jacobian  
 has maximal rank:  
.A simple classical mechanical example of functionally dependent 
constraints occurs in a -dimensional phase space with coordinates 
 and constraints  and 
. In this case, 




 and 
. A system of
just one constraint can also fail the test of regularity. Consider the
constraint  in a -dimensional phase space. In this
case, 




 and . The same problem occurs
with the constraint , which has a zero of seventh order at
the constraint surface, or with any other  constraint which is not
linear in .



Classification of Irregular Constraints 

Irregular constraints can be classified according to their approximate
behavior near the surface .

A. Linear constraints . The Jacobian has constant, non-maximal rank
throughout , and
 
These are regular systems in disguise. Regularity fails simply because 
 constraints are redundant and should be discarded. The
regular system gives the correct description.

B. Multilinear constraints . In the vicinity of , the
constraints are of the form
 
where the coefficients  vanish if any two indices are
equal. Thus,  has simple zeros  on surfaces of dimension 
, and zeros of higher order occur at the intersections of these surfaces.
The RCs fail at the points of intersection, where  has multiple
zeros. At those intersections,  can be replaced by the equivalent
(
Two sets of constraints are said to be equivalent  if they define the
same constraint surface .)  set of constraints,
 
At the intersections, the set 
 is regular and therefore this provides a recipe for substituting the
irregular multilinear constraint  by a regular set of linear
constraints. For example, the constraint  is
irregular at  because it admits a linear approximation everywhere
except at this point. Replacement  by the linear constraints 
 at  regularizes the system.

C. Higher order constraints.  In the vicinity of , the
constraints do not possess a linear approximation:
 
The Jacobian vanishes everywhere on the constraint surface. Naively, it
would seem possible to choose  as an equivalent
regular constraint, but it turns out that this could change the dynamics of
original theory, as we show below.

These three classes are generic and, in general, there can be combinations
of these three types occurring simultaneously near a constraint surface. By
selecting a sufficiently small neighborhood of a point on , one can
always expect to be in one and only one of the three situations just
described.

In correspondence with the three generic cases in which regularity can fail,
the nature of the constraint surface  falls into one of three
categories:A.  The RCs are satisfied on the whole constraint surface.  
These are regular systems, either desguised or not.

B.  The RCs fail on a submanifold of  : 
 except on a submanifold  where 
 .

C.  The RCs fail everywhere on  :   has
constant lower than  rank on .The first case is treated in the standard texts and will not be further
discussed here.

In the second case, the constraint surface can be decomposed into two
non-empty submanifolds,  and  such that 
 and  is empty.
Then, the rank of the Jacobian jumps from  on 
, to  on . As
mentioned above, in this case it is possible to replace  at 
 by a set of regular constraints 
 which regularize the system at 
.

The important question is how to proceed in the third case. If the RCs fail
everywhere on , the previous approach is not applicable, because
there is no guarantee that the resulting Hamiltonian dynamics will be
equivalent to that of the original Lagrangian system.

This can be seen in the example of Lagrangian in a three-dimensional
configuration space,
 
The general solution of Euler-Lagrange equations describes a system with
one  degree of freedom - a free particle, whose time evolution 
 is determined by two initial conditions  and 
. The remaining fields are , a Lagrange multiplier with
indeterminate evolution, and , with trivial evolution, 
.

The Hamiltonian approach gives just two (first class) constraints, 
, (), and one  degree of
freedom, as expected from the Lagrangian approach. However, this is only
superficially correct, because the Jacobian has rank 1, and not 2. This is
because the constraint function  has no linear approximation at
.

On the other hand, if we naively take , which is regular and
equivalent to , then the Hamiltonian analysis generates
three  first class constraints 
, which leave zero  physical degrees of freedom.
This result is not consistent with the Lagrangian description where there is
one degree of freedom.

As seen in the previous example, even if two constraints are equivalent in
defining the same constraint surface, they may yield different dynamics and
should be treated more carefully.

Suppose  is a constraint of the form (),
which is equivalent to the regular  constraint
 
The question is whether  gives also the correct dynamics.
The answer to this question depends on whether  is a first or second
class constraint. Namely, it makes a difference whether the linear
constraint  can generate a transformation in phase space that leaves
the Hamiltonian action unchanged or not . As shown in
, if the linearized constraint  is second class, then it is not only
geometrically equivalent to  in the sense that it defines the same 
, but the substitution also yields the same dynamical description as
the Lagrangian approach. On the other hand, if  is first class, then
the subtitution generates a system whose dynamics is different from the one
obtained from the Euler-Lagrange equations.



Conclusions 

The recipe for treating the non-regular constraints is:

 
Every linear or multi-linear set of constraints can be exchanged by
an equivalent regular set. It allows to carry out Dirac's procedure in the
standard way.

A higher order constraint 
, can be exchanged by the equivalent linear constraint 
. If  is a second class constraint, the
dynamics of the new system is equivalent to the Lagrangian one. If 
is first class, the substitution yields a system which is not dynamically
equivalent to the Lagrangian one. In this latter case, one should view the
original Lagrangian as an incomplete, if not a totally inconsistent
description for a dynamical system.



Acknowledgments 

We are deeply grateful to Ricardo Troncoso for many enlightening insights and discussions. This
work is partially funded by grants FONDECYT  1020629, 7020629, 1010450, 2010017, and MECESUP USA
9930 scholarship. The generous support of Empresas CMPC to the CECS is also acknowledged. CECS is
a Millennium Science Institute and it is funded in part by grants from Fundacio n Andes and the
Tinker Foundation.



 9 

  P. A. M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics 
(Yeshiva University, New York, 1964).

  M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, 
Quantization of Gauge Systems  (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1992).

  M. Blagojevic , Gravity and Gauge Symmetries 
(Institute of Physics Publishing, London, 2001).

  N. P. Chitaia, S. A. Gogilidze and
Yu. S. Surovtsev, Phys. Rev.  D 56  (1997) 1135; Phys.
Rev.  D 56  (1997) 1142.

  O. Mis kovic  and J. Zanelli, Dynamical Structure of Irregular Constrained Systems  (in preparation).


