






















Fermion determinant for general background gauge fields 

M. P. Fry 

School of Mathematics, University of Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 

 

 
An exact representation of the Euclidean fermion determinant in two
dimensions for centrally symmetric, finite-ranged Abelian background
fields is derived. Input data are the wave function inside the field's
range and the scattering phase shift with their momenta rotated to the
positive imaginary axis and fixed at the fermion mass for each
partial-wave. The determinant's asymptotic limit for strong coupling
and small fermion mass for square-integrable, unidirecitonal magnetic
fields is shown to depend only on the chiral anomaly. The concept of
duality is extended from one to two-variable fields, thereby relating
the two-dimensional Euclidean determinant for a class of background
magnetic fields to the pair production probability in four dimensions
for a related class of electric pulses. Additionally, the
"diamagnetic" bound on the two-dimensional Euclidean determinant is
related to the negative sign of
 in four dimensions in
the strong coupling, small mass limit, where  is the
one-loop effective action.

12.20Ds,11.10Kk,11.15Tk 

Introduction 


Within the Standard Model fermion determinants are encountered in
the calculation of every physical process. Because of their nonlocal
dependence on the gauge fields they are difficult to calculate.
Consequently the practice has been to either ignore them-the quenched
approximation-or to expand them in power series. Ultimately they will
have to be confronted nonperturbatively, as lattice theorists are now
doing with faster machines, in order to obtain reliable predictions
with known computational error.

The current status of fermion determinants is reviewed
in . To indicate just how bad our knowledge of these
determinants is, not even the strong coupling limit of the massive
Euclidean QED determinant in two dimensions is known except for a
constant background magnetic field and for a magnetic field confined
to the surface of a cylinder .  Therefore, it seems that
this is as good a starting point as any to get a better insight into
the properties of fermion determinants and to understand their
physics.

There are other reasons why the  determinant should be
of general interest. Namely, if there were precise nonperturbative
information on at least one continuum, infinite-volume determinant
then the algorithms of lattice theorists for calculating determinants
could be tested by extrapolating their output to zero lattice spacing
and infinite volume. Algorithms for determinants can be easily
adjusted to any dimensionality, and if some fail to coincide with
known results for an Abelian background field in two dimensions then
they are certainly useless.

Work in this direction has already begun  with the
computation of the fermion determinant for massless fermions on a
torus using the Neuberger-Dirac operator and the higher-order overlap
Dirac operator and the comparison of the results with the exact
massless QED determinant on a torus . In massive
two-flavour QED the determinant was calculated explicitly to study
the masses of the triplet (pion) and singlet (eta) bound states
using the overlap and fixed point Dirac
operators . Presumably the continuum limit of the
determinant itself in the nonperturbative domain discussed below could
be used as a sensitive test of the many lattice discretizations of the
Dirac operator now in use.


In addition, we develop further the concept of duality and relate the
Euclidean  determinant to the pair production
probability in  for a class of electric pulses. Thus,
the Euclidean  determinant contains nonperturbative
physical information in four dimensions.

Fermion determinants are obtained by integrating over the fermion
fields to produce the one-loop effective Euclidean action
, where  is formally the ratio

of Fredholm determinants of Euclidean Dirac operators. We assume that
the continuation to the Euclidean metric has been done. When  is
properly defined it is a nonlocal function of the field strength
 formed from the potential  , modulo Chern-Simons
terms that are absent in two dimensions. Since the determinant is part
of the gauge field's action,  and  are random
fields. We have discussed elsewhere  how the
need to regulate in any dimension above one allows one to assume
smooth potentials and fields. In order to make further progress we
assume in addition that  is centrally symmetric and that
it has a finite range .

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec.  we define
the determinant and indicate our strategy for calculating it by first
assuming  and then letting , where  is the
fermion mass and  is the flux of the background magnetic field
. This is the really interesting limit as it takes one deep
into the nonperturbative regime. In Sec.  the
low-energy scattering phase shifts required to calculate the
determinant are obtained. Section  deals with the small
mass, strong coupling expansion of the determinant, while
Sec.  presents the explicit form it takes in this
limit. Section  generalizes the concept of duality from
one to two-variable fields, thereby allowing the QED Euclidean
determinant to be related to physics in four dimensions. Section
 summarizes our results while the asymptotic form of
the determinant given in Sec.  is derived in the
Appendix.




Representation of the Determinant 

Green's functions 

The exact calculation of  in  continued to the
Euclidean metric reduces to the scattering problem of a charged
particle confined to a plane pierced by a magnetic field,
namely 
 
 

where the supersymmetric operator pair
 are obtained
from the two-dimensional Pauli Hamiltonian
. Hence, the
subscripts on H in () refer to positive and negative
chirality. The auxiliary potential  is related to the vector
potential by 
and to the magnetic field by  or

 

with . Expansion of () in powers of 
yields the standard one-loop effective action given by the Feynman
rules. The first term on the right-hand side of () is
 of the massless Schwinger
model . Due to the  falloff of  when
 an integration by parts is not justified in this case. As
we will see in Sec. , the presence of the mass dependent
term profoundly modifies the determinant, ultimatelly cancelling the
first term when . The invariance of ()
under , where  is a constant, gives the
index theorem on a two-dimensional Euclidean manifold .

We now assume that  is centrally symmetric and that  for
. To ensure finite flux we assume  is square-integrable in view
of the inequality
.
Referring to (), define the Green's function

 

where 

  

and

 

The calculation is simplified by introducing the Green's function

 

where

 

and

 

The outgoing-wave Green's functions  are
constructed from  
 

where  is a regular solution and  an irregular
outgoing-wave solution, of

 

 is the associated Jost function and ,  denote the lesser and
larger values of . Here and below we will occasionally suppress
the subscripts  and  to reduce notational clutter.

Regular solutions of () are

 
 

where

 

 and  denote the Hankel functions 
and , respectively;  are the
scattering phase shifts; , and
 is the total flux of . The interior wavefunctions
 satisfy the boundary condition
. These will be
discussed further below. The structure of  for
 ensures that the eigenfunctions of  in
(), ,
correspond to physical wave functions . That is,

 

assumes the asymptotic form for 

 

where


 

with the differential scattering cross section
.

Assuming  are known, irregular outgoing-wave solutions of ()
can be found by standard means, giving

 
 

Near the regular singular point at  of (),
.

Equations () and () give the Jost function

 

which is independent of chirality;  on the left-hand side is the
Wronskian. It may be verified that (), (),
() and () combine to satisfy the basic
condition


 

In order to make contact with the determinant in () we now
analytically continue  in  into the upper
half of the complex plane by letting . Then
(), () and () give

 
 

while () gives

 

Because of the invariance of  under 
we have adjusted  so that .

For , (), (), () and
() give

 
 

where  is a modified Bessel function and we used 
 

The phase shifts in () are understood to be analytically
continued as well.

It is convenient to separate the energy-independent Aharonov-Bohm
phase shifts  from
. Without loss of generality we assume
. Then, modulo ,

 

 

where  stands for the nearest integer less than  with 
. The energy-dependent phase shifts  will be
calculated in Sec. .

The Green's function difference on the left-hand side of
() for  may be dealt with as for , this
time using  
 
 

where  is a modified Bessel function. For
, ; 
the final result from (), (),
(), () and () is


 
 


The interior wave functions  and the phase shifts
 are abbreviations for 
and .

The representation () is exact. Its advantage over other
representations of determinants based on scattering data is that it
involves no integration over phase shift energy. It is particularly
relevant to a study of the chiral limit . Anticipating what follows,
the integrals can be interchanged with the sums for the class of fields
considered here, allowing the integrals in the exterior region 
to be done immediately. Only information about the interior wave
functions is required to calculate the determinant exactly, and these
are known explicitly for  as in () below.

The right-hand side of () must be real since it is a
Euclidean determinant. This imposes the nontrivial constraints

 
 

For the fields considered here and the small mass expansions of
 made in Sec.  there is complete
agreement with ().

Small mass expansions 

We now commence the expansion of  when . This does not
mean an expansion in powers of . Such an expansion does not exist as
 has a branch beginning at  . Rather, we are referring
to a collection of leading terms in  such as ,
, as well as intergral powers of .

Since () depends only on  and the boundary condition
 is independent of
 is a regular function of . Therefore we set
 and begin an
expansion in powers of :

 

For , exact positive chirality solutions of
 are
known for  ; the remaining cases can be
dealt with similarly. The results are, up to irrelevant normalization
constants that cancel in (),

 

Noting (),  is square-integrable for
 for . This is in accord
with the Aharonov-Casher theorem which states that the number of
positive (negative) chirality square-integrable zero modes is
, depending on whether 
 . These zero modes will be shown to
play a dominant role in the strong coupling limit of .

We want to calculate  in the limit  followed by
. This must be done with care as there may be ratios of
terms like  which when
further expanded in powers of  grows exponentially with
. There is one firm guiding principle here, namely that the
determinant is an entire function of  of order
2 . This means that for any complex value of ,

for any  and ,  are
constants. Therefore, any growth of  faster than quadratic in
 means that the expansion one is making is inadmissible. In fact,
for real values of   must satisfy the more precise bound

 

for any  with .
There are additional technical assumptions underlying
() that the fields considered here satisfy.
The right-hand side is the "diamagnetic"
bound  and the
left-hand side follows from the general operator structure of 
and some standard inequalities .

The warning cited above materialzes for 
when . There may be other cases. In the positive chirality
sector  in () is

 

for . What happens is that the effective potential

 

has a high and wide barrier beginning in the range  and
extending out to  for . This gives rise to
quasi-stationary states. As a consequence the wave function is
enhanced inside  and  can become large for strong
coupling.

For  or larger the barrier in  disappears and the
growth of  for  slows down. This must
happen since  for all . For  the
integral in () is dominated in the range , giving
. For the special case of ,  and
zero otherwise we find

 

for , , .

To reiterate, care must be taken that every term in the small
mass expansion makes sense, either by satisfying the bound
() or by making sure that the offending term is cancelled
by other terms.



Low-Energy Phase Shifts 

In order to take the small mass limit of  in () we
will need the low-energy phase shifts. From here on it is convenient
to revert to the solutions of

 

where  is defined by () and  are
connected to the regular solutions () of () by

 

For any chirality the zero-energy solutions () of
() are related to the zero-energy solutions  of
() by

 

From (), (), (),
() and (), for ,

 
 


where  is a Bessel function of the second kind. This holds for
all  and both chiralities except for positive chirality when ,
which has to be dealt with separately. Then

 

where

 

and from ()

 

Equations () and () give

 
 

and (), () give, for both chiralities,

 

The norms of the square-integrable zero modes are, from (), ()
and ()

 

With (), (), (),
(), ,
,  the following
low-energy phase shifts are obtained:

 
 
^+ _l
  = -  ^2(W)  (ka 2 )^2W 
    
    2 ^0_l^2 (ka)^2  + 1 W 
    + 1 (1-W) ^0_l^2 .

    .
    + (4 (W-1)^2 (2-W) )^-1  + 2 ^(4) _l 
           ^0_l^4 
    + O(ka)^2
    
    + O(ka)^4W-4 , l = 0, ..., N-2

 
^+ _N-1 
  = -  ^2 (1 + ) 
    (ka 2 )^2 + 2 
    
    2 ^0_N-1 ^2 (ka)^2  + 1 1 +  
    - 1 ^0_N-1 ^2 .

    .
    + (4 ^2 (1-) )^-1  + 2 ^(4) _N-1  
           ^0_N-1 ^4 
    
    - ^2  
           4 ^4 (1 + )^0_N-1 ^4 
    (ka 2 )^4 
    + O(ka)^6  , 

provided ;

 
 

provided , and

 

This may seem impossible to satisfy for large , but it turns out
that the integral in () decreases as a power of N (see
Appendix). Continuing,

 
 2 
^+ _l
  &= 2(ka/2)^2W+2  ^2 (1+W) 
  ^a_0 dr a  (r a )^2l+1 
  e^2e   +  O(ka)^2W+4 ,
  &l =& N+1, N+2, ...,
 
and 
^+ _l
  &= (ka/2)^2W  ^2(W) 
  (
  2 ^a_0 dr r  (r a )^2l 
  e^-2e   - 1 W  )
  + O[(ka)^4W , (ka)^2W+2 ],
  
  &l =& -1, -2, ...

For negative chirality,

 


The negative values of  for  can be
qualitatively understood as due to the repulsive barrier in 
mentioned in Sec. . The apparent poles in
 when  is integral disappear when a careful limit
is taken. For example, going back to the basic definition
(),


 

where  is Euler's constant. The general rule is that simple
poles in  when  is integral are replaced with
logarithms of the type .

The main observation here is the presence of the  factors
in  for  which cause each of the
corresponding partial-wave Green's functions
 in () to develop a simple
pole in  at the origin. These are of course expected due to the N
square-integrable zero modes of .

We have learned from this calculation that the precise form of these
phase shifts is necessary if large cancellations are to go through in
the calculation of the determinant. This is further discussed in
Sec. .

Small-Mass, Strong-Coupling Expansion of  

Because of the rapid falloff of the low-energy phase shifts
with  the sums and integrals in () can be
interchanged. Using entries 5.54.2 of Ref.  and
1.12.3.3 of Ref.  one obtains

 
 
 

 
 2 
a^-2  
 ^ _a dr  r (r a ) K^2_W(mr) 

  =& K_W+1 (ma) K'_W(ma) - K_W(ma) K'_W+1 (ma)&&

  &  + W 2ma 
  [
  K_W+1 (ma) W K_W(ma) - K_W(ma) W K_W+1 (ma)
  ]&&

  =& ^2(W-1) 16  (ma 2 )^-2W 
  +  16 W 
  [
  2W (W) + W W
  - 2W (ma 2 ) - 2W + 1
  ]
  (ma 2 )^-2 &

  &
  + ^2(W) 8 (1-W) (2-W)^2  (ma 2 )^2-2W 
  + O[(ma)^4-2W , (ma)^0],& l N&

  =& ^2(- 1) 16 
  (ma 2 )^-2  +  16  
  [
  2() +   - 2 (ma 2 ) - 2 + 1
  ]
  (ma 2 )^-2 
  -  8  &&

  &
  + ^2 16^2(2 + )()^2 
  (ma 2 )^2 
  + ^2() 8(1-)(2-)^2 
    (ma 2 )^2-2 
  + O[(ma)^2 + 2 , (ma)^4-2 ],& l = N&,


where  and
. Apparent singularities in () and
() at integral values of  cancel when careful limits
are taken. Also required are the following
expansions :

 
 

and

 

The pole at  in  from
the factors  in  in () and
() make the positive chirality terms for 
in () the dominant ones when . Using
()-(), ()-() and
() when it makes sense-as discussed at the end of
Sec. II and below-we obtain from ()

 
 
e  lndet = -2e ^a_0 dr  r (r) B(r)
  + ^N-1 _l=0  e  ^0_l^2
  +    (ma)
  -  2 [2()
    + + 1 - 2 + 22]

  + O[(ma)^2 (ma),(ma)^2-2 (ma),(ma)^2(e)],

provided . Recall that
.

Regarding the remainder in (), there are twelve cases to
consider: positive/negative chirality, regions inside/outside the
range of B, and the angular momentum ranges
, ,  for . The
terms of order  and
 come from positive chirality,
 for . The term of order  comes from the

terms in () summed over values of  in the neighborhood
of . The presence of the factor  is
tentative: there may be subtle cancellations between the positive and
negative chirality sectors that will eliminate the logarithm. All of
the  remainder estimates are based on what we consider the
worst case, namely, , which causes  to be
positive and monotonically decreasing for .

Our second comment on () concerns large individual terms
in the mass expansion when . Consider the second term in
() and the ratio . As
discussed in Sec. ,  can exponentially
increase for  for . However,
this ratio at   and its leading
correction  in () are cancelled for each 
by the third term in (). It remains to understand these
cancellations and to verify that they continue at order  and
higher orders.

The terms  for 
 in () have not been expanded since there is no
apparent cancellation mechanism. We have found that in one of the
worst cases, when  for  and zero otherwise, these
terms when left unexpanded vanish as . For 
these terms remain bounded when expanded, and for 
their leading  behavior is cancelled by the negative chirality
sector since the distinction between the two chiralities disappears as
.

In the exactly solvable case of a magnetic field confined to the
surface of a cylinder the mass-dependent terms remain subdominant when
 . The study of the cancellation of large
terms and the vanishing of ratios of large terms when 
 is still at a preliminary stage. The control of these terms
has much to teach us about the nonperturbative structure of .

Finally, we have previously shown that for  fixed and 

 

where  . Now consider the case when
 and . Then the dominant mass-dependent
term in () for  occurs at , :

 
 

where  are continued to . From
(), () and

 
 

one gets

 

in accord with ().

Next, consider the case when ,
. As  a pole at  begins
to develop in  and
. For  we
find

 

again in accord with (). Moreover, the same result is
obtained in the limit .

In the interval  the 
term in () comes from the ,  contribution to
. This term contradicts ()
which was derived by holding  fixed and letting 
. Here we are setting , then letting  increase
indefinitely. By taking limits in this way the  term becomes
an infinitesimal addition to  when compared to its growth due
to the pileup of normalizable zero modes as  increases, as we
will see in Sec. . For the present it is assumed that
there are other infinitesimal terms not yet found that will result in
the shift  in the
range of  indicated.

We are confident that () is the leading mass-dependent term
in , and it will accordingly be added on to our strong coupling
result for  in Sec. .



Small-Mass, Strong-Coupling Limit of  


Up to now we have assumed that  is square-integrable,
centrally symmetric and finite-ranged. Further analytic analysis of
() requires additional assumptions, namely 
with continuous first and second derivatives. Then we can show that
for , the first term in () is cancelled
by the zero modes contributing to the second term.

The demonstration is straightforward. Refer to (),
(), the first lines of () and
() and obtain

 
 

Now make use of the following theorem of Erdo s ,
specialized here to the case of central symmetry: Let  be a
compactly supported magnetic field with a continuous first
derivative. Define the ground-state density function

 

Then  converges to  in   for any 
as . According to this theorem

 

for  and where . The
-integral in () cuts off due to the finite range of
. Hence, () leads to the promised cancellation in
().

The really interesting question now is what is the remainder in
()? Erdo s' theorem is not yet sharp enough to state
what it is. It had better be negative to be in accord with the
diamagnetic upper bound in (). In the Appendix we
investigate this problem by the method of steepest descents assuming
 with two alternative sets of boundary conditions: ,
, and . The result in both cases is

 
 

The case when  is the mirror image of the  case, and so
we need only insert absolute value signs to cover both cases. As
discussed in Sec. , we have inserted the mass-dependent
term from Ref. . Comparing () with the constant
field result

 

we see that they are formally in accord on setting
. Of course we cannot say anything about the
remaining mass-dependent terms in () in this limit.

The minus sign in () is a reflection of the paramagnetism
of charged fermions in a magnetic field. This is most clearly seen
with Schwinger's proper time definition of the
determinant , namely

 
 

Noting the minus sign in (), ()
indicates that on average the spectrum of the Pauli operator is
lowered by  relative to the field-free case. Therefore, the current
usage of "diamagnetic" bound to describe the right-hand side of
() is a misnomer. The factor  in ()
multiplying the logarithm is related to the counting of zero
modes. More will be said about the physics of () in
Sec. .

The discussion of the remainder in () in
Sec.  means that we cannot rule out the subdominant
term  in (); more detailed
analysis is required to exclude the  factor.

The remarkable thing about () is that the limit is
universal for a broad class of fields. Since it only depends on a
global property of the background magnetic field-its total flux-we
suspect that () is also the limit in the general case of
non-central, square-integrable fields.

Finally, the case of zero-flux background fields has not been
considered in the literature to the author's knowledge except for the
case of massless QED on a torus  and a
sphere . Our limit seems to indicate that when
 there are no square-integrable zero modes and hence no
mechanism to cancel the first term in ().  In this case
one might suppose that it is this term-the Schwinger term-that is
dominant in the small-mass, strong-coupling limit. This is the result
in .








Duality 

The purpose of this section is to relate the Euclidean determinant of
QED and some of the results of the previous sections to physics in
four dimensions. The term duality as used in this section is distinct
from Olive-Montonen electric-magnetic duality . It is
rather a duality closely related to the analyticity of the one-loop
effective action of QED in two and four dimensions.

The Euclidean determinants in QED and QED for the background
magnetic field  are related by

 
 

where ,  is the
volume of the space-time box for  and , and on-shell charge
renormalization is used . Hence  must be at least
square-integrable in what follows.  Assuming one can rotate energy
contours in the usual way, continue  to the
Lorentz metric by letting ,
,  and .
On the right det remains a Euclidean determinant and
so () now becomes

 
 

with the superscripts  and  denoting Euclidean and Lorentz metrics,
respectively. Therefore, given  we can
calculate  for a general unidirectional
magnetic field  by integrating () over
  as described in Ref. .

Now make the duality transformation from the static magnetic field
 to the functionally equivalent electric field 
by letting

 

with ,
 and

 

A change in  in () results in a gauge transformation
and does not affect the determinant. This duality transformation is
implemented by the replacement 
in det, det and  in
() and the coordinate/momentum relabeling
, , followed by continuation
to the Lorentz metric, including , where  is
the range of  in the -direction, and  is the duration
of the electric pulse . An example is given in
() below. If  has more than one range parameter in the
-direction then all of them must be continued as . The rule
 in going from the Euclidean metric back to the
Lorentz metric is a consequence of the definition of  above and the
rotation . Ultimately it is rooted
in the fundamental prescription . Then
() becomes

 
 

As an example consider the last terms in () and
() for the case of a magnetic field in a closed region
with two range parameters:

 

with . Following the
above rules

) 

where , ,  define
the boundaries of  and .

Equation () may seem to give nothing new, at least when
developed in a power-series expansion in . Its real power enters when
 is known nonperturbatively as we will now
see. Defining the one-loop Lorentz metric effective action by
, () gives

 
 

As an example, consider the finite-range magnetic field

 

and the corresponding electric pulse

 

where  and  are constants,  and
. Both fields are directed along the -axis. For
 and  we found the result () for
. Then following the above rules set

 

where corrections of  have been ignored. Substituting
() in () gives for 

 
 

As far as we know there is nothing in the literature to direcly check
() with, or any other class of electric two-variable
pulses.

The minus sign in () is universal for the class of fields
and their dual pulses considered in this paper. We now see that the
physically reasonable result that the pair production probability
 decreases with increasing
fermion mass depends on the paramagnetism of charged fermions in a
magnetic field, as indicated by the minus sign in () and
discussed afterwards. We take this as direct physical evidence for the
validity, at least in the strong-coupling, low-mass domain, of the
"diamagnetic" bound on the Euclidean determinant, namely
det.

The diamagnetic bound also holds in the perturbative domain of large
mass and weak coupling since the power series expansion of
 is asymptotic and the overall sign of the
second-order term is negative .

A mechanical device that would simulate the pulses implied by the
duality transforms on centrally symmetric magnetic fields would be
two parallel conducting plates of large extent initially very close
together, then pulled apart and then pushed together again. These
plates have the unusual property of having opposite surface-charge
densities varying with time and their spatial separation.

Duality has been considered recently by Dunne and Hall for nonconstant fields in their study of the exactly solvable
single-variable magnetic field .
Although the asymptotic boundary conditions are different in the
magnetic and electric field cases, they allow the analytic
continuations required for duality in this example. In a later
paper  they go beyond exactly solvable background fields
by using a WKB approach to approximate the spectrum of the Pauli
operator . The authors are
aware that such an approach cannot prove duality in the
single-variable case, but it does give an insight into just how
nontrivial duality is. Presumably the final justification of duality
in both the one- and two-variable cases is the validity of the Wick
rotation in the presence of external fields.

The question arises as to whether there is a duality transformation of
the type , where  is
directed along the third axis. The answer is no except for the special
case when  is constant within the boundary parallel to
the direction of the field. Otherwise, the Bianchi identity excludes
such fields. So for  constant over a finite spatial region, duality
takes the simple form, from (),

 
 

The determinant det retains its Euclidean metric
since the background field is static. For the case of a circular
boundary of radius  () can be checked since there is a
reliable semiclassical approximation that is valid for ,
namely 
 
 

Then for ,

 

which agrees by inspection with () when combined with
(), taking  and letting
.


Summary 

An exact representation of the Euclidean fermion determinant in two
dimensions for centrally symmetric, finite-ranged Abelian background
gauge fields has been obtained that depends only on the interior
partial-wave functions and scattering phase shifts continued to the
upper -plane by setting , where  is the fermion
mass. In the nonperturbative limit of small fermion mass these are
known explicitly, thereby making the determinant amenable to numerical
analysis. For the sequence of limits of small fermion mass followed by
strong coupling we have been able to obtain the explicit asymptotic
limit of the determinant when the background field is unidirectional
and nonvanishing except on its boundary. The result is universal,
depending only on the two-dimensional chiral anomaly . It
should be an easy task to obtain the determinant's asymptotic limit
for fluctuating magnetic fields since one only needs to numerically
evaluate the second term in (). These results should be a
useful nonperturbative check on lattice algorithms for fermion
determinants when the output is extrapolated to infinite volume and
zero lattice spacing.

By extending the concept of duality to two variables we have been able
to relate the Euclidean determinant in two dimensions for a wide class
of background magnetic fields to the pair production probability in
four dimensions for a related class of electric pulses. We have also
connected the "diamagnetic" bound on the Euclidean two-dimensional
determinant to the negative sign of
 in four dimensions, thereby
providing a physical basis for this bound in the strong-coupling,
small-mass limit.

Central to this work was the ability to count zero modes in two
dimensions. Further analytic progress in three and four dimensions
will be hindered, if not blocked, until there are theorems for
counting zero modes. In four dimensions more is needed than just the
difference of positive and negative chirality zero modes, while in
three dimensions there may be some as yet undiscovered topological
invariant that will count them.


 
The author would like to thank G. Dunne, L. Erdo s and C. Lang for
helpful correspondence, and M. Peardon, S. Ryan and I. Sachs for
helpful discussions.

*

 



Here we will derive the asymptotic limit (). Referring to
() let

 

Then,

 

Consider the first term in (). Referring to ()
consider

 

where  and where for ,
. Refer to the first sum
in (). By inspection of (),
, where , ,
with  given by (). Hence,
. For , where
 we find later on in () with
 that
. These two results
indicate that  has exponential growth in  for this range of
. Thus,  or less for
 and

  

Now for the second sum in (). For  large enough
we can use the method of steepest descents to calculate  except
near the point . Referring to (), let

 

Assume  so that  given by () is
monotonically increasing with . Then  is maximized at point
 for which

 

since . Hence for ,

 

To calculate the point  for each admissible , note that for
, . So expand the right-hand side of
() about  by setting . 
Let , , . Assuming  has continuous
first and second derivatives with  and  then
 and

 

and

 

Inserting (), () in () gives for


 
 

By definition (),  for
. This will be true for the estimate ()
provided

 

in addition to .

Now return to the second sum in () and write it as the
following sum using ():

 

Consider the first term in (). We need not rely on
() yet because () holds irrespective of where
the roots  of () lie in . The important
point is that they are closely spaced over the entire interval 
for  and for  monotonically increasing
with . Hence, the  can be considered to be nearly
continuous across  for  in the range indicated with

 

Referring to (), () and (),

 

and so

 

When (), (), () are combined we
already see the promised cancellation of the first term in
(), as guaranteed by Erdo s' theorem . We
now turn to the calculation of the remainder.

Consider the second sum in () and break it up into two
sums:

 
 

where . Now deal with the first sum and recall
. From () for
,
 which implies
 for , and hence
. For the upper limit
, () gives
 and hence
. So

 

and

 

and so .
Substituting this result into () gives

 

Thus  for  and
so the first sum in () gives a contribution of .

Next consider the second term in (). With ,


 

The range of m in () is such that () is valid
so that

 

This completes the sum in () and the second sum in
().

Finally, consider the last sum in (). This requires that
 be estimated near the end point  or . For  and
with  monotonically decreasing to zero
, the integral in ()
is dominated near . Since ,  has
a first-order zero at : ,
. Hence, for 

 
 

But,

 

where  is the incomplete gamma function given by entry
6.5.3 in. Using entries 8.356.2 in
 and 6.5.35 in,

 

Combining ()-() with Stirling's formula gives

 

This is an overestimate as we integrated over all of the range 
instead of a patch near , and therefore the factor
 in () cannot be trusted. However, the
result demonstrates that  falls off as a power of  and not
exponentially. Since  and
 we can state that
 for
 and so


 

Combining (), (), (),
(), (), (), (),
() and intermediate results gives

 

where  but -independant. This completes the sum of
the first term in ().

The sum of the second term in () is straightforward:

 

Now consider the sum of the third term in (). Letting
,

 
 

where  and  for ,
, and  is given by (). Consider the first
sum:

  

since by definition of  and (),
.

Next consider the second sum in (). Since  we
have

 

The last sum is bounded by elementary means by noting that
 and hence
 or less. Then by inspection the
right-hand side is bounded by . Likewise so
is the first sum, and hence

 

Finally, consider the last sum in (). Again because
,

 

As  and ,
we can use () and conclude

 
 

Hence,  where
. Simple estimates applied to the first and last sums
in () give

 

Combining (), (), () and
() gives

 

We now turn to the sum of the final term in (). Using
previous definitions we can write this as

 
 

Consider the first sum in (). We have previously noted
that  for the range of 
indicated. Since , then

 

The range of  in the second sum in () allows the use of
() for , and hence

 
 

where  is defined by (). Then the second sum in
() is

 
 

For the range of  indicated,  is given by
() and has the functional form
, 
where ,  are constants. Note that
. Then the first sum in
() vanishes as  by inspection. Over the
range of  indicated,  and
. Therefore the remaining sums in
() are dominated by
 which, when
approximated by an integral, is of  and so

 

Finally, we deal with the last sum in (). It is for
, and following () we estimated
 or less for this -range. We
have already noted that 
and that . Hence we conclude

 

In summary, (), (), (),
() give

 

Combining (), (), (),
(), () gives for 

 
 

where  but -independent. Now combine ()
with (), integrate and combine this with our previous
result in () to get for  followed by 

 
 

The justification for the inclusion of the  term was
discussed following (). Also, as discussed immediately
after (), there may be subtle cancellations that will
eliminate the  factor in the remainder term
. The case when  is included by
replacing  in () everywhere with .

This analysis is for fields  for  with continuous
first and second derivatives and with , . For the
case  the analysis is almost identical to the preceding case
and is also a little simpler. The main changes are

 

and

 
 

provided . The result is
the same as ().

 99 
M. P. Fry, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17 , 936 (2002).
M. P. Fry, Phys. Rev. D 51 , 810 (1995).
T.W. Chiu, Nucl. Phys. B588 , 400 (2000).
I. Sachs and A. Wipf, Helv. Phys. Acta. 65 , 652 (1992).
S. Ha usler and C.B. Lang, Phys. Lett. B 515 , 213 (2001).
M. P. Fry, Phys. Rev. D 45 , 682 (1992); D 47 , 743(E) (1993).
M. P. Fry, Phys. Rev. D 54 , 6444 (1996).
M. P. Fry, Phys. Rev. D 47 , 2629 (1993).
J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 128 , 2425 (1962).
R. Musto, L. O'Raifeartaigh, and A. Wipf, Phys. Lett. B 175 ,
433 (1986).
R. G. Newton, Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles , 2nd
ed. (Springer, New York, 1982).
M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical
Functions  (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1964).
T. Jaroszewicz, Phys. Rev. D 34 , 3128 (1986).
M. P. Fry, Phys. Rev. D 62 , 125007 (2000).
Y. Aharonov and A. Casher, Phys. Rev. A 19 , 2461 (1979).
E. Seiler and B. Simon, Commun. Math. Phys. 45 , 99 (1975).
E. Seiler, Gauge Theories as a Problem of Constructive Quantum Field
Theory and Statistical Mechanics , Lecture Notes in Physics Vol. 159
(Springer, Berlin, 1982).
E. Seiler, in Gauge Theories: Fundamental Interactions and Rigorous
Results , Proceedings of the International Summer School of Theoretical
Physics, Poiana Brasov, Romania, 1981, edited by P. Dita,
V. Georgescu, and R. Purice, Progress in Physics Vol. 5 (Birkha user,
Boston, 1982), p. 263.
D. Brydges, J. Fro hlich, and E. Seiler, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)
121 , 227 (1979).
D. Weingarten, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 126 , 154 (1980).
I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series
and Products  (Academic Press, New York, 1965).
A. P. Prudnikov, Yu. A. Brychkov, and O. I. Marichev, Integrals
and Series  (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1988), Vol. 2.
M. P. Fry, J. Math. Phys. 41 , 1691 (2000).
L. Erdo s, Lett. Math. Phys. 29 , 219 (1993).
J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82 , 664 (1951).
C. Jayewardena, Helv. Phys. Acta. 61 , 636 (1988).
C. Montonen and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. B 72 , 117 (1977);
P. Goddard, J. Nuyts, and D. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B125 , 1
(1977).
G. Dunne and T. Hall, Phys. Rev. D 58 , 105022 (1998).
G. Dunne and T. Hall, Phys. Rev. D 60 , 065002 (1999).
C. Martin and D. Vautherin, Phys. Rev. D 38 , 3593 (1988).



