Gluino condensate and effective superpotential 
gluino_pot 
Let us start our analysis by considering the geometry of the
"internal" manifold. The bulk solution is-apart from the warp
factor-of the form , where  is a 
Kahler manifold and geometrically encodes various aspects of the
dual gauge theory. It encodes, first, the effective superpotential 
equation 
superpot_def 
  _M_6  F^(3)   ,
equation  
where  is the holomorphic 3-form of the complex manifold
. Since  is not compact,  explicitly depends on a
cut-off. The holomorphic 3-form  is given by
Ivanov:2000fg,Papadopoulos:2000gj (We
have chosen the phase so that  is real.) 
equation 
form3 
  = 2  L^3  
  E ^1 E ^2 E ^3 ,
equation 
where the complex 1-forms  are defined by
align 
E1 
  E ^1 &= (^3-L A^3) -i d ,

  E ^2 &= (^1-L A^1)+iX h  d-iP
  (^2-L A^2) ,

  E ^3 &= h  d+iX ( ^2-L A^2) +iP h 
  d ,
align 
and 
equation 
PX 
  P = (4+2c)-4 2^2(2+c)  ,
  X = (1-P^2)^1/2  = 2 h  (2+c)  .
equation 
A straightforward calculation yields 
equation 
superpot 
  (_0) 16 ^3 L^5  2_0  f(c)
  _ ^_0  d[ 2(2+c) -1
  ] .
equation 


The effective superpotential can be recast in terms of a pre-potential after
introducing a canonical basis of homology 3-cycles of 
Taylor:1999ii,Mayr:2000hh ,
equation 
  _A F^(3)  _B - _A _B F^(3)  .
equation   
In our case the compact 3-cycle is , and the non-compact 3-cycle  has
a complicated form. Since we have already found , we shall
consider only the compact .
The integral of  over 
is proportional to the number of D-branes, , see eqn.
charge_quant , while the integral of  over  encodes the gluino condensate,
equation 
gluino_cond 
  2i _c = _5 _S^3  =
  i _5 2^2 L^3  2  X 
  = i _5 2^2 L^3  2_0  f(c) . 
equation 
The constant  is needed for dimensional reasons.
Following our interpretation of the integration constants, we re-write
eqn. gluino_cond  as 
equation 
gluino_c 
  _c = _0 f(c)= ^3 f(c) ,
equation 
where we have used the
convention  and the fact that the regular solution is the true
dual of  SYM theory, i.e.  ,
where  is the dynamically generated mass scale.
Thus, we identify the precise role of  relating  to
the SUGRA parameters by the relation 
equation 
Phi0_interpret 
  2_0  = ^-1  _5^-1  ^3 L^3 = 
  2(2)^4 N^3 g_s^2  ( L )^3 .
equation 
Obviously, for  we have ,
in agreement with the fact that a purely perturbative calculation
fails to exhibit the gluino condensate.


Beta function 
betafunc 
In this section we shall analyze and interpret the gauge coupling and
 angle measured by a probe D5-brane. Our main interest lies in the
calculation of the perturbative beta function, but other aspects, such
as the breaking of chiral symmetry from classically  to
 in the perturbative regime and to  by
non-perturbative effects, will also become transparent.

Let us start by discussing the chiral symmetry. We argue that the
transformation , where ,
corresponds to a chiral transformation of the dual SYM theory. The
perturbative physics is correctly captured by the solution with
, in which case eqns. gYM  and tYM  simplify
to  
equation 
YMinf 
  1^2  = N 4^2  and  
  = N2 .
equation 
Moreover, in this solution the non-abelian gauge field becomes abelian by virtue of , which removes all terms with
 and  from the metric and the
form fields. Hence, the metric and the field strengths 
and  are symmetric under  for all
. These transformations form the classical
chiral symmetry group . 
However,  is determined by , which is not
invariant under a general chiral transformation. In fact, eqn.
YMinf  is invariant only for  for
, corresponding to the group  of the
non-anomalous chiral symmetry transformations. 
In contrast, for every solution with , where a certain
amount of non-perturbative effects are included, terms with
 and  appear showing that
the symmetry of the bulk solutions is given by 
 only, which represents
the generator of the unbroken  chiral symmetry of the
quantum theory. We clearly see that the breaking 
 is a non-perturbative effect.

Let us turn now to the beta function. Considering the case ,
which is given by eqn. YMinf , one is tempted to identify
, where the exponent of  is chosen such
that the correct coefficient of the one-loop beta function is
reproducedApreda:2001qb . We shall present an 
alternative argument, which is applicable for any solution with
. To begin, let us combine 
and  to the complexified gauge coupling,
equation 
tau 
  =  2  +i 4 ^2  
  =i N 2  [ 2(2+c) -i-a()
  -i(] .
equation 
In order to identify the energy scale , we follow
Apreda:2001qb,DiVecchia:2002ks  
and interpret the function  as the
gluino condensate measured in units of ,(A different
approach to finding a radial/energy relation can be found in
Wang:2002ka .)  
equation 
mudef 
  a() = _c ^3  ,
equation 
where  by virtue of eqn. gluino_c .
We shall in the following be able to determine the function . 
The identification mudef  is ambiguous in the case
, but the result of the following arguments will have a
well-defined limit for , because any non-zero 
drops out when calculating the beta function.  

The complex coupling tau  or, alternatively, eqns. gYM 
and tYM , might be interpreted as exact, non-perturbative
expressions. More precisely, starting at very large  and
a certain initial , the RG flow proceeds along the direction of
steepest descent of the probe potential  (see Sec. probepot )
towards the 
minimum at , . In the regular case, , the
gauge coupling, , diverges at , signalling the
disappearance of the UV degrees of freedom at the vacuum. 
This exact RG flow was analyzed inBertolini:2002yr  for the
special case .

The exact RG flow "knows" about the position of the vacuum at
 in the sense that the value of  flows towards
. In contrast, perturbative calculations
in field theory are typically ignorant about the vacuum state. For
example, an argument as to why a direct perturbative calculation of 
the gaugino condensate yields
zero is that the perturbative analysis averages over all vacua
Amati:1985uz,Amati:1988ft .
We wish to confront our results with a perturbative field theory
calculation and, therefore, we must average over all inequivalent vacua, which
can be equivalently expressed as the following change 
of renormalization scheme,(It is irrelevant whether we
  average over the  discrete values of  for a given
  , or whether we take the average over the whole interval.) 
equation 
tauredef 
  +iN 2  
  _c ^3 i   ,
equation 
where we have written , leading to the
coupling 
align 
gYM_new 
  1^2  &= N 4^2  (2+c) ,

and the -angle 
tYM_new 
  &= N 2.
align 
It is interesting to observe that, in this renormalization scheme, the
coupling gYM_new  does not diverge for , in contrast
to the exact coupling gYM . 

From eqns. gYM_new  and mudef  it is straightforward to
obtain the beta function of the gauge coupling, 
equation 
beta 
 = d d  
  = -3N 16^2  ^3 
  [ 1-a()^2N^2 8^2  ]
  [1-N^2 8^2  ]^-1  .
equation 
For , where non-perturbative effects are absent, this
coincides with the complete perturbative beta function of NSVZ
Novikov:1983uc,Novikov:1986rd . Notice also that in obtaining 
beta  no leading order approximation has been made in order to
rewrite  in terms of , and thus beta  holds at all
energies. Non-perturbative effects are described by , which,
in a large  expansion, takes the form of instanton
corrections. In fact, 
. We see that the constant  determines
how much instanton physics is present in the running. 
Notice, however, that these non-perturbative effects have been
obtained via a "perturbative" calculation, in that we are
considering the vacuum-averaged coupling.  


By using eqn. mudef , eqn. beta  is recast in terms
of gauge theory quantities only,
equation 
beta_new 
 = -3N 16^2  ^3 
  [1- _c^2 ^6  N^2 8^2  ]
  [1-N^2 8^2  ]^-1  .
equation 
In this way we are also able to determine . In fact, consider
the cases , where the beta function diverges for 
or, equivalently, for , where  is determined by 
equation 
rhoLambda 
  2 ( 2+c) =1 .
equation 
Clearly, we have . For the limiting cases,  and
, we find  and , respectively. (The regular case
, in which , will be considered below.) Thus, the
perturbative analysis breaks down before the brane reaches the
singularity. Defining  as the scale
where the beta function diverges, we
obtain from eqn. mudef  that 
equation 
f_def 
  f(c) = a() = 1-4^2  ,
equation 
where  is determined implicitly by eqn. rhoLambda . 
It is straightforward to check that  and, for ,
, as needed. 

In the regular case the beta function is not
singular at , because also the numerator is zero. More
precisely, the limit is 
equation 
beta_limit 
  -3N 8^2  ^3 
  = -3 (8^2 N )^1/2  .
equation 
Hence, the running changes from NSVZ type for very large 
to pure one-loop at . Notice, however, the factor 
with respect to the UV one-loop coefficient.

An interesting observation is that  coincides with the location
of the minimum of the effective superpotential, , cf.
eqn. superpot . Thus, we are lead to interpret  as a
"perturbative" expression that averages over all inequivalent vacua. 
 

Perturbative and non-perturbative aspects of pure
   super Yang-Mills theory from wrapped branes 

W. Muck 

  Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universita di Napoli
  "Federico II", 
 
  and INFN, Sezione di Napoli, Via Cintia, 80125 Napoli, Italy

  E-mail: mueck@na.infn.it  

The Maldacena-Nunez solution is generalized to include a
  number of integration constants, one of which controls the
  resolution of the singularity of the wrapped D5-brane
  background. Some features of the dual pure 
  super Yang-Mills (SYM) theory are calculated, amongst which the gluino
  condensate, the beta function of the gauge coupling and a brane
  probe potential, which is related to the Veneziano-Yankielowicz
  effective potential. Each integration constant has a precise meaning
  in the dual SYM theory, e.g., the amount of non-perturbative SYM
  physics captured by the gravity configuration is described by the
  singularity resolution parameter. 

Brane Dynamics in Gauge Theories, D-branes, Nonperturbative Effects 

DSF-3-2003
hep-th/0301171 



  
 



 
 
 
 
 
 

I am indebted to A. Lerda for his collaboration on this
topic and  careful reading of the manuscript. 
Moreover, thanks go to M. Bertolini, P. Di Vecchia,
A. Liccardo, R. Marotta, P. Merlatti, F. Nicodemi, C. Nunez and
R. Russo, as well as the other participants of the "gauge/gravity"
workshop during the 2003 RTN Torino winter school, for useful
discussions. Financial support by the European Commission under the
contract RTN-2000-00131 and by a fellowship from INFN is gratefully
acknowledged. 


 



Brane probe analysis 
Another way of obtaining information about the dual field theory is
by using the probe technique. 
Let us consider a D5-brane embedded in the background
metric10 . Its action is given by 
 
We consider a D5-brane wrapping a two-sphere parameterized by two
angles  and . Expanding the Born-Infeld part of
the action D5action  and demanding that the non-abelian gauge
fields  live only in the 4d part of the D5-branes, one finds
 
where the raising of the indices and the dual of the gauge fields are
taken using the 4d Minkowski metric, and we have used the convention
 for the colour trace over the
non-abelian generators. The potential  is given by 
   
For the gauge coupling, , and
the theta angle, , one obtains 
 
In eqns. D5action_exp  and tYMdef  we have used the fact
that the physics of Yang-Mills theory is periodic in the theta angle with
period , and we adopt the convention . 
The metric, the 2-form and the 6-form are induced from the respective
bulk fields. 

In order to proceed we have to specify how the world volume
coordinates of the D5-brane are related to the bulk coordinates of the
MN solution. The flat 4d part is obvious, but the wrapped  needs
some care. In order to use the coordinates  and  as
parameters, we have to ensure that both of them are trivially fibred
over the world volume. This is done by
imposing the four embedding conditions(The alternative
   is physically equivalent.)  
 
Thus, we have  and 
on the world volume.
Notice that the first two conditions differ from the ones used in
, where  and  are kept constant.
Hence, the induced metric on the world volume of the D5-branes becomes
 
so that
 
Moreover, the induced 2- and 6-forms are 
 
respectively.

Inserting these equations into the general expressions for , 
and , we find 
 
as well as 
 

Probe potential 
The vacuum of  SYM is usually described by the
Veneziano-Yankielowicz effective potential, , where  is a
chiral superfield containing the composite operator , where
 is the gluino field, as its lowest component. After
integrating out the auxiliary fields, this becomes 
,
 
In the notation of,
, where  
is the vacuum angle. The integer  stems from the fact that we may
choose a branch of the logarithm 
.
The scalar field  
describes the effective degrees of freedom at low
energies. Since  has period , there are  inequivalent
values of . Hence, the minimum of  at
 describes the  inequivalent
vacua of  SYM. The chirally symmetric minimum at
 is unphysical, since the second derivative of 
diverges. 

We would like to find a SUGRA derived quantity that can be compared to
. The effective superpotential superpot  is not a good
candidate, because it does not contain an angular variable that could
play the role of . We shall argue in the following that the
probe brane potential  can be compared to a potential derived from
 in the vicinity of the vacuum. 
Consider the potential 
 
where  is a dimensionless constant. The potential 
possesses the same physical minimum at  as ,
whereas the existence and the properties of the unphysical minimum at
 depend on . In fact,  is a minimum of
, if , but for  the first
derivative at this minimum is singular. We shall determine in the
following that the probe potential  coincides with 
around the vacuum for  and . 

The brane potential  is given by eqn. V ,
 
where the function  satisfies eqn. dotPsi 
 
In order to discuss , we must again distinguish
between the singular solutions, , and the regular one, ,
which are qualitatively very different. Let us
start with the singular cases. We were not able to integrate eqn.
dotPsi_new  except for the case , where
. The integration constant 
plays the role of a zero-point energy, and we shall set it to zero
ensuring  for . Hence, we obtain
 
where we have used eqn. Phi0_interpret  to eliminate 
and eqn. f_def  for . Eqn. Vinf  captures not only
the large  behaviour of  in all cases, but its behaviour at
the singularity is typical for the cases with . In fact,
making the ansatz , we find from
eqn. dotPsi_new  the following differential equation for ,
 
It is not difficult to show that  behaves as 
 
close to the singularity. Setting the integration constant  to
zero we ensure again  for . Moreover, using 
 and , we obtain 
 with a positive proportionality constant close to the
singularity. Hence, the potential has its absolute minimum at
, but the brane probe feels an infinite attractive force at
the singularity. Furthermore, the last term in eqn. V_new  
containing  exactly vanishes at the singularity, which
means that the state of lowest potential energy does not depend on the
choice of . Both features of the minimum-invariance under variations of
 and a singular first derivative-are in common with the
unphysical minimum of the potential , although
the comparison does not stand up to a more quantitative analysis.

We shall discuss now the regular solution and find a
quantitative agreement between  and  close to the
vacuum for  and .  
The first feature, which is different from the singular cases, is that
the coefficient in  of  is strictly
negative. Hence, the vacuum must be found at . (Any
multiples of  are irrelevant.) From eqn. tYM  we now
have that , so that we can re-write
 as , where 
is the field theory vacuum angle. 
Expanding the cosine in  to quadratic order and comparing it with
, we find that , and we can make the following
identifications, which we expect to hold in the vicinity to the
physical minimum, 
 
It is straightforward to show that the right hand side of eqn.
pot_ident  has exactly one local minimum, 
which is at . Thus, the potential  has
its minimum at  and , which is not chirally invariant. 

Expanding eqn. phi_ident  about  and substituting
eqn. Phi0_interpret  for , we find
 
Since  at the minimum, we obtain . 
Then, from eqn. phi_exp  follows


which we use to expand the left hand side of eqn. pot_ident ,
thus obtaining 
 
After substituting the constant 
we find agreement of the second and the third derivatives of
the potentials  and  at the minimum, if .
(The fourth derivatives do not agree). Naively one might have expected
to find , but one should bear in mind that, while  is
constructed from a holomorphic superfield, the probe potential is not
intrinsically holomorphic. 

Finally, we would like to point out that the result  is
supported also by a consideration of the kinetic term.
In fact, it is not difficult to show that, if we allow
for small fluctuations  and  of the brane positions,
the probe brane action gives rise also to the kinetic term 
 
We consider the regular case, , and evaluate the kinetic term in
the vicinity of the vacuum. Up to quadratic order in  and 
, we find 
 
Using  and , we find to leading order from eqn. phi_exp 
that , so that eqn. Skin_0 
can be re-written (again exact to quadratic order) as 
 
where . 
In order to obtain this complexified form the value  is
crucial.

It would be very interesting to recast eqn. Skin_1  in
terms of a Kahler potential.


Review of the MN solution 
We consider the SUGRA solution corresponding to a system of 
D5-branes. One way of finding it is by using 
gauged SUGRA, which is obtained as a consistent truncation of the
 SUGRA by compactification on an 
. This is a natural setting to
incorporate the twist condition necessary to retain some supersymmetry
. 
The metric in the string frame is 
Here,  and  parameterize a
two-sphere, , which is part of the gauged SUGRA solution. The 
compactification three-sphere, , is parameterized by the
left-invariant one-forms  () and is twisted by the
 gauge field , where  denote
the Pauli matrices. For completeness, we give here the
expressions for the ,
 
which satisfy
 
The angles are defined in the intervals
,  and 
. In addition to the solution in the literature, 
we have included the constant angle , 
which arises from a global  gauge transformation. 
More precisely, one could consider the
transformed gauge field , where 
. Then, the part of the metric that belongs to the twisted 3-sphere
can be written in the form (apart from the warp factor)
 
Hence, a global  gauge transformation corresponds to a pure rotation
of the frame on , while local  transformations will, in
addition to the rotation, contribute to the twisting. Our frame is
obtained from the MN frame by the transformation
. 

The dilaton  and the prefactor  in the metric are functions of
the radial variable  and are given by
 
In eqn. Phi ,  is part of the overall constant, but we
choose not to absorb it into . The reason for this is that we want to
consider  and  as independent  integration constants
related to distict features of the dual gauge theory. We impose
that for the MN solution (), . Moreover, if the solution
with  and finite  is to make sense, we also need
 for .  shall be determined in Sec.
. 

The  gauge fields, , are given by
 
with the field strengths 
, 
 
The dot denotes a derivative with respect to .

Furthermore, the solution contains a 2-form potential
 
whose 3-form field strength  is 
 

The metric metric10  is real for , where  is
defined by . It is not difficult to show that  is
implicitly determined by the transcedental equation
 
which has a unique solution . The limiting cases are 
 for  and  for .

The constant  is related to the number  of wrapped
D5-branes by the usual charge quantization condition
 
Using  and 
 one obtains 

In addition to the fields listed so far, there is a non-zero 6-form
potential, , defined by , where the Hodge
dual is taken with respect to the string frame metric metric10 .
Using eqns. metric10 , A , F  and F3 , it
is straightforward to obtain
    
where we have abbreviated 
. 
Thus, the 6-form potential is 
    
where the function  satisfies
 
We were not able to integrate this equation, except for the case
, where , with 
being an integration constant. We shall comment further on the
function  in Sec. .
