




The uses of Connes and Kreimer's algebraic formulation

of renormalization theory 


Hector Figueroa and
Jose M. Gracia-Bondia

Department of Mathematics, Universidad de Costa Rica,

2060 San Pedro, Costa Rica


Department of Physics, Universidad de Costa Rica,

2060 San Pedro, Costa Rica

and

Department of Theoretical Physics, Universidad de Zaragoza,

50009 Zaragoza, Spain 


by -by -

plain 
thm Theorem            
prop [thm]Proposition  

definition 
defn Definition        



      
       
           
           
     
       
       
           
           
     
 Hom     
      
     
          
 
           
          
 
 
 
   
           
           
 
       



section 1  -3.5ex plus -1ex minus
      -.2ex 2.3ex plus .2ex   
subsection 2  -3.25ex plus -1ex
      minus -.2ex 1.5ex plus .2ex   


 







 
We show how, modulo the distinction between the antipode and the
"twisted" or "renormalized" antipode, Connes and Kreimer's
algebraic paradigm trivializes the proofs of equivalence of the
(corrected) Dyson-Salam, Bogoliubov-Parasiuk-Hepp and Zimmermann
procedures for renormalizing Feynman amplitudes. We discuss the
outlook for a parallel simplification of computations in quantum field
theory, stemming from the same algebraic approach.

Keywords :
Feynman diagrams, renormalization, graded Hopf algebras, antipodes.

PACS numbers: 11.10.Gh, 02.20.Uw


Introduction 

The present authors have dealt in a Hopf algebraic context with the
relation between the Dyson-Salam, Bogoliubov-Parasiuk and Zimmermann
renormalization schemes in . This we did using the
algebra of rooted trees   as a proxy for the
complexities of the combinatorics of Feynman graphs in renormalization.

The point of  was that the differences of the diverse
schemes could largely be tracked down to avatars of the convolution
operation in spaces of homomorphisms of the Hopf algebra. This was
illustrated by the apparently simple-minded, but tremendously
effective, computation of antipode images in  by means of the
convolution geometric series.

In this paper we return on the subject, now in terms of Hopf algebras
of the Feynman graphs themselves.

It must be acknowledged that the deeply conceptual approach by Connes
and Kreimer till now has failed to impress many physicists who
practice renormalization theory. For that approach to become
mainstream, it should be shown to simplify both proofs  and
calculations  in perturbative renormalization theory.

The proof given by Zimmermann  of the equivalence of
his forest formula and Bogoliubov and Parasiuk's scheme has a
reputation of difficulty. The Dyson-Salam scheme has been thoroughly
analyzed and purged of difficulties in . But the proof
of equivalence between the forest and the (corrected) Dyson-Salam
formulae given in  is anything but simple.

In contrast, here we show that the equivalence between all the
aforementioned schemes boils down to downright basic facts in Hopf
algebra theory. So basic in fact, that we can only conclude that the
combinatorics of perturbative renormalization finds its definitive
expression in Hopf algebraic terms. Not only the equivalence proofs
result from uniqueness of the Hopf antipode, but we are able to show
that the Dyson-Salam scheme corresponds identically  to the
convolution geometric series. All our arguments are elementary and
short, much more so, by the way, than in : in the
previous paper, we did not quite see the forest for the trees.

At the end of the paper we briefly review the perspectives for the
Connes-Kreimer method to simplify other theorems and
computations  in renormalization, by means of reduction to the
case of elements that are primitive (i.e., without subdivergences).
Here the situation is more mixed; still, the hope remains that
sizeable simplifications can be gleaned from the algebraic approach.


Bialgebras of graphs 

The basics of graded bialgebra theory are recalled in the Appendix.
 From now on, we assume the reader is familiar with them.

Bialgebras of Feynman graphs, encoding the combinatorics of
renormalization, were introduced by Connes and Kreimer
in . The precise definition we use in this paper was
first given in . To fix ideas, and whenever an example is
given, we think of the (massless)  scalar model.
Nevertheless, the constructions hold in any given quantum field
theory, such as the  model considered
in .

We recall that a graph  or diagram  of the theory is
specified by a set  of vertices  and a set 
of lines  (propagators) among them; external  lines
are attached to only one vertex each, internal  lines to two.
Diagrams with no external lines will not be taken into account -and
in  theory only graphs with an even number of external
lines are to be found. Also tadpole diagrams, in which a line connects
a vertex to itself, are excluded in this paper.

Given a graph , a subdiagram   of  is specified
by a subset of at least two elements of  and a subset of the
lines that join these vertices in . By exception, the empty
subset  will be admitted as a subdiagram of . As well
as  itself. Clearly, the external lines for a subdiagram 
include not only a subset of original incident lines, but some
internal lines of  not included in . The connected pieces of
 are the maximal connected subdiagrams. A diagram is
proper  (or 1PI) when the number of its connected pieces would
not increase on the removal of a single internal line; otherwise it is
called improper . An improper graph is the union of proper
components plus subdiagrams containing a single line.

A subgraph  of a proper graph is a subdiagram that contains
all the elements of  joining its vertices in the whole graph;
as such, it is determined solely by the vertices. When a subdiagram
contains several connected pieces, each one of them being a subgraph,
we still call it a subgraph. A subgraph of an improper graph ,
distinct from  itself, is a proper subdiagram each of whose
components is a subgraph with respect to the proper components of
.

We write  if and only if  is a subgraph of
 as defined (not just a subdiagram): this is the really important
concept for us. For renormalization in configuration
space , it is more convenient to deal with subgraphs than
with more general subdiagrams. Zimmermann showed long ago that only
subtractions corresponding to subgraphs need be used , and
this dispenses us from dealing with subdiagrams that are not
subgraphs.

Two subgraphs  of  are said to be
nonoverlapping  when  or
 or ; otherwise they are
overlapping. Given , the quotient graph or cograph
 (reduced graph in Zimmermann's parlance) is defined by
shrinking  in  to a point, that is to say,  (bereft of
its external lines) is considered as a vertex of , and all the
lines in  not belonging to  belong to . This is
modified in the obvious way when  represents a propagator
correction. The graphs  and  have the same external
structure. A nonempty  will be proper iff  is proper
-the situation considered in .

Now, the bialgebra  is defined as the polynomial algebra generated
by the empty set  and the connected Feynman graphs that are
(superficially) divergent and/or have (superficially) divergent
subgraphs (renormalization parts in Zimmermann's parlance), with set
union as the product operation (hence  is the unit element
). The counit is given by  on any generator,
except .

The really telling operation is the coproduct ;
as it is to be a homomorphism of the algebra structure, we need only
define it on connected diagrams. By definition, the coproduct of 
is given by
 
The sum is over all divergent, proper, not necessarily connected
subgraphs of , such that each piece  is divergent,
including (and then with the possible exception of, as  need not
be divergent nor proper) the empty set and  itself. We put
. When appropriate, the sum runs also over different
types of local counterterms associated to  ;
this is not needed in our example model.

It is natural to exclude the appearance of tadpole parts in ,
and this we do hereafter. This tadpole-free condition was not used or
remarked in , nor in , which employs the
same definition. We show in Figure  how his
situation can happen. The cograph corresponding to the "bikini"
subgraph in the upper part of the graph in
Figure  is a tadpole correction and can be
outlawed from the coproduct.


 


 
 would contain the term

 
 

Cograph which is a tadpole part 


For the proof of the bialgebra properties of , we refer
to ; for graphical examples of coproducts,
see .

Actually  is a connected, graded bialgebra. Obvious grading
operators are available: if  denotes the number of vertices
in  (i.e., the coupling order), then we define the degree of a
generator (connected element)  as ; the
degree of a product is the sum of the degrees of the factors. This
grading is compatible with the coproduct, and clearly scalars are the
only degree 0 elements. Other gradings are by the number  of
internal lines in  and by loop number
. For the  model,
 for two-point graphs and
 for four-point graphs. A more relevant grading
will emerge in the next section.

Lurking in the background there is a character (i.e., multiplicative)
map  (the "Feynman rule") of  into an algebra  of Feynman
amplitudes: for instance, in dimensional regularization the character
takes values in a ring of Laurent series (with finite order poles) in
the regularization parameter. In physics, the Feynman rules are
essentially fixed by the interpretation of the theory, and thus one
tends to identify  with .


The importance of convolution 

Given a unital algebra  and a counital coalgebra
 over , the convolution  of two elements
 of the vector space of -linear maps  is defined
as the map  given by the composition



In other words, . This product
turns  into a unital algebra, where the unit is the map
, as is easily checked. In particular, linear endomorphisms of
a bialgebra can be convolved.

A bialgebra  in which the identity map  is invertible under
convolution is called a Hopf algebra , and its convolution
inverse  is called the coinverse or antipode ; that is to
say, . The antipode is clearly unique.
It is known to be of order two for commutative bialgebras. Also, in a
commutative bialgebra  is a homomorphism: .

In particular, if , then
 
and likewise . Since any left
inverse under convolution automatically equals any right inverse
provided both exist, any map  satisfying eq:antipode  is the
antipode.

The main outcome of equation eq:gr-coprod  in the Appendix for
connected graded bialgebras is that these are always Hopf .
Indeed, as is done in , one can try to compute the
antipode  by exploiting its very definition as the
convolution inverse of the identity in , via a geometric series:
 


 
Let  be a connected, graded bialgebra, then the geometric series
expansion of  has at most  terms when .

 
If  the claim holds since .
Assume that the claim holds for the elements of  when
, and let ; then by eq:gr-coprod 
* 
The first two terms vanish because . By the
induction hypothesis each of the summands of the third term are also
zero.

As a corollary, connected graded bialgebras are always Hopf, with
antipode indeed given by the geometric series eq:geom-series .
One of the advantages of this formulation is that we obtain fully
explicit formulae for  from the coproduct.


 
If , ,
, and in
general 
, then for
,
 

 
To abbreviate we use the notation . Then
 if  with , because then
. Moreover,
* 
so the statement holds for . If the statement holds for ,
then
* 
since, by the induction hypothesis,

.


If  denotes the map  where 
is applied on the first tensor factor only, and  the map
, where  is applied on the first two
tensor factors only, then we can rewrite eq:many-conv  as
 
By splitting the powers in the form , one
can obtain a twin formula of eq:many-conv , on which the
coproduct is applied successively on the last tensor factor, instead
of on the first factor; this formula was given in .

While all the foregoing is happily elementary, the following important
fact must be registered: a new grading on  has been obtained,
defined simply by declaring the degree of a generator  as  when
 and . It is easily seen that
this indeed defines a grading ; the degree of a product is the
sum of the degrees of the factors.

For a connected diagram  this grading coincides with
the maximal length of a chain of subdivergences inside  (see
below), and in this context we call it depth . We can
combine  with the gradings  or  to obtain a
bidegree: note that we have proved , for
any .

This grading by depth is the same -primitivity grading already
pondered in the seminal paper  and studied in
the context of  by Broadhurst and Kreimer . Here the
concept is even more pertinent, as the correlation between loop number
and depth in field theory is weaker than the correlation between the
number of tree vertices and -primitivity in : for instance,
it is well known that in the  model there are three
5-loop diagrams which are (1-)primitive .

We write  for the space of elements of primitivity
degree .

Anticipating the following discussion, note that there are other ways
to show that a connected graded bialgebra is a Hopf algebra. One can
take advantage of the equation  whenever
 for , to introduce in the context the
Bogoliubov recursive formula:
 
if .


 
If  is a connected, graded bialgebra, then .

 
The statement holds, by a direct check, if . Assume
that  whenever  with , and let
. Then
* 
where the penultimate equality uses the inductive hypothesis.


Taking into account that we can also write
, it follows that the
twin formula



also provides an expression for the antipode.

We record eq:Bogol-recur  in the language of the bialgebra 
of graphs
 
For a primitive diagram, .

Now it is time to reveal our strategy. Perhaps the main path-breaking
insight of  and subsequent papers by Kreimer and
coworkers is the introduction of the "twisted antipode". Let us
usher in the other personages of this drama. There is a linear map
, which effects the subtraction of ultraviolet
divergencies in each renormalization scheme.

The twisted (or "renormalized") antipode  is a map
 defined by ; 
 for primitive diagrams, and then recursively:





In other words,  is the map that produces the counterterms in
perturbative field theory. The Hopf algebra approach works most
effectively because in many cases  is multiplicative; for
that, it is not necessary for  to be an endomorphism of the algebra
of amplitudes , but the following weaker
condition  is sufficient:



This condition endows  with the structure of a Rota-Baxter algebra
(see  and references therein); it is fulfilled in the
BPHZ formalism and the dimensional regularization scheme with minimal
subtraction, for which the present paradigm is most cleanly
formulated .

Finally, the renormalization map  is given by




In view of a previous remark,  is also a homomorphism;
compatibility with the coproduct operation is given by its very
definition as a convolution.

(In Epstein-Glaser renormalization, things are a bit more
complicated, since  is not properly defined, and 
involves a map between two different spaces of Feynman amplitudes;
still, the homomorphism condition for  can by enforced, and
 is compatible with the Hopf algebra structure in a suitable
sense .)

In what follows, we shall assume that  has been defined to be
a homomorphism, and we concentrate on the computation of .
According to the dictum, Hopf algebras simplify combinatorics by
reducing it to algebra. Connes and Kreimer's algebraic approach to the
renormalization schemes separates neatly their combinatorics from the
analytical procedures and renders the first an essentially trivial
application of Hopf algebra.

Now, for the combinatorial aspect in renormalization theory, there are
on the market mainly the recursive formula by Bogoliubov, Zimmermann's
forest formula and the corrected Dyson-Salam formula. The last one is
most natural in the context of the primitivity grading. They just
amount to different ways to compute the antipode. It must be already
evident that the recursive formula by Bogoliubov corresponds to the
definition of . Now, in order to prove the equivalence of two
combinatorial schemes, it is enough to prove that both yield the
antipode, either directly, as in the proof of Proposition 3, or by
using the uniqueness of the antipode. This we systematically proceed
to do in the sequel. That the coming proofs are all short, utterly
simple, or decidedly trivial, is our main point and asset.

It turns out, and this is perhaps the most illuminating result, that
the Dyson-Salam scheme corresponds identically (i.e., without need of
further cancellations) to the geometric series formula.


Convolution and the Dyson-Salam formula 

The present framework applies to proper and improper graphs. For
brevity, in what follows we concentrate on proper graphs.


 
A chain   of a proper, connected graph  is a sequence

 of proper, divergent,
not necessarily connected  subgraphs of . We denote by
 the set of chains of . The length  of a chain
 is the number , and we write
.

With this notation we can define the antipode as follows:
 


This definition corresponds, on the one hand, to the correct version of
the Dyson-Salam formula for renormalization. On the other hand,
formula eq:ds-antip  is totally analogous to the explicit
expression for the antipode given by Schmitt for his incidence Hopf
algebras .


 
 so defined is an antipode for .

 
We prove that  is an inverse, under convolution, of . By
definition,
* 

Now, if , say , then
. Moreover,
 
On the other hand, given a chain ,
then , and
eq:chain-length  holds. Therefore





in other words,  is a left inverse for , and therefore
it is an antipode.

As a corollary . Nevertheless, it is more
instructive to check that  identically , as
follows.


 
 coincides with  without cancellations.

 
First, given a proper, connected graph , we rewrite



where  denote the set of chains of length . Thus, it is
enough to prove that




To prove this first we notice that
 
Indeed, by definition of the coproduct the statement is true for
. Moreover, if eq:foldup  holds for , then
* 
Thus, by eq:many-conv-bis 
* 

The proof shows how the chains are generated from the coproduct.

As an application, we obtain a nonrecursive formula for
: if  is a chain in , write





Let us use the temporary notation








 
.

 
We shall proceed by induction on the bidegree (no other method seems
available here). A simple check gives the statement for
. Assume the claim is true for graphs in 
with , and let , then
* 
since each  for some . Now, if 
, then ,




Conversely, if  is not the trivial
chain , then  is a chain in
, and




Therefore






The morals of the story so far are: first, there is nothing in
Bogoliubov's procedure that will not be valid in any 
connected, graded bialgebra; second, Schmitt's formula for his
incidence Hopf algebras coincides identically with the geometric
series formulae eq:geom-series  and eq:many-conv ;
third, the latter in the field theory context gives rise to the
Dyson-Salam formula. We turn our attention now to Zimmermann's forest
formula.



Zimmermann's forest formula 

 
A (normal) forest   of a proper, connected graph  is
a set of proper, divergent and connected subdiagrams, none of them
equal to , such that any pair of elements are nonoverlapping.
Again we include the forest  as a special case.
 denotes the set of forests of . The density  of
a forest  is the number , where  is the
number of elements of . Given  we say that  is a
predecessor  of  in  if  and
there is no element  in  such that
. Let



where  denote the disjoint union of all predecessors of
. When  is minimal, , and
.


Notice that if a forest  is a chain, then , and
conversely if a chain  is a forest, .
Obviously not every forest is a chain; but also not every chain is a
forest, because product subgraphs can occur in chains and cannot in
forests. There are diagrams like the one in the  model
pictured in Figure , for which the sets of
chains and forests coincide; but in general there are fewer forests
than chains.


 

 
Diagram  without extra cancellations in  with
respect to  


Zimmermann's version for the antipode is defined by




 
 provides another formula for the antipode of .

 
Once more, the idea is to prove that  is an inverse, under
convolution, of . By definition
* 
where  is the number of connected components of , and
,  are the connected components of .

Now, if , then 
 is a forest of . Moreover



so
 
On the other hand, in , , hence
 
Conversely, if , and if  are the maximal
elements of , then the sets
 constitute a forest
of . Since all the elements of a forest are connected diagrams,
 are the connected components of
 and clearly eq:density  and
eq:big-theta  hold. Therefore,





Thus,  is a left inverse for , and therefore is an antipode.

The proofs of Propositions  and  are
parallel; the difference lies in minor combinatorial details. Even so,
it is clear that Zimmermann's formula (although more sensitive in the
practice to the details of the renormalization method) is, from the
combinatorial viewpoint, altogether subtler than Bogoliubov's or Dyson
and Salam's. It is more economical in that all the cancellations
implicit in the convolution formula eq:geom-series  are taken
into account and suppressed; this we already made clear in the context
of the algebra of rooted trees . Thus, the "commerce"
between quantum field theory and Hopf algebra theory has not been
one-way: Zimmermann's formula is advantageously applicable to a large
class of bialgebras .

The reader will have no difficulty in writing the nonrecursive forest
formula for the twisted coinverse .



The bidegree and computations in quantum field theory 

Let us indicate first that Kreimer has announced  a
new proof of finiteness of the renormalized graphs and Green
functions, based on a cohomological reinterpretation of the basic
coproduct equation eq:coprod .


Whether the Connes-Kreimer algebraic paradigm will become useful to
simplify computations  -in distinction to "merely"
proofs- in realistic field theories, seems to hinge to a large
extent on the practical usefulness of the depth bigrading. The fact is
that simplifications in sums of Feynman diagrams do occur, and they
usually involve, beyond trivialization of the topology, reduction in
depth. For instance, in the  model we have (for the
corresponding amplitudes in configuration space):


 


 
 
+

 
 =


 
 
+  


 
 

 coefficients vanish in the sum of two graphs with
the same symmetry factor 


A naive hope in that respect, to wit, that every diagram be eventually
expressed in terms of primitive elements (so renormalization proceeds
"at a stroke") is quickly dashed. A Hopf algebra  is
primitively generated  when the smallest subalgebra of 
containing all its primitive elements is  itself. The structure
theorem for commutative connected graded algebras makes it plain that Hopf algebras of Feynman graphs are far from being
primitively generated; neither the Hopf algebra of rooted trees nor
its noncommutative geometry subalgebra
  is primitively generated.

In fact, only elements for which the coproduct is invariant under the
flip map  can be primitively generated. In
any Hopf algebra associated to a field theory there exist "ladder"
subalgebras of diagrams with only completely nested subgraphs, and
these subalgebras are primitively generated. However, this is of scant
practical use, as then the recursive methods  carry off
the award for computational simplicity.

According to the structure theorem, commutative Hopf algebras can be
decomposed as algebras as a tensor product



where  denotes the polynomial algebra generated by all the
primitive elements in , and  the polynomial algebra on a
(nonunique) suitable subspace  of . To get a handle on (a
representative for)  for bialgebras of Feynman graphs is on the
order of the day.

The depth grading for the algebra  of rooted trees has been
investigated, beyond , in the
paper . The strategy suggested
in  looks feasible in bialgebras of graphs.
By use of the dual algebra, so-called normal coordinate elements
(appropriate sums of products of graphs) can be found, for which the
antipode (although not the twisted antipode in general) is
diagonal .

Let  be the dual element of a graph . Any graph  has
an associated normal element , and any graph can be
decomposed into a sum of products of normal elements. Let a sequence
of graphs  be given; we say that  is
compatible with  if
 
The normal decomposition is as follows:





where we sum in practice over a finite number of compatible sequences.

Ladder normal coordinate elements are primitive, and for non-ladder
ones the indications are that the complexity of their renormalization
is substantially lessened with respect to that of the graphs
themselves; they are instrumental in the description of .

Also, Kreimer has introduced  a "shuffle" product
of diagrams, based on a variant of eq:compatibility , that
seems to hold promise of eventual factorization of perturbative field
theory into primitive elements. In this respect, as in other
tantalizing subjects springing from the Connes-Kreimer
paradigm , we are barely starting to scratch the
surface.


Acknowledgments 

We thank Joseph C. Varilly for illuminating discussions and
 nical help. We are grateful for the hospitality of the
Departamento de Fisica Teorica of the Universidad de Zaragoza.
Support from the Vicerrectoria de Investigacion of the
Universidad de Costa Rica is acknowledged.


Appendix: Graded bialgebras 

A bialgebra H is a vector space over a field  (here taken to be of
characteristic 0) equipped with two structures: an algebra structure
and a coalgebra structure, related by some compatibility conditions.
The algebra structure is described by two maps: the product
, and the unit map . The
conditions imposed on these maps are:
 
Associativity: ;
Unity: .


A coalgebra is obtained is obtained by reversing arrows in the
defining maps for an algebra; it is, therefore, also described by two
maps: the coproduct , and the counit
. The requirements are:
 
Coassociativity:
;
Counity: .

Finally, to obtain a bialgebra one stipulates
 
Compatibility:  and  are unital algebra homomorphisms.

This requirement turns out to be equivalent to asking that  and
 be coalgebra morphisms.


 
A bialgebra  graded as a vector
space is called a graded bialgebra  when the grading is
compatible with both the algebra and the coalgebra structures:




It is called connected  when the first piece consists of
scalars only: .


A most useful property of connected graded bialgebras is that when
, the coproduct can be written as
 
 
where the elements  and  all have degree between 1 and
. The proof is easy and found in many
places . To simplify
the notation we define
 
Coassociativity of  is easily obtained from the coassociativity
of . An element  is called (1-)primitive when
.

Applying  to eq:gr-coprod-full  gives
;
therefore, if  with , the connectedness
condition forces .



 27 

H. Figueroa and J. M. Gracia-Bondia,

Mod. Phys. Lett. A16  (2001) 1427.


A. Connes and D. Kreimer,

Commun. Math. Phys. 199  (1998) 203.


W. Zimmermann,


Commun. Math. Phys. 15  (1969) 208.


E. B. Manoukian,
Renormalization ,
Academic Press, London, 1983.

A. Connes and D. Kreimer,



Commun. Math. Phys. 210  (2000) 249.


J. M. Gracia-Bondia and S. Lazzarini,
"Connes-Kreimer-Epstein-Glaser renormalization",
hep-th/0006106.


J. M. Gracia-Bondia,
"Improved Epstein-Glaser renormalization in coordinate space I.
Euclidean framework",
hep-th/0202023,
Mathematical Physics, Analysis and Geometry (2002), in press.


W. Zimmermann,
"Remarks on equivalent formulations for Bogoliubov's method of
renormalization",
in Renormalization Theory , G. Velo and A. S. Wightman, eds.,
NATO ASI Series C 23 , D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1976.

G. Pinter,
Lett. Math. Phys. 54  (2000) 227.


J. M. Gracia-Bondia, J. C. Varilly and H. Figueroa,
Elements of Noncommutative Geometry ,
Birkhauser, Boston, 2001.

D. Kreimer,

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 303.


D. J. Broadhurst and D. Kreimer,
Commun. Math. Phys. 215  (2000) 217.


H. Kleinert and V. Schulte-Frohlinde,
Critical Properties of  Theories ,
World Scientific, Singapore, 2001.

J. C. Varilly,
"Hopf algebras in noncommutative geometry",
hep-th/0109077.


D. Kreimer,

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3  (1999) 3.


D. Kreimer,
"New mathematical structures in renormalizable quantum field
theories",
hep-th/0211136.


A. Connes and D. Kreimer,
Commun. Math. Phys. 216  (2001) 215.


J. M. Gracia-Bondia,
"Improved Epstein-Glaser renormalization in coordinate space
III. The Hopf algebra of Feynman graphs", forthcoming.

W. R. Schmitt,

J. Comb. Theory A46  (1987) 264;


J. Pure Appl. Alg. 96  (1994) 299.


K.-H. Hoffmann and S. A. Morris,
The Structure of Compact Groups ,
de Gruyter, Berlin, 1998.

A. Connes and H. Moscovici,

Commun. Math. Phys. 198  (1998) 198.


I. Bierenbaum,
"Die Riemannsche -Funktion in iterierten
Einschleifenintegralen",
Diplomarbeit, Mainz, 2000.

C. Chryssomalakos, H. Quevedo, M. Rosenbaum and J. D. Vergara,


Commun. Math. Phys. 225  (2002) 465.


D. Kreimer,
Knots and Feynman Diagrams ,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.

N. Bourbaki,
Groupes et Algebres de Lie ,
Hermann, Paris, 1972.

D. Kastler,
"Connes-Moscovici-Kreimer Hopf algebras",
in Mathematical Physics in Mathematics and Physics:
Quantum and Operator Algebraic Aspects , R. Longo, ed.,
Fields Institute Communications 30 ,
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2001; pp. 219-248.


S. Montgomery,
Hopf Algebras and their Actions on Rings ,
CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics 82 ,
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1993.


