equation section 
table section 




A.E. Faraggi 
Nucl. Phys.  B#1  (#2) #3 
Phys. Lett.  B#1  (#2) #3 
Phys. Rev.  D#1  (#2) #3 
Phys. Rev. Lett.  #1  (#2) #3 
Phys. Rep.  #1  (#2) #3 
Mod. Phys. Lett.  A#1  (#2) #3 
Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A#1  (#2) #3 
Nuovo Cimento  #1A  (#2) #3 
et al   




   
     OUTP-03-02P    
 
     hep-th/0301147 

     January 2003   
    

Yukawa couplings 
in  heterotic M-theory vacua 

Alon E. Faraggifaraggi@thphys.ox.ac.uk   
and Richard S. Garavusogaravuso@thphys.ox.ac.uk  

Theoretical Physics Department, University of Oxford  

Oxford  OX1 3NP, UK  

  


 
We demonstrate the existence of a class of 
supersymmetric nonperturbative vacua of Hor ava-Witten M-theory
compactified on a torus fibered Calabi-Yau
3-fold  with first homotopy group ,
having the following properties: 1)  grand unification group,
2) net number of three generations of chiral fermions in the
observable sector, and 3) potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings. 
These vacua correspond to semistable holomorphic vector bundles 
 over  having structure group , and 
generically contain M5-branes in the bulk space. The nontrivial
first homotopy group allows Wilson line breaking of the 
symmetry. Additionally, we propose how the 11-dimensional
Hor ava-Witten M-theory framework may be used to extend
the perturbative calculation of the top quark Yukawa coupling in the
realistic free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative regime. 
The basic argument being that the relevant coupling couples
twisted-twisted-untwisted states and can be 
calculated at the level of the 
orbifold without resorting to the full three generation models.





Introduction  


The five self-consistent 10-dimensional superstring theories are different
vacua of a single underlying 11-dimensional quantum theory,
M-theory , which has 11-dimensional supergravity as its low
energy limit .  While the complete formulation of M-theory
is not known, a web of perturbative and nonperturbative dualities 
has been established which connects the different M-theory limits.  These
dualities provide insight into the nonperturbative behavior of the
superstring theories.

One such duality, proposed by Hor ava and Witten,
connects M-theory compactified on an orbifold 
 with the strong coupling limit of the 
 heterotic string . A class of 
 heterotic string models are the
realistic free-fermionic models  .
A remarkable achievement of the realistic free-fermionic models is their
successful prediction of the top quark mass .

The first goal of this paper is to demonstrate the existence of a class of 
 supersymmetric nonperturbative vacua of
Hor ava-Witten M-theory compactified on a torus fibered Calabi-Yau
3-fold  with first homotopy group 
, having the following properties:
 

 grand unification group.

Net number of generations  of chiral fermions in the
observable sector.

Potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings.

The nontrivial first homotopy group allows Wilson line breaking of the   
grand unification group. Our second goal is to discuss how the
11-dimensional Hor ava-Witten M-theory framework may be used to extend
the perturbative calculation of the top quark Yukawa coupling in the
realistic free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative regime.

The tools needed to achieve the above goals have been recently developed.
Donagi, Ovrut, Pantev and Waldram  presented rules for
constructing a class of  supersymmetric nonperturbative
vacua of Hor ava-Witten
M-theory compactified on a torus fibered Calabi-Yau 3-fold  with
first homotopy group , having grand
unification group  or  and net number of 
generations  of chiral fermions in the observable sector.
The case with grand unification group  
was studied in , where the overlap with the free-fermionic
models was discussed.  The vacua with , , or
 correspond to semistable holomorphic vector bundles 
over  having structure group 
, , or 
, respectively, and generically contain M5-branes in
the bulk space. Arnowitt and Dutta  argue that
phenomenologically viable matter Yukawa couplings can be obtained by
requiring vanishing instanton charges on the observable orbifold fixed
plane and clustering of the M5-branes near the hidden orbifold fixed
plane, and provide an explicit  example.

To aid in achieving our first goal of obtaining vacua with ,
, and potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings, we 
combine the  rules discussed 
in  with the constraint of vanishing instanton charges on
the observable orbifold fixed plane. Instead of restricting
ourselves to a set of sufficient (but not necessary) constraints on the
vector bundles (as was done in ), 
we consider the most general case.  Indeed, the vacua obtained in
Section  require this generalization. 

The key to achieving our second goal is to utilize the correspondence
between the free-fermionic models and  

orbifold compactification . In the free fermionic models
the top quark mass term arises from a twisted-twisted-untwisted
Yukawa coupling, at a fixed point in the moduli space.
We can calculate this coupling in the three generation model,
or at the level of the (51,3) or (27,3)  orbifold.
While we do not know the precise
geometrical realization of the three generation models, the geometry of
the  orbifold is more readily identified.
Furthermore, the calculation can be done as either a 
  coupling,
or a   coupling.
At the free-fermionic point in the moduli space 
the numerical results will be identical.
Thus, to extend the calculation of the top quark Yukawa
coupling in the realistic free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative
regime, one can compactify Hor ava-Witten M-theory on a Calabi-Yau
3-fold which corresponds to the 
orbifold.  One can choose  vector bundles with 
 or , corresponding to the  or  grand 
unification group, respectively. The nonperturbative top quark Yukawa
coupling at the grand unification scale is then computed, at least in
principle, using ().  We note that the compactification on the
Calabi-Yau 3-fold corresponding to the  
 orbifold will lead to 
.

We are thus led to present rules for arbitrary , allowing
general  vector bundles with , 4, or 5
corresponding to grand unification group , , or 
, respectively.  To obtain potentially viable Yukawa couplings,
we require vanishing instanton charges on the observable orbifold fixed
plane.  This further restricts the allowed vector bundles. 

This paper is organized as follows.  In Section , we briefly
review Hor ava-Witten M-theory, some results of its compactification to
four dimensions and the associated 4-dimensional low energy effective
theory. In Section , we present the rules as discussed above.
Section  demonstrates that torus fibered Calabi-Yau 3-folds with
 and a Hirzebruch base surface do not admit
the ,  vacua with potentially viable
matter Yukawa couplings that we seek.  In contrast, Section demonstrates the existence of such vacua with a del Pezzo  base.
In Section , we discuss the extension of the top quark
Yukawa coupling calculation in the realistic free-fermionic
models to the nonperturbative regime, and explain why
modifications to the rules of Section  may be required for a
detailed analysis.  Section  summarizes our conclusions.



Review of Horava-Witten M-theory 

Hor ava and Witten proposed that M-theory compactified
on an orbifold  is the strong coupling limit of
the  heterotic string .

The low energy effective action of Hor ava-Witten M-theory can be
formulated as an expansion in powers of the 11-dimensional gravitational
coupling .  To lowest order in this expansion,
Hor ava-Witten M-theory is 11-dimensional supergravity ,
which is of order .
The supergravity vacuum is specified by the metric , the 3-form
potential  with 4-form field strength 
, and the spin  gravitino
. 

The  projection introduces gauge, gravitational, and
mixed anomalies into the theory.  Cancellation of the irreducible part of
the gravitational anomaly requires the introduction of two chiral 
  vector supermultiplets, one on each orbifold
fixed plane   at  and 
, respectively.  The reducible portion of the
gravitational anomaly, as well as the gauge and mixed anomalies, are
cancelled with a refinement  of the standard
Green-Schwarz mechanism  .  Requiring the one-loop chiral
anomaly to cancel fixes a relation between  and the
10-dimensional gauge coupling :
    
Formally, the low energy effective action of Hor ava-Witten
M-theory appears to be an expansion with the 
term being of order  .  Other
exponents must arise at the quantum level since we will run into
infinities which, when cut off in the quantum theory, must on dimensional
grounds give anomalous powers of .


Compactification to four dimensions 

We refer to the compactification of Hor ava-Witten M-theory to lower
dimensions as heterotic M-theory . The compactification to four
dimensions with unbroken  supersymmetry was discussed
in .  The procedure starts with the spacetime
structure
 
where  is 4-dimensional Minkowski space and  is a Calabi-Yau
3-fold.  M5-branes can be included in the bulk space at points throughout
the orbifold interval.  These M5-branes are required to span 
(to preserve -dimensional Poincare  invariance) and wrap
holomorphic curves in  (to preserve  supersymmetry
in four dimensions).  

Generally, some subgroup  of the  symmetry will survive this
compactification.   is broken to , where the grand
unification group  is the commutant subgroup of  in .
The gauge fields associated with  'live' on the Calabi-Yau 3-fold,
and hence  Poincare  invariance is left unbroken.  The
requirement of unbroken  supersymmetry implies that the
corresponding field strengths must satisfy the Hermitian Yang-Mills
constraints  
.  Donaldson  and
Uhlenbeck and Yau  prove that each solution to the
6-dimensional Hermitian Yang-Mills equations  
satisfying the Hermitian Yang-Mills constraints corresponds
to a semistable holomorphic vector bundle over the Calabi-Yau 3-fold with   
structure group being the complexification  of the group
, and conversely.

The correction to the background () is computed
perturbatively. The set of equations to be solved consists of the Killing 
spinor equation
 
the equation motion
 
and the Bianchi identity
 
(dG)_11RSTU  = 4 2  (  4   )^2/3 
  [ J^(0)  (x^11 ) + J^(N+1)  (x^11  - ) 
.           
 
.  + 1 2  _n=1 ^N  J^(n)   
           ( (x^11  - x_n ) + (x^11  + x_n )
           )   
  ]_RSTU 
  
where ,  are the sources on the orbifold fixed
planes at  and , respectively, and 
  are the M5-brane sources located at 
 
.  Note that each M5-brane at  has to be
paired with a mirror M5-brane at  with the same source
since the Bianchi identity must be even under the 
symmetry.

The Bianchi identity () can be viewed as an expansion in
powers of .  To linear order in , 
the solution to the Killing spinor equation, equation of motion, and
Bianchi identity takes the form
 
(ds)^2   = (1 + b)_  dx^  dx^ 
            + (g^(CY) _AB  + h_AB ) dx^A  dx^B 
            + (1 + ) ( dx^11  )^2     

 
with all other components of  vanishing.  
and  are the Ricci-flat metric and the covariantly constant
spinor on the Calabi-Yau 3-fold.  

As discussed in , the first order corrections 
, , ,  and  can be expressed in 
terms of a single -form  on the 
Calabi-Yau 3-fold.  All that remains then is to determine 
, which can be expanded in terms of eigenmodes of the
Laplacian on the Calabi-Yau 3-fold.  For the purpose of computing low
energy effective actions, it is sufficient to keep only the
zero-eigenvalue or 'massless' terms in this expansion; that is, the terms
proportional to the harmonic  forms of the Calabi-Yau 3-fold. 
Let us choose a basis  for these
harmonic -forms, where .
We then write
 
The  are Poincare  dual to the 4-cycles 
, and one can define the integer charges
 
 and  are the instanton charges on
the orbifold fixed planes and , 
are the the magnetic charges of the M5-branes.  The expansion coefficients
 are found in  in terms of these charges,
the normalized orbifold coordinates
 
and the expansion parameter
 
where  is the
Calabi-Yau volume.

Finally, we note that a cohomological constraint on the Calabi-Yau 3-fold,
the gauge bundles, and the M5-branes can be found by integrating the
Bianchi identity over a 5-cycle which spans the orbifold interval together
with an arbitrary 4-cycle  in the Calabi-Yau 3-fold.
Since  is exact and the cycle is compact, this integral must vanish 
and we obtain
 
where  and  are the second Chern classes of
the tangent bundle  and the vector bundle , respectively  
and  is the 4-form cohomology class associated with the  
M5-branes.



Four-dimensional low energy effective theory 

Following , we now discuss the 4-dimensional low energy
effective theory on the observable orbifold fixed plane at .
As discussed in Section , the apriori  gauge symmetry
is broken to .  The  of  decomposes 
under  as 

, where  and  are
irreducible representations of  and , with representation
indices  and
, respectively.
We denote a physical field in the representation  of 
by . Here 
 is the generation index,
 is the vector bundle  in the
representation , and the cohomology group 
 has basis .

Define the conventional 4-dimensional chiral fields  and the
chiral fields  by
 
Here  where .
The nonvanishing components of the
Calabi-Yau metric are given by 


, where  are the  moduli of
the Calabi-Yau 3-fold.  The modulus  
is the Calabi-Yau averaged orbifold radius divided by , and
the moduli   are
given by ().   

The 4-dimensional low energy effective theory on the observable orbifold
fixed plane is specified in terms of 3 functions of the chiral matter
multiplets:

 

The Ka hler potential  
 determines the kinetic
terms of the chiral matter fields.  To first order in the expansion
parameter , the Ka hler metric  takes the form
 
where 
 
and
 

The holomorphic superpotential   determines the Yukawa
couplings
 
as well as the -term part of the scalar potential.   is the
covariantly constant  form and 

projects out the singlet in 
 (if
any).  The Yukawa contribution to the superpotential is
 
where  is the moduli
contribution to the Ka hler potential.
 
The holomorphic gauge kinetic function 
 
determines the gauge kinetic terms and contributes to the gaugino masses
and the gauge part of the scalar potential.
    
We note that () and () hold at the grand
unification scale , which coincides with the compactification
scale .  The fermion mass hierarchies are encoded in
the Ka hler metric, which must be diagonalized and rescaled to the unit
matrix to obtain the Yukawa couplings of the canonically normalized
fields .  One then uses the supersymmetry renormalization group
equations to evaluate the Yukawa couplings at low energy.

If the perturbative correction to the background discussed in 
Section  is to make sense, the second term
in () must be a small correction to the
first.  However, setting 
 GeV, one finds . Furthermore, one expects 
 and  to be of order 1.  Arnowitt and
Dutta  point out that the second term can still be a small
correction to the first if the instanton charges on the observable
orbifold fixed plane (at ) vanish and the M5-branes cluster
near the hidden orbifold fixed plane (at ):
 
We will impose the  constraint in
Section .


Summary of rules 

In this section, we present rules for constructing a class of
 supersymmetric nonperturbative vacua of
Hor ava-Witten M-theory compactified on a
torus fibered Calabi-Yau 3-fold  with first homotopy group 
, having 1) grand unification group 
, , or , 2) arbitrary net number of
generations  of chiral fermions in the observable sector, and 3)
potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings.  The vacua with 
, , or  correspond to semistable
holomorphic vector bundles  over  having structure group 
 with , 4 or 5,
respectively, and generically contain M5-branes in the bulk space. 

Construction of :   We wish to construct a smooth torus 
fibered Calabi-Yau 3-fold  with .  To
do this, we first construct a smooth elliptically  fibered
Calabi-Yau 3-fold  which admits a freely-acting involution 
.  We can then construct the quotient manifold .

 

Construction of :   To construct a smooth elliptically
fibered Calabi-Yau 3-fold  which admits a freely-acting involution 
,

 

Choose the base :   The requirement that 
 restricts the possible bases .  If the
base is smooth and preserves only  supersymmetry in
four dimensions, then  is restricted to be a del Pezzo 
, , Hirzebruch , ,
blown-up Hirzebruch, or an Enriques surface .

Require two global sections:   To admit a freely-acting
involution , require  to have two  global sections
 and  satisfying
 

Elliptically fibered manifolds can be described in terms of a Weierstrass
model.  A general elliptic curve can be embedded via a cubic equation into 
.  Without loss of generality, the equation can be
expressed in the Weierstrass form
 
where  and  are general coefficients and  are
homogeneous coordinates on .  To define an elliptic
fibration over a base , one needs to specify how the coefficients 
 and  vary as one moves around the base.  In order to
have a pair of sections  and , the Weierstrass
polynomial () must factorize as
  
Comparing () and (), we see that
 
The zero section  is given by , and the
second section  by .

Blow up singularities:  The elliptic fibers are singular when
two roots of the Weierstrass polynomial () coincide.  The
set of points in the base over which the fibers are singular is given by
the discriminant locus
 
where
 
and
 
One can show that there is a curve of singularities over the 
 component of the discriminant curve.  To construct the
smooth Calabi-Yau 3-fold , one must blow up this curve of
singularities.  This is achieved by replacing the singular point of each
fiber over  by a sphere .  This is a
new curve in the Calabi-Yau 3-fold, which we denote by .  The general
elliptic fiber  has now split into two spheres: the new fiber ,
plus the proper transform of the singular fiber, which is in the class 
.   
 

Choice of involution :   Construct a freely-acting
involution  on  as the composition
 
where  is the lift to  of a fibration-preserving involution
 on the base  with fixed point set 
, and
 
is an involutive translation of the fibers.
To ensure that  preserves the fibration, require
 
Upon the explicit specification of an involution  with the
above properties, the involution  is uniquely determined by the
additional requirements that it fix the zero section  and that
it preserve the holomorphic volume form on .

Note that  leaves fixed the whole fiber above each point in 
.  Since the action of translation on a
smooth  torus acts without fixed points,  will be freely
acting provided none of the fibers above  are
singular.  Thus, require
  


Construction of a vector bundle  over  which descends
to a vector bundle  over : 

 

 bundle constraints: 
We wish to construct (via the spectral cover
method ) a semi-stable holomorphic vector
bundle  over  with structure group 
.  To do this, we need to fix a spectral cover 
and a line bundle  over it.  The condition that 
 implies that the spectral data  can
be written in terms of an effective divisor class  in the base 
 and coefficients  and  
.  Constraints are placed on  ,  , and
the  by the condition that
 
be an integer class.  Various sufficient (but not necessary) constraints 
can be imposed , but most generally, 
 will be an integer class if the constraints
 
q n ( 1 2  + ) Z 
 

(1 2  - ) ^* _C     + ( 1 2  + n ) ^* _C  c_1 (B)
is an integer class     

_i  - 1 2  m Z , m Z  
 are simultaneously satisfied. 

Bundle involution conditions:   The bundle  over 
will descend to a bundle  over  if  is invariant
under the involution . Necessary conditions for  to
be invariant are given by
 
We note that there may be non-invariant bundles
satisfying () and (); the details of selecting
only the invariant bundles are beyond the scope of this paper.

Phenomenological constraints 

 

 condition:   In the models of interest with 
 having structure group 
(with , 4, or 5), the net number of generations 
( generations   antigenerations)  of chiral
fermions in the observable sector (in the 
 of , 
 of , or 
 of ) is
given by 
 
Since  is a double cover of , it follows that
 
 has been computed by Curio  and
Andreas :
 
Thus, 
 
where we have integrated over the fiber and used Poincare  duality.

Effectiveness condition:   Anomaly cancellation requires
 
where  is the class associated with non-perturbative M5-branes
in the bulk space of the theory.  For simplicity, we will take 
to be the trivial bundle.  Hence, the gauge group  remains
unbroken in the hidden sector,  vanishes,
and () simplifies accordingly.  Condition () can
then be pulled back onto  to give
    
The Chern classes appearing
in () have been evaluated to be  
   
where  and
 
Using these expressions for  and 
, ()
becomes
 
where
 
and
 
The class   must represent a physical holomorphic curve in 
the Calabi-Yau 3-fold  since M5-branes are required to wrap around
it. Hence  must be an effective class, and its pull-back 
 is an effective class in the covering 3-fold .  Thus, we
require
 
and
 
 
 constraint:   As discussed
in , to obtain phenomenologically viable matter Yukawa
couplings, require vanishing instanton charges, , on
the observable orbifold fixed plane.   implies that
 
and thus from () and ()
 
where
 
Thus, we require
 
and
 

Stability constraint:  Let  and
 be the structure group of the vector bundle .
Then the commutant subgroup of  in , denoted by  will be
the largest subgroup preserved by  if  
We note that for the models of interest (which have ,  and 
), the  constraint () ensures that
the stability constraint is satisfied.


  
 


Hirzebruch surfaces 

In this section we demonstrate that torus-fibered Calabi-Yau manifolds 
 with  and Hirzebruch base surfaces do
not admit the ,  vacua with potentially
viable matter Yukawa couplings that we seek.  

A Hirzebruch surface  , is a 2-dimensional complex
manifold constructed as a fibration with base  and
fiber .  We denote the class of the base and fiber of 
 by  and , respectively.  Their intersection numbers
are
 
 and  form a basis of the homology class 
. This pair has the advantage that it is also
the set of generators for the Mori cone.  That is, the class
 
is effective on  for integers  and  if and only if
 
The Chern classes of  are
 
We will need the result
 


 Hirzebruch solutions with  
We wish to find  Hirzebruch solutions,
corresponding to  and , with .  We
begin by imposing the 
constraint ():
 
With this constraint on , the second bundle involution
condition () becomes
  
and the  condition (), with , becomes
 
For , we obtain
 
Plugging this value for  along with 
into (), we see that the 
 bundle constraints cannot be satisfied and hence
there are no 
Hirzebruch solutions with  .  It is interesting to note
that the requirement of vanishing instanton charges on the observable
orbifold plane rules out the  Hirzebruch solutions presented
in .    


Del Pezzo surfaces 

In this section we demonstrate the existence of a torus fibered Calabi-Yau
3-fold  with  and del Pezzo base
surface  which admits ,  vacua
with potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings.

A del Pezzo surface  , is a 2-dimensional
complex manifold constructed from complex projective space 
 by blowing up  points.  A basis of 
 composed of effective classes is given by
the hyperplane class  and  exceptional divisors , 
.  Their intersections are
  
The Chern classes are given by
 
We will need the result
 


 del Pezzo solutions with  
We wish to find  del Pezzo solutions, corresponding to 
 and , with .  We begin by
imposing the  constraint ():
    
With this constraint on , the second bundle involution
condition () becomes
   
and the  condition (), with , becomes
 
For , we obtain
 
The values of  given by () for each
 are given in Table .
 
 
The second line contains the  del Pezzo  values
for  given by ().
 must be an integer
for the  bundle
constraint () to be satisfied.  
In this table, the quantity 
 must be an integer for the 
 bundle constraint () to be satisfied.
From the table, we see that when , this constraint can be satisfied
only for  or .  Thus, we can exclude the 
 surfaces from consideration. 

We now try to satisfy the second 
bundle constraint ().  Using () 
in () gives
 
Thus, () is satisfied if
 
For the  and  del Pezzo surfaces, we find
 
respectively.  Thus, the  del Pezzo surface is excluded, and the
only remaining possibility is
 
We note that this value of  would not be permitted if the 
sufficient (but not necessary)  
bundle constraints discussed in  had been imposed. 
Using () and  in ()
and () gives
 
Imposing the effectiveness conditions  and  gives
 
Furthermore,  implies that 
 
which means that  is indeed effective.

Using ,  and our 
results , , ()
and () become   
 
Imposing the  constraints 
 gives
 
which is consistent with ().  One needs therefore a set
of  which simultaneously satisfy
) 
and () for  obeying the bundle
constraint ().  An example of such  is
 
Thus,   solutions with   exist
whenever the constraints  (), (),
and () on the involution  are satisfied.


Toward nonperturbative top quark mass 

In this section we discuss how the 11-dimensional framework of
Hor ava-Witten M-theory may be used to extend the perturbative
calculation of the top quark Yukawa coupling in the realistic
free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative regime. 

Let us recall that in the free-fermionic heterotic string
formalism , a model is
specified in terms of a set of boundary condition basis vectors and
one-loop GSO projection coefficients. The realistic free-fermionic
models of interest here are constructed in two stages.
The first stage corresponds to the NAHE set of boundary condition basis
vectors 
 .  At the second
stage, we add to the NAHE set three boundary condition
basis vectors, typically denoted by 
. 
The gauge group at the level of the NAHE set is 
, 
which is broken to 
 by the vector 
.  Alternatively, we can start with an extended NAHE set 
, with 
.  The set
 produces a toroidal Narain model
with  or 
 gauge group for appropriate choices
of the GSO phase .  The basis vectors 
 and  then break , and
either 

or
. 
The vectors  and  correspond to 
 orbifold modding.  The three vectors , 
, and  correspond to the three twisted sectors of the 
 orbifold, each producing eight
generations in the  representation of  or 
 representation of .  In the case of ,
the untwisted sector produces an additional 
, whereas in the 
 model it produces 
.  Therefore, the
Calabi-Yau 3-fold which corresponds to the 
 orbifold at the free-fermionic
point in the Narain moduli space has .  

This basic structure underlies all realistic free fermionic models.
In the second stage of the contruction the  symmetry is broken
to one of its subgroups and the number of generations is reduced
to three, one from each of the twisted sectors ,  or
. The top quark is identified with the leading mass state. The
Yukawa coupling of this mass state is obtained at the cubic level of the
superpotential and is a coupling between states from the  
twisted-twisted-untwisted sectors. For example, in the
standard-like models the relevant coupling is 
,
where  and  are respectively the quark 
singlet and doublet from the sector , and  is the
untwisted Higgs. Thus, one can calculate this coupling in the full three
generation model or at the level of the (51,3) or (27,3) 
 orbifold, and as a
  coupling,
or a   coupling. As long as the moduli are
fixed at the free-fermionic point, the numerical results will be   
identical. While we do not know the precise geometrical realization of the
three generation models, the geometry of the 
 orbifold is more readily identified.
Thus, to extend the calculation of the top quark Yukawa coupling in the
realistic free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative regime, one can
compactify Hor ava-Witten M-theory on a Calabi-Yau 3-fold which
corresponds to the  orbifold.  
 vector bundles with  or  can be
chosen, corresponding to the  or  grand unification
group, respectively.  The nonperturbative top quark Yukawa coupling at
the grand unification scale  is then computed, at least in
principle, using (). However, this calculation may require
modifications to the rules presented in Section  in the sense
that we now discuss. 

Let  be the Calabi-Yau 3-fold which corresponds to the 
  orbifold.  As
discussed in , this manifold has the structure of the manifold
 described in Section .
 can be realized as a singular limit of the 
elliptically-fibered Calabi-Yau 3-fold
 with base
 .  
We can represent the fibers of  in Weierstrass form
 
where  are inhomogeneous coordinates of the respective 
.  Making the choices
 
where
 
we have a  singular fiber as we approach any of the 
(or ).  These  singularities
intersect in 16 points, ,  in
the base. To obtain the , resolving the singular fibers is not
enough.  One must also blow up the base once at each 
, .  This blow-up procedure 
differs from the prescription in Section .  Thus, a detailed
nonperturbative extension of the top quark Yukawa coupling calculation in
the realistic free fermionic models may require modifications to
the rules presented in Section .  We remark that the
nonperturbative calculation of the remaining matter Yukawa
couplings  requires more detailed knowledge of the geometry of
the three generation free-fermionic models.



Conclusions 

Using the rules presented in Section , we have searched for 
 supersymmetric nonperturbative vacua of
Hor ava Witten M-theory compactified on a torus-fibered Calabi-Yau
3-fold  with  having 
1)  grand unification group, 2) net number of generations 
 of chiral fermions in the observable sector and 
3) potentially viable matter Yukawa couplings.  These vacua correspond to
semistable holomorphic vector bundles  over  having
structure group , and generically contain M5-branes 
in the bulk space.  We have demonstrated that torus fibered Calabi-Yau
3-folds   with  and Hirzebruch base
surfaces do not admit such vacua, but those with a del Pezzo 
base surface do.  The extension of the top quark Yukawa coupling
calculation in the realistic free-fermionic models to the nonperturbative
regime was discussed.  It appears that a detailed analysis will require 
modifications to the rules presented in Section .
We hope to make these modifications and perform a detailed analysis in a
future publication.  


Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank Jose Isidro for discussions during the initial
stages of this project.  A.E.F. is supported in part by PPARC.




 99 

 For reviews and references, see     

M.J. Duff, hep-th/9611203;                             

P.K. Townsend, hep-th/9612121;                         
 
A. Sen, hep-th/9802051;                                
 
B.A. Ovrut, hep-th/0201032.

 
P. Hor ava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys.  B460  (1996) 506;
Nucl. Phys.  B475  (1996) 94.

I. Antoniadis, J.R. Ellis, J.S. Hagelin and D.V. Nanopoulos, 
231 1989 65 ;                                                  

A.E. Faraggi, D.V. Nanopoulos and K. Yuan, 335 1990 347 ;      

I. Antoniadis, G.K. Leontaris, and J. Rizos, 245 1990 161 ;    

A.E. Faraggi, 278 1992 131 ; 
387 1992 239 ;                                                 

G.B. Cleaver, et al. , 455 1999 135 ;  
620 2002 259 ;  
63 2001 066001 ;   
Phys. Rev.  D65  (2002) 106003; hep-ph/0301037. 














 
A.E. Faraggi, Phys. Lett.  B274  (1991) 47;     
Phys. Lett.  B377  (1996) 43;       
Nucl. Phys.  B487  (1997) 55.




 R. Donagi, B.A. Ovrut, T. Pantev and D. Waldram,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  5  (2002) 93.

 R. Donagi, B.A. Ovrut, T. Pantev and D. Waldram,
Class. Quant. Grav.  17  (2000) 1049.

 A.E. Faraggi, R. Garavuso and J.M. Isidro, 
Nucl. Phys.  B641  (2002) 111.


 R. Arnowitt and B. Dutta, Nucl. Phys.  B592 
(2001) 143.

A.E. Faraggi, 326 1994 62 ;  
544 2002 207 ;                 

J.R. Ellis, A.E. Faraggi and D.V. Nanopoulos, 419 1998 123 .




 E. Cremmer, B. Julia, and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett.  
B76  (1978) 409.

 M.B. Green and J.H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett.  B149 
(1984) 117.

 E. Witten, Nucl. Phys.  B471  (1996)
135.

 A. Lukas, B.A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Phys. Rev.  
D57  (1998) 7529.

 A. Lukas, B.A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Phys. Rev.  
D59  (1999) 106005.

 A. Lukas, B.A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, JHEP  9904  (1999) 009.

 S. Donaldson, Proc. London Math. Soc.  3 
(1985) 1.

 K. Uhlenbeck and S.-T. Yau, Comm. Pure App. Math.  
39  (1986) 257;
Comm. Pure App. Math.  42  (1986) 703.

 A. Grassi, Internat. J. Math. 4  (1993) 203.

 D.R. Morrison and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys.  B476 
(1996) 437.  

 R. Friedman, J.Morgan, and E. Witten, 
Commun. Math. Phys.  187  (1997) 679.

 R. Donagi, Asian J. Math.  1  (1997) 214.

 M. Bershadsky, A. Johansen, T. Pantev and V. Sadov, 
Nucl. Phys.  B505  (1997) 165.

 G. Curio, Phys. Lett.  B435  (1998) 39.

 B. Andreas, JHEP  01  (1999) 011. 

 P. Berglund and P. Mayr, JHEP  9912  (1999)
009.

 I. Antoniadis, C.P. Bachas, and C. Kounnas, Nucl.
Phys.  B289  (1987) 87.

 H. Kawai, D.C. Lewellen, and S.-H.H. Tye, Nucl. Phys. 
B288  (1987) 1.

 A.E. Faraggi and D.V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rev.  D48  (1993) 3288.


 P. Berglund, J.R. Ellis, A.E. Faraggi, D.V. Nanopoulos
and Z. Qui, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A15  (2000) 1345.


 
J.L. Lopez and D.V. Nanopoulos,  338 1990 73 ;  
251 1990 73 ;  
268 1991 359 ;                                 
 
A.E. Faraggi, 403 1993 101 ;                
407 1993 57 ;                                  

A.E. Faraggi and E. Halyo, 416 1994 63 ;       

G.B. Cleaver et al. , 57 1998 2701 ; 59 1999 055005 ;

J. Giedt, 595 2001 3 .














Title:  Yukawa couplings in SO(10) heterotic M-theory vacua
Authors: Alon E. Faraggi, Richard S. Garavuso
Comments: 24 pages. Standard LaTeX. 
Report-no: OUTP-03-02P


We demonstrate the existence of a class of N=1 supersymmetric nonperturbative
vacua of Horava-Witten M-theory compactified on a torus fibered Calabi-Yau
3-fold Z with first homotopy group _1 (Z)= Z2, having the following
properties: 1) SO(10) grand unification group, 2) net number of three
generations of chiral fermions in the observable sector, and 3) potentially
viable matter Yukawa couplings. These vacua correspond to semistable
holomorphic vector bundles  V_Z  over Z having structure group SU(4)_C,
and generically contain M5-branes in the bulk space. The nontrivial
first homotopy group allows Wilson line breaking of the SO(10) symmetry.
Additionally, we propose how the 11-dimensional Horava-Witten M-theory
framework may be used to extend the perturbative calculation of the top
quark Yukawa coupling in the realistic free-fermionic models to the
nonperturbative regime. The basic argument being that the relevant 
coupling couples twisted-twisted-untwisted states and can be calculated
at the level of the Z2 X Z2 orbifold without resorting to the full three
generation models.













