





























   


   
   

















 
              



#1^^o      
   
o    M  
   

##  
    
  

a  
b  
c  
  
   





_LL   
_G   
_cov   



   

    
  23pt /  
   
  23pt /  
   




                    23pt /  
                
                

                    23pt /  
                
                

                    23pt /  
                
                
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   
  23pt   
   






 
January 2003

DAMTP-2003-8

hep-th/0301166 





 



Graphical Representation of Supersymmetry 


 




Shoichi ICHINOSE
         (
On leave of absence from
School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Yada 52-1, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan
(Address after Feb.9, 2003).
          
E-mail address: ichinose@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp
                  ) 
 



Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, 

University of Cambridge, 

Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WA, U.K.   









Abstract A graphical representation of supersymmetry
is presented. It clearly expresses the chiral flow 
appearing in SUSY quantities, by representing
spinors by directed lines  (arrows). The chiral indices
are expressed by the directions (up, down, left, right)
of the arrows. 
The SL(2,C) invariants are represented by wedges . 
Both the Weyl spinor and the Majorana spinor
are treated. 
We are free from the messy symbols of spinor indices.

The method is applied to the 5D supersymmetry. 
Many applications are expected. 
The result is suitable for coding a computer program
and is highly expected to be applicable to 
various SUSY theories (including Supergravity) 
in various dimensions.




PACS NO: 
02.10.Ox, 
02.70.-c, 
02.90.+p, 
11.30.Pb, 
11.30.Rd, 
Key Words: Graphical representation, Supersymmetry, 
Spinor suffix, Chiral suffix, Graph index







Introduction 
Since supersymmetry was born, more than quarter
century has passed. Although super particles
are not yet discovered in experiments, everybody now
admits its importance as one possible extension
beyond the standard model. Some important models,
such as 4 dimensional  susy YM 

, give us 
a deep insight in the non-perturbative aspects
of the quantum field theories. 
Because of the high 
symmetry, the dynamics is strongly constrained and
it makes possible to analyse the nonperturbative
aspects. The BPS state is such a
representative. 

The beauty of SUSY
theory comes from the harmony between bosons and fermions. 
At the cost of the high symmetry, the SUSY fields
generally carry many suffixes: 
chiral-suffixes (), anti-chiral suffixes ()
in addition to usual ones: 
gauge suffixes (), Lorentz suffixes ().
The usual notation is, for example, .
Many suffixes are "crowded" within one character .
Whether the meaning of a quantity is clearly read, 
sometimes crucially depends on
the way of description. In the case of quantities
with many indices,  
we are sometimes lost in the "jungle" of suffixes.
In this circumstance we propose a new representation
to express SUSY quantities.
It has the following properties.
 
All suffix-information is expressed.
Suffixes are suppressed as much as possible. 
Instead we use the "geometrical" notation: lines, arrows, .
In this sense, the use of "forms" instead of the
tensorial quantities is the similar line of
simplification.
 
Particularly, 
contracted suffixes (we call them "dummy" suffixes) are
expressed by vertices (for fermion suffixes) or lines.
The chiral flow is manifest.
The graphical indices specify a spinorial quantity.

Another quantity with many suffixes
is the Riemann tensor appearing in the general relativity.
It was already graphically representedand some applications have appeared
. 


We follow the notation and the convention of the textbook by
Wess and Bagger. Many (graphical) relations
appearing in the present paper (except Sec.6 and Sec.8)
appear in that textbook.






Definition 

Basic Ingredients 
Let us represent the Weyl fermion 
(2 complex components,  ) 
and their 'suffixes-raised' partners as in Fig.1.
Raising and lowering the spinor suffixes is done by
the antisymmetric tensors : 

 

where  and  are in the inverse relation: 
. 



 
 figure=F1.eps,height=5cm,angle=0  
  





Weyl fermions. 

 


2

Graphical Rule 1 ( Fig.1)  1. The arrow is pointed to the left  for the chiral field  and
to the right  for the anti-chiral one .(Complex structure)2. The arrow is pointed to the up  for the upper-suffix quantity and
to the down  for lower-suffix quantity.(Symplectic structure)3. All spinor suffixes (;)
 are labeled at the lowest position of arrow lines.

2

The choice of 3 is fixed by the condition that, 
when we express 
the basic SL(2,C)(Lorentz) invariants 
(NW-SE convention)
=
,
(SW-NE convention)
=
where suffixes are contracted by the anti-symmetric
tensor
(
NorthWest-SouthEast(NW-SE), SouthWest-NorthEast(SW-NE).
) 
, 
the arrows continuously  flow along the lines ( see Fig.4 
which will be explained later)
without changing the order of the spinor-field graphs. 

2

Graphical Rule 2  Every spinor graph is anticommuting  
in the horizontal direction. The derivatives of fermions are expressed as in Fig.2.
We give it as a rule.


 
 figure=F2.eps,height=6cm,angle=0  







Derivatives of fermions. 

 


2

Graphical Rule 3 ( Fig.2)  1. For each derivative, attach the derivative symbol ""
to the corresponding spinor-arrow with a dotted line 
as in Fig.2. At the end of the line, the Lorentz suffix
of the derivative is described.2. The order of the derivative lines described above is irrelevant
because the derivative  is commutative .

2



Following the above rule, 
the elements of the SL(2,C) -matrix are expressed as in Fig.3. 

 
 figure=F3.eps,height=8cm,angle=0  





   

Elements of SL(2,C) -matrices. 
 and  are
the standard form.

   

In Fig.3, the two arrows are directed 'horizontally outward' for , 
whereas 'horizontally inward' for . 
We consider  and  are
the standard form which is basically used in this text.



Spinor suffix contraction 
Lorentz covariants and invariants are expressed by the contraction  of 
the spinor suffixes. We take the convention of 
NW-SE contraction for the chiral suffix ,
and SW-NE contraction for the anti-chiral one . 
They are expressed by connecting the corresponding suffix-ends
as in Fig.4. 

 
 figure=F4.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

Contraction of spinor suffixes. 
[above] N(orth)W(est)-S(outh)E(ast) contraction for the chiral suffix

(

)
: 
[below] SW-NE contraction for the anti-chiral suffix 
(


). 

    

The wedge  structure, in Fig.4, characterizes all spinor
contractions in the following. 
For the chiral -suffixes contraction,
the wedge 'runs' to the left , whereas the anti-chiral  ones 
to the right .

2

Graphical Rule 4: Spinor Suffix Contraction ( Fig.4)  The contraction is expressed by connecting the corresponding
suffix-ends. 



2

Two Lorentz vectors,
 and

are expressed as in Fig.5. 

 
 figure=F5.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

Two Lorentz vectors 
 and
. 
The double wedge structure appears. 

    

The double-wedge  structure, in Fig.5, characterizes
the vector  quantities which involve one  or one . 

Next we take examples with two 's. 
 and 

are expressed as in Fig.6. 

 
 figure=F6.eps,height=6cm,angle=0  





   

 and 
. 
The "spinor contraction" between  and  is
expressed as a wedge.

    

The "spinor contraction" between  and  is also
expressed as a wedge. 

2

Graphical Rule 5: Space-Time Suffixes Contraction The contraction of space-time suffix  is expressed
by a dotted line.

2
 
An example 
is expressed as in Fig.7. 

 
 figure=F7.eps,height=2cm,angle=0  





   

An Lorentz invariant: 
.

    

Note that 2
all dummy  suffixes do not  appear
in the final invariant quantities. 2
The contraction
is expressed by the directed wedges
and the dotted curved lines. This makes the expression
very transparent.

As the partially contracted examples, we take
 and
. See Fig.8.

 
 figure=F8.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

Partially contracted cases. 
 and
. 

    

The spinor suffixes  and the space-time
suffix  remain and wait for further contraction.





Graphical Formula 
An important advantage of the graphical representation
is the usage of graphical formula (relations). 
It helps so much in practical calculation of SUSY quantities.
Some demonstrations will be given later. 
We express the formula: 


, 



in Fig.9. The last equalities in the both lines
of the figure comes from the anti-commutatibity of 
the spinor graphs(GR2). 

 
 figure=F9.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

A graphical formula. 
, and 


. 

    

We can express all formulae graphically.
In this subsection, we list only basic ones.
In Fig.10, the symmetric combination of 
are shown as the basic spinor algebra.


 
 figure=F10.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

A graphical formula of the basic spinor algebra. 

, and 

. 

    

The antisymmetric combination gives the generators
of the Lorentz group, .

 



Although we have already used , its definition 
in terms of  and
the "inverse" relation are displayed in Fig.11.

 
 figure=F11.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

Definition of ,

, and its "inverse" relation,

.

    

Here we do the upward and downward changes, within the  and , 
by  and  as explained for the spinor 
in ().
Using the relation Fig.11, we can obtain the following useful relation.


 


The "reduction" formulae (from the cubic s to 
the linear one) are expressed as in Fig.12.

 
 figure=F12.eps,height=8cm,angle=0  





   

Two relations: 
1) 
, 
2) 
.

    

From Fig.12, we notice any chain of s
can always be expressed by less than three s. 
The appearance of the 4th rank anti-symmetric tensor 
is quite illuminating. 
The completeness  relations are expressed as in Fig.13.

 
 figure=F13.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  





   

Completeness relations: 
1) 
, 
2) 
. 
The contraction using  is the matrix trace.

    

The contraction, expressed by  in Fig.13, 
is the matrix trace.
(
We do not, at present, the matrix trace graphical.
) 
Finally we display the Fierz identity .

 


where the relation:  





, is expressed.





4D Chiral Multiplet 
As the first example, we take the 4D chiral multiplet.
It is made of a complex scalar field , a Weyl spinor 
and an auxiliary field (complex scalar) . Their transformations 
are expressed as follows.

 


The complex conjugate ones are given as

 


We can read the graphical rule of the complex conjugate
operation by comparing () and ().Graphical Rule 6: Complex Conjugation Operation 

 


In order to 
show the graphical representation, presented in Sec.2, 
satisfies the SUSY representation and the usage of the graphical rules
and formulae,
 we graphically show the
SUSY symmetry of the Lagrangian. 

 


(Hermiticity of the first term, up to a total derivative, can be confirmed by
the use of GR6 anf Fig.11B.)
The three terms in the Lagrangian transform as

 


 can be shown as

 


where graph formula Fig.11B is used. 
 a total derivative is shown as

 


where "" means the corresponding previous
graph. In the above the relations Fig.10 and Fig.9 are used.
 a total derivative can be shown as

 


where some modification of Fig.11B is used in the first line,
and Fig.10 is used in the second line. 
 a total derivative can be obtained as

 


Summing the above results, we finally obtain
the result.

 


Hence the Lagrangian indeed invariant up to a
total derivative .








4D Vector Multiplet 
The super elctromagnetic theory, in the WZ gauge, is given by

 


where .
 is the vector field,  is the Weyl fermion, 
is a scalar auxiliary field. () is invariant
under the SUSY transformation.

 




The SUSY invariance of () can be graphically shown
by using the relations of Fig.9,Fig.11, Fig.12 and
Fig.11B.
The result is

 


which express a total derivative . 
The appearance of the totally anti-symmetric tensor 
shows that the invariance depends on the space-time dimensionality 4
in the case of vector multiplet.




Majorana spinor 
Another useful way to represent the supersymmetry
is the use of the Majorana spinor which is based on 
SO(1,3) (not SL(2,C)) structure. 
We define the graphical representation for 
the Majorana spinor  and its conjugate 
as in Fig.14.  

 
 figure=Mspinor.eps,height=2cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical representation for the
Majorana spinor, , and its conjugate .


    

The SO(1,3) invariants  and  are
represented as in Fig.15.

 
 figure=Minv.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical representation for 
the SO(1,3) invariants made of the
Majorana spinors:  and .

    

They are graphically much simpler than the Weyl case
( no arrows, the single (vertical) wedge structure with spinor matrices
placed at the vertex )
because only the adjoint structure is necessary to be build in
the graph. Remaining information, such as hermiticity and chiral properties, is in the 44
matrix elements (made of  matrices).

The relation between the Weyl and Majorana spinors is 
described in textbooks
.
To show the precise relation, at the graphical level,
and to show some usage of the graph method,
we derive the relation using the previously defined contents.
The chiral multiplet of Sec.3 is taken for the explanation.

First we introduce 4 real fields , instead of
().

 

As for spinor quantities, we introduce 
4 components spinor quantities 
instead of the 2 components ones (). 

 

Using these quantities the SUSY transformation (of the chiral multiplet)
is obtained as


 



where the double lines are used to express the SUSY
parameters and the following gamma matrices are taken: 

 

We show here the graphical expressions for 
the SO(1,3) invariants made of the
Majorana spinors: 


.
The above graphical relations manifestly show the  matrix
controls the chirality in the Majorana spinor,
whereas it is shown by the left-right direction
(dot-undotted suffixes)in the Weyl case.
The above relations can be used in the transformation
between both expressions even at the graphical level.

The fermion kinetic term of the chiral Lagrangian
() is graphically
transformed into the Majorana expression as follows.

 


where the relation of Fig.11B is used in the first line.









Indices of Graph 
We introduce some indices  of a graph. They classify graphs.
Its use is another advantage of the graphical representation.

(i) Left Chiral Number  and Right Chiral Number We assign  for each one step leftward arrow 
and define its total sum within a graph
as Left Chiral Number (LCN). In the same way,
we assign  for each one step rightward arrow 
and define its total sum within a graph as Right Chiral Number (RCN).

(ii) Up-Down CountingWe assign  for one step of the upward arrow
and  for the one step of the downward arrow. Then we define
Left Up-Down Number (LUDN) as the total sum for all leftward arrows
within a graph, and Right Up-Down Number (RUDN) as the total sum for 
all rightward arrows within a graph. For SL(2,C) invariants, these indices
vanish. 

In order to count the number of the suffix contraction
we introduce the following ones.

(iii) Left Wedge Number  and Right Wedge Number We assign  for each piece of  
and define the total sum within a graph as Left Wedge Number (LWN).
In the same way,  
we assign  for each piece of
 and define the total sum within a graph 
as Right Wedge Number (RWN).

(iv) Dotted Line Number We assign  for one dotted line which connects
the space-time suffix. We define the total sum within a graph
as Dotted Line Number (DLN).

In addition to the graph-related indices, we introducea) Physical Dimension (DIM); 
b) Number of the differentials (DIF); 
c) Number of  or  (SIG)

We list the above indices for basic spinor quantities in Table 1
and for the operators appearing the chiral multiplet Lagrangian (Sec.3)
in Table 2.

2




 







 



We can identify every term appearing in the theory
in terms of some of these indices. We list some indices for
all spinorial operators in Super QED. We see all terms
are classified by the indices and the field contents.

2




 














Superspace Quantities 
We know the SUSY symmetry is most naturally viewed in the
superspace (). Here
we introduce anti-commuting parameters 

as the basic spinor coordinate. We show them graphically
in Fig.16.

 
 figure=F15.eps,height=6cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical representation for the
spinor coordinates in the superspace:  and 
.

    

They satisfy the graphical relations of Fig.17.

 
 figure=F16.eps,height=8cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical rules for the spinor coordinates: 



.

    


The general superfield , in terms of
components fields(
)
, is shown as

 


The SUSY transformation generator  and 
are expressed as

 


The SUSY derivative operators  and , which are
the conjugate partners of  and , are expressed as

 


We can graphically confirm the SUSY algebra
by using the commutativity and anti-commutativity between
 and .

 



In the treatment of the chiral superfield, it is important to choose
appropriate coordinates: ()
for the chiral field, and ()
for the anti-chiral one.

 


Because of the properties () and
(), the chiral superfield 
() and the anti-chiral one 
() are always written as

 


respectively. 
The SUSY differential operators are expressed as, in terms of
(),

 


and as, in terms of (),

 



The superspace calculation can be performed graphically.
For example, the  calculation, in order to
find the 4D SUSY Lagragian, can be done using the graph
relations of Fig.17. The advantage, compared to the usual
one, is that the graphically expressed quantity is not
"obscured" by the dummy (contracted) suffixes.







Application to 5D Supersymmetry 
In this section we apply the graphical method
to a recent subject: 5D supersymmetry. 
Here both (4-components and 2-components spinors) types
of representation appears in relation to SUSY "decomposition". 
Stimulated by
the brane world physics, higher dimensional SUSY becomes
an important subject. In particular, 5 dimensional one is used
as the concrete extended model of the standard model. The simplest
one is the hypermultiplet , where both () 
and  
are the SU(2) doublet of complex scalars.  are the auxiliary
fields.  is a Dirac field. The SU(2) suffix, , is lowered
or raised by  and : 
 
where  and  are the same as (). 

The doublet fields are graphically
represented as in Fig.18. 

 
 figure=F8A.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical representation for the SU(2) doublet
fields,  and .
The arrowed dotted line is depicted arbitrarily except that
the one end should be attached to the symbol and the correct
arrow direction should be taken.

    

The suffix up-down is expressed by the arrow
direction: the flow-in direction for the up-suffix and the flow-out
direction for the down-suffix. (This representation of the suffix up-down
is different from the treatment taken in the spinor case of Sec.2.) 

As the 5D SUSY parameter, we take the symplectic Majorana spinors.
They are SU(2) doublet of Dirac  spinors () which
satisfy the symplectic Majorana condition ("reality" condition).

 

From the number of the independent SUSY parameters,
we know the present system has 8 (counted in real) supercharges. 
We introduce the graphical
representation for  and  as in Fig.19.
The Dirac spinor structure is graphically the same as the Majorana one
of Sec.5.


 
 figure=F8B.eps,height=4cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical representation for the 5D SUSY parameters, 
 and .

    


Then the 5D SUSY transformation is expressed as

 


where a wavy line is used to express the 5D space-time suffixes ()
contraction.
(
5D Dirac gamma matrix is taken to be  where
 and  are defined in ().
) 
The complex conjugate one is given by

 



The free Lagrangian is given by

 


Using the graphical rule of Fig.20 (),
and the basic spinor relation ,
we can graphically confirm the SUSY invariance.
(

) 

 




 
 figure=F8C.eps,height=2cm,angle=0  






   

The graphical rules for the relation: 
.

    


In relation to the SUSY decomposition, we rewrite the Dirac fields
() in terms of Weyl spinors.

 


where the reality condition is used to express the SUSY parameters
by 8 (counted in real) independent quantities: ,  and their
conjugates.
Then the 5D SUSY symmetry () is decomposed as follows.
For the bosonic part, they are given by

 




For the fermionic part they are given by

 



(The graph equations in
() are, in the ordinary expression, as follows.






















) 




Let us compare the above result with the decomposition structure 
in the case of 4D: Majorana (4-comonents) to Weyl (2-components). 
In the 4D case, the decomposition 
is done with respect to chirality (left versus right), and
 controls it. 
In the present case of 5D, the decomposition is done
with respect to  and , 
 the label 1 and 2 control it. 
Here we note that there is no "chiral matrix" in 5D
in the sense that . 
Next we explain what symmetry plays the role
of separation of 1 and 2. 



In relation to the decomposition (to SUSY) procedure, 
we introduce Z-symmetry,
that is the reflection in the origin in the (fifth) extra coordinate.

 

We assign  the Z-parity to all fields in a consistent way
with the decomposition relations (). A choice is 
given in Table 4.































Then the the 5D SUSY symmetry is decomposed to two  chiral
multiplets; one is for  states, the other is for  states.
Up to now, the SUSY decomposition is not directly related with 
the space-time dimensional reduction.
Let us consider the case that the present 5D SUSY system 
has the localized configuration around the origin in
the extra coordinate.  
Then we can naturally suppose that 
the -symmetry, which is required from the configuration,
restricts the boundary condition of the fields and
the whole system 
decomposes into even-parity and odd-parity fields.
Then dimensional reduction occurs.





Discussion and conclusion 
The use of graphs is popular in the history of mathematics and theoretical
physics. 
Penrose, with the similar motivation described in the
introduction, proposed a diagrammatical (graphical) notation
in the tensorial and spinorial calculation.
Feynman diagram is the most familiar graph method to represent a scattering
amplitude.
The diagram tells us, without the explicit calculation, 
important features such as
the coupling dependence, mass dependence and the
divergence degree. 
Nakanishi analysed the Feynman amplitude
using the graph theory in mathematics. 
In this sense
quite a large part of mathematical physics relies on
the use of the graph. 

As an application of the present approach, supergravity is interesting.
Relegating the full treatment to a separate work, we indicate a graphical
advantage here. There appears such a quantity in the supergravity.: 


 Graphically it is expressed as

 


where we introduce the graphical representation for the vier-bein 
and the Rarita-Schwinger field  as

 


The indices, which specifies the above graph (),
are given as follows: 


.













We have presented a graphical representation
of the supersymmetric theory. It has some
advantages over the conventional description.
The applications are diverse. Especially
the higher dimensional suspergravities
are the interesting physical models
to apply the present approach. 
In the ordinary approach, it has a technical problem which
hinders analysis. 
The theory is so "big" that it is rather hard 

in the conventional approach.

The present graphical description is
expected to resolve or reduce the technical
but an important problem. We point out that the
present representation is suitable for coding
as a (algebraic) computer program. 
(See for the C-language program
and graphical calculation for the product of Riemann tensors.)





5 



) 
Acknowledgment) 
The basic idea of this work was born 
during the author's stay at Albert Einstein Institute (fall of 1999) . 
The author thanks the hospitality at the institute. 
He also thanks M. Abe, N. Ikeda, T. Kugo and N. Nakanishi
for comments and criticism in the RIMS(Kyoto Univ.) workshop(2002.9.30-10.29).
This work is completed in the present form in the author's stay
during DAMTP(Univ. of Cambridge). He thanks the hospitality there.
The author thanks G.W. Gibbons for comments and reference information.
He also thanks S. Rankin for the help in computer work.
Finally the author thanks the governor of the Shizuoka prefecture for
the financial support.







5) 




 99 
 
S. Ichinose, 12 (1995)1021, hep-th/9309035
 
S. Ichinose and N. Ikeda, 38 (1997)6475, hep-th/9702003


  
G.W. Gibbons and S. Ichinose, 17 (2000)2129,
hep-th/9911167
 
J. Wess and J. Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravity . 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1992
 
S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields : Supersymmetry 
(Volume III). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000
 
P.G.O. Freund, Introduction to Supersymmetry . 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986
 
P. West, Introduction to Supersymmetry and Supergravity .
World Scientific, Singapore, 1990
 
E.A.Mirabelli and M.E. Peskin,
Phys.Rev.D58 (1998)065002, hep-th/9712214
 
A. Hebecker, B632 (2002)101



  
R. Penrose, "Application of Negative Dimensional Tensors" in
Combinatorial Mathematics and its Applications , 1971,
ed. D.J.A. Welch (Academic Press, London);R. Penrose and W. Rindler, "Spinors and space-time, Vol.1: 
Two-spinor calculus and relativistic fields", Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1984
  
N. Nakanishi, "Graph Theory and Feynman Integral",
Gordon and Breach, Science Publisher, New York-London-Paris, 1971
  
S. Ichinose, in preparation.
 
S. Ichinose, C9 (1998)243, hep-th/9609014













 



