

23cm
16cm
-2cm
0.5cm
0.5cm
  
equation  
 
Constant magnetic field and  non-commutative inverted oscillator 


Stefano Bellucci 


INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati,
 P.O. Box 13, I-00044 Frascati, Italy 
 
e-mail: bellucci@lnf.infn.it 
 
We consider a two-dimensional non-commutative inverted oscillator in the
presence of a constant magnetic field, coupled to the system in a
"symplectic" and "Poisson" way. We show that it has a discrete
energy spectrum for some value of the magnetic field.
 
PACS number: 03.65.-w
Introduction 
Non-commutative quantum field theories have been
studied intensively during the last several years, owing
to their relationship with M-theory compactifications,
string theory in nontrivial backgrounds and
quantum Hall effect(see e.g. for a recent review).
At low energies the one-particle sectors become
relevant, which prompted an interest in the study of
non-commutative quantum mechanics (NCQM)  -(for some earlier studies of NCQM see
 -).
Most of the attention was focused on quantum mechanics on
two- and three-dimensional noncommutative spaces. Two-dimensional
NCQM in the presence of a constant
magnetic field was considered on a plane,
torus, sphere and pseudosphere
(Lobachewski plane, or ).

NCQM on a plane has a critical point,
specified by the vanishing of the dimensionless parameter
   
where the system
becomes effectively one-dimensional.
Away from the critical point, the rotational properties of the model
become qualitatively dependent on the sign
of : for  the system admits an infinite
number of states with a given value of the angular momentum,
while for  the number of such states is finite.
From NCQM on a (pseudo)sphere
originate, in some sense, the "phases" of planar NCQM:
the "monopole number" is defined, in such phases, in a
different way.
In the planar limit the  NCQM on (pseudo)sphere results in the
"non-conventional", or the so-called "exotic" NCQM
, where the magnetic
field is introduced via "minimal", or symplectic coupling.

Notice that the only two-dimensional NCQM with a non-zero potential term that has been solved
explicitly corresponds to a noncommutative circular oscillator in the presence of a magnetic field.
Although this system has been solved for both conventional and exotic coupling of the magnetic field,
its rotational properties have been analyzed only for a conventional coupling of the magnetic field.
The present interest in NCQM was initiated by Chaichian, Sheikh-Jabbari and Tureanu
, who calculated the corrections to the hydrogen atom spectrum, which arise
in non-commutative QED. Later on, the three-dimensional noncommutative oscillator with a conventional
coupling of the magnetic field has also been considered and explicitly solved.
Hence, the recent studies of NCQM concentrated mainly on the
systems with either an attractive potential, or without potential.

On the other hand, Ho and Kao, accurately considering the multi-particle
non-relativistic limit of the noncommutative field theory, found that particles of opposite charges
have opposite non-commutativity.
Hence, in the center-of-mass frame, the "particle-antiparticle" system has no noncommutative correction,
in contrast to the system of two identical particles.
Therefore, in the context of a two-particle interpretation, NCQM
with a repulsive potential becomes especially important.(
In it was claimed, that "since proton and electron have opposite charges,
the hydrogen atom has no noncommutative corrections, in spite of the statement
 of". However, the authors of the latter paper argued in their replythat this prediction does not work in the case of the hydrogen atom, owing to the composite nature of the proton.) 

We recall that, at the present time, the only example of
an exactly solvable
NCQM system with a nonzero potential term is the
oscillator, which adds on to the distinguished role played by the
harmonic oscillator in both theoretical physics and mathematics.(
A "maximally integrable" isotropic oscillator on the complex
projective space has been recently
introduced in, where the behaviour of the system
in a constant magnetic field
and its supersymmetric generalization on the Kahler space
based upon the N=4 mechanics formulated in have been discussed.) 
Owing to this reason, in the present work we decided
to examine
the effects of non-commutativity in systems with a repulsive
potential in the presence of a constant magnetic field
(coupled in a conventional and an exotic way), considering the
simple model of the two-dimensional inverted oscillator. For completeness, we shall
present also
the known facts about the non-commutative harmonic oscillator.

Basic properties 

As stated above, we will determine the effects of introducing a
constant magnetic field in the following two cases: the
"conventional" picture and the "exotic" one.
We will also consider, as a by-product, the rotational
properties of the noncommutative oscillator with exotic coupling of the constant magnetic field.
Thus, we consider NCQM with the potential
 
where  corresponds to the
harmonic oscillator and 
to the inverted one.

The two-dimensional non-commutative quantum mechanical
system with an arbitrary central potential in the presence
of a constant magnetic
field  is given by the Hamiltonian  
with the operators  which obey the
commutation relations
  
where  and the non-commutativity parameter 
has the dimension of .

The system can be also represented as follows:
  
where the operators  and  form the algebra
[ _, q _] = 0,
 At the  "critical point", i.e. for , the system
becomes effectively
one-dimensional 

Away from the point 
the  angular momentum of the systems is defined by the operator
 
The eigenvalues of the angular momentum operator
are given by the expression
l=( (n_1+1/2)-  (n_2+1/2)),n_1, n_2=0, 1,...
where  denote, respectively, the eigenvalues of
the operators
 for the "conventional" NCQM
and those of the operators  for the
"exotic" one.
In () the upper sign corresponds to the "conventional"
system and the lower sign to the "exotic" one.
Hence, the rotational properties of NCQM qualitatively depend
on the sign of .

Let us remind, that for a non-constant 
the Jacobi identities fail in the "conventional" model, while
in the "exotic" model the Jacobi identities hold for any
, by definition.
This reflects the different origin of the magnetic field 
appearing
in the two models. In the "conventional" model,  appears
as the strength of a non-commutative  magnetic field,
 while in the  "exotic" model,  appears as
a commutative  magnetic field, obtained by means of
the Seiberg-Witten map from the non-commutative one.

Conventional coupling 


For non-vanishing values of , it is convenient to
introduce the  operators
   a ^ =q_1q_2 2  ,
   b ^ =  _1 _2 2   ,
  with the following non-zero commutators:
  [ a ^-,  a ^+]=1, [ b ^-,  b ^+]= -.
 In terms of the operators in (),
the angular momentum reads
 L=(a^+a^- + a^+a^- )/2   -
(b^+b^- + b^+b^-  )/2 ,
  and the Hamiltonian () takes the form
 H =1 2 ((b^+b^-+b^-b^+)-2   ( b^+a^-a^+b^-)+E (
a^+a^-+a^-a^+)),
where we have used the notation
E =1+()^2.
Let us introduce  the orthonormal basis in the Hilbert space
consisting of the states
 basis 
 n_1,n_2 =
(a^+)^n_1 (b^- )^n_2  n_1!n_2!  0,0 ,a^-0,n_1 =
b^- n_2, 0 =0,
 where  for
, and  for
 .


Recall that the eigenvalues of the angular momentum
are given by (). One can see that the
spectrum essentially depends on the sign
of . Indeed,
the angular momentum  and the occupation number 
take the values(
We remind that  defines the eigenvalue of the
operator  and has the meaning of the
quantized radius of the system .) 

    
 At the critical point ,
the system reduces to the one-dimensional oscillator
with the energy spectrum
E^osc _(0)n =
E   (n+1/2), n=0,1,2,Even though we are dealing with an inverted oscillator,
the latter possesses a discrete spectrum,
and gets a ground state when .

For , let us try to
diagonalize the Hamiltonian, by performing an
appropriate (pseudo)unitary transformation
 
where the matrix  belongs to SU(1,1) for , and to
SU(2) for ,
 
The Hamiltonian becomes diagonal, when 
obey the conditions
 . .
The diagonalized Hamiltonian should take the form
 
where
 

"Conventional" harmonic oscillator. 
In the case of the
harmonic oscillator the above equations have a solution for any
. After some work one gets
 
Hence, the energy spectrum of the "conventional" oscillator
  takes the form
 
Since the transformation () belongs to the
symmetry group of the rotational momentum , the magnetic number
is given by the same equation as above, i.e. ().
It can be seen that the expressions
() arise, in the case of the harmonic oscillator,
from the requirement of the
positivity of the energy spectrum.

There exists an "isotropic point",
 ,
where the frequencies become equal to each other


and the system has the symmetry of the ordinary circular oscillator.

In the commutative limit, i.e. for , the
effective frequencies read
 
In the case
of the Landau problem,  (or, equivalently, ),
one of the frequencies vanishes and the spectrum reads








Hence, although the energy spectrum of the
Landau problem is independent from the non-commutativity parameter,
its expression in terms of the angular momentum essentially depends
on .


"Conventional" inverted oscillator 
When we deal with the "conventional" inverted oscillator,
 ,  the equations ()
have a solution for any , as well as for the values
 which satisfy the condition
 
Hence, the non-commutativity of the plane,
together with the presence of a magnetic field, yield different
"regimes" in the "conventional" inverted oscillator:
 
:
the spectrum of the inverted oscillator is given by the expression
(),
where  .
Hence, when , the inverted oscillator transmutes into
a one-dimensional harmonic one, and the system possesses a ground state.
For  the energy of the system vanishes.

: the Hamiltonian
of the inverted oscillator can be diagonalized by
a 
transformation.
The resulting system is again given by (), where
, .
,  (or, equivalently,


 .

In this case, we can diagonalize  the Hamiltonian
by an appropriate  transformation.
The energy spectrum is defined by  by (), where






Hence, although the spectrum is discrete, the system has no ground state.
This regime also appears in the absence of a magnetic field, i.e. for ,
when .
In this case the "frequencies" are
.

,  (or, equivalently,

).

In this case we cannot diagonalize the Hamiltonian,
neither by , nor by  transformations.
This indicates that in the given regime
the system possesses a smooth energy spectrum.
Notice that this is the only regime which has commutative limit.
 So, considering the simplest system with a
repulsive potential, we find
that the non-commutativity of the coordinates, together with the
presence of a non-vanishing magnetic field,
essentially change its initial properties.


 "Exotic" coupling 

Here we must distinguish, once more, between two different cases.


"Exotic" harmonic  oscillator. 
The spectrum of the "exotic" oscillator, away from the point ,
can be obtained in a way similar to that described above.
For this purpose we should make, in the above derivation, the following
replacements:
- q /,q /-, 1/.
Thus, away from the point , the spectrum of the "exotic"
oscillator reads
 
Since the transformation () belongs to the
symmetry group of the angular momentum , the eigenvalues of
the latter operator are given by ().
As in the case of the "conventional" oscillator, the expressions
() arise, also in the case of the "exotic" oscillator,
from the requirement of the
positivity of the energy spectrum. The "isotropy point" of
the "exotic"  oscillator is defined by the expression
 E =1/,>0 .
 "Exotic" inverted oscillator. 
The  regimes of the "exotic"
inverted oscillator can be found
in the same way, as the regimes of the
inverted "conventional" oscillator.
One has
 
: the Hamiltonian
of the inverted oscillator can be diagonalized by
a 
transformation.
,  (or, equivalently,


 .

In this case we can diagonalize  the Hamiltonian
by an appropriate  transformation.
The energy spectrum is discrete, however the system has no ground state.
,  (or, equivalently,

).

In this  case we cannot diagonalize the Hamiltonian,
neither by , nor by  transformations.
The system has a smooth energy spectrum.

Discussion 

We considered quantum mechanics with a repulsive oscillator potential
on a non-commutative plane, interacting with a constant magnetic
field. This system could be interpreted as a two-particle system in a
center-of-mass frame. We found that non-commutativity, combined with the presence
of a constant magnetic field, generates a special regime, where the system gets
a discrete spectrum. The qualitative behaviour of the system is the same for
both types of coupling of the magnetic field, i.e. symplectic and Poisson ones
(which we called, respectively, "conventional and "exotic").

It should be quite interesting to take into consideration similar non-commutative
systems on two- and higher-dimensional spheres, as well as to study
non-commutativity effects on supersymmetric quantum mechanics.
The appropriate commutative  candidate, namely a (super)oscillator, in
a constant magnetic field, on complex projective spaces,
is constructed in.


It can be seen from eq. () that, at the
critical point, the "conventional" NCQM gets a ground state
not only for attractive potentials, but for repulsive potentials
as well, when the latter are long-range distance ones, namely
2^2 dV(q^2) dq^2 >-1.
This class includes the physically important
cases of the logarithmic potential



and the Coulomb  one,
as well as a simplest repulsive potential, i.e. that describing
an inverted oscillator.


Acknowledgments 

I would like to thank Armen Nersessian for useful discussions.
This work was supported in part
by the European Community's Human Potential
Programme under the contract HPRN-CT-2000-00131 Quantum Spacetime,
the INTAS-00-0254 grant, the NATO Collaborative Linkage Grant PST.CLG.979389 and the Iniziativa
Specifica MI12 of the INFN Commissione Nazionale IV.

 99 
 A. Connes, M. R. Douglas and A. Schwarz,
JHEP 9802  (1998) 003.

N. Seiberg and E. Witten, JHEP 9909  (1999) 032.

A. P. Polychronakos,
JHEP 0104  (2001) 011;



V. P. Nair and A. P. Polychronakos,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  87  (2001) 030403.

R. J. Szabo,
"Quantum field theory on noncommutative spaces,"
arXiv:hep-th/0109162.

V. P. Nair, Phys. Lett. B 505  (2001) 249.

M. Chaichian, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and A. Tureanu,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  86  (2001) 2716.

J. Gamboa, M. Loewe and J. C. Rojas,
Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 067901.

V. P. Nair and A. P. Polychronakos,
Phys. Lett. B 505  (2001) 267.

B. Morariu and A. P. Polychronakos,
Nucl. Phys. B 610  (2001) 531.

C. Duval and P. A. Horvathy,
 J. Phys. A 34  (2001) 10097;


P. A. Horvathy, Annals Phys. 299  (2002) 128.

S. Bellucci, A. Nersessian and C. Sochichiu,
Phys. Lett. B 522  (2001) 345.

O. F. Dayi and A. Jellal,
Phys. Lett.  A 287  (2001) 349.

S. Bellucci and A. Nersessian,
Phys. Lett. B 542  (2002) 295.

D. H. Correa,
G. S. Lozano, E. F. Moreno and F. A. Schaposnik, JHEP 0111  (2001) 034.

D. Karabali, V. P. Nair and A. P. Polychronakos,
Nucl. Phys. B 627  (2002) 565.

R. Iengo and R. Ramachandran, JHEP 0202  (2002)
017.

 A. A. Deriglazov, "Noncommutative quantum mechanics as a
constrained system", arXiv:hep-th/0112053;


ibid., Phys. Lett. B 530  (2002) 235.

 P. M. Ho and H. C. Kao,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  88  (2002) 151602.

B. Morariu and A. P. Polychronakos,
Nucl. Phys. B 634  (2002) 326.

G. V. Dunne, R. Jackiw and C. A. Trugenberger,
Phys. Rev. D 41  661 (1990).

J. Madore,
Phys. Lett. B 263  (1991) 245.

J. Lukierski, P. C. Stichel and W. J. Zakrzewski,
Annals Phys.  260  (1997) 224.


















A. Smailagic and E. Spallucci,

J. Phys. A 35 , L363 (2002),
arXiv:hep-th/0205242;


 I. Dadic, L. Jonke and S. Meljanac,
"Harmonic oscillator on noncommutative spaces",
arXiv:hep-th/0301066.
M. Chaichian, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and A. Tureanu,
"Comments on the Hydrogen Atom Spectrum in the Noncommutative Space",
arXiv:hep-th/0212259.

S. Bellucci and A. Nersessian,
"(Super)Oscillator on CP(N) and Constant Magnetic Field",
Phys. Rev. D (to appear),
arXiv:hep-th/0211070.
S. Bellucci and A. Nersessian,

Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 021702(R);
                    

ibid., Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  102  (2001) 227,
arXiv:hep-th/0103005.



