



















equation section 




 
 
 
F  
T  
U 
H 
h 
I 
A  






const  
rank  
i 
i   



1 2   



hep-th/0301085  
 

BRST-anti-BRST Symmetric Conversion of Second-Class Constraints 

I.A. Batalin and M.A. Grigoriev  Lebedev Physics
  Institute, RAS, Leninskiy 53, Moscow 117924, Russia 


 
  A general method of the BRST-anti-BRST symmetric conversion of
  second-class constraints is presented.  It yields a pair of
  commuting and nilpotent BRST-type charges that can be naturally
  regarded as BRST and anti-BRST ones.  Interchanging the BRST and
  anti-BRST generators corresponds to a symmetry between the original
  second-class constraints and the conversion variables, which
  enter the formalism on equal footing.












Introduction 
For first-class constraints, the well-known BFV-BRST quantization
method provides an adequate description of general constrained systems
at the classical and quantum levels .  But for second-class
systems, a proper counterpart of the BFV-BRST method is not yet
known.  Most of the well-established approaches to second-class
systems are based on the construction of an effective first-class
system that is equivalent to the original second-class
system .  Among these methods, the
most developed one is the so-called conversion
  method  .  In this approach, one introduces
additional variables , called conversion variables , and
extends second-class constraints by -dependent terms such that
the extended constraints become first-class.

The conversion method has proved a powerful tool for description and
quantization of second-class systems.  But the general conversion is
too ambiguous, and it seems natural to reduce this ambiguity by
imposing additional conditions on the conversion procedure.  A
well-known restriction consists in requiring the effective gauge
algebra to be of a fixed rank; a common choice is to take a -rank
(Abelian) effective gauge algebra.  This Abelian  conversion
is well studied; in particular, the existence theorem and a
constructive procedure are known for the effective
constraints .

In this paper, we take another route and reduce the ambiguity by
requiring the conversion procedure to respect extra symmetries.
Namely, we treat the original second-class constraints and conversion
variables on equal footing.  Technically, this implies that the
conversion variables appear as constraints  dual to
the original second-class constraints .  We then
proceed with the conversion keeping the symmetry between
 and  explicit.


The conversion is carried out in the framework of the BFV-BRST
approach.  At the level of the effective gauge system (converted
system), the symmetry between  and 
results in the BRST-anti-BRST invariance.  The BRST and anti-BRST charges
are associated to the appropriately
extended original constraints  and the extended dual
constraints  respectively.


The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. sec:basics , we
develop basics of our approach to conversion and show that the
resulting gauge system is naturally described by a pair of nilpotent
and commuting generators identified as the BRST and anti-BRST
generators.  In Sec. sec:QA , generating equations of the
BRST-anti-BRST symmetric conversion are reformulated as a certain
type of master equations with respect to the quantum
  antibracket  .  A more restricted version of the
formalism is considered in Sec. sec:special .  In this more
special approach, generating operators satisfy stronger conditions.
These conditions are also shown to allow the existence of a conversion
procedure for arbitrary original constraints .  In
Sec. sec:Hamiltonian , we consider construction of a unitarizing
Hamiltonian in the BRST-anti-BRST symmetric formulation.



Basics Let a second-class constrained system be determined by constraints
.  Their Dirac matrix is given
by
 
and is assumed to be invertible. To each constraint  we
associate its dual . We choose
 where  denotes
Grassmann parity of . Dual constraints plays a role of extra
degrees of freedom and therefore are defined on the appropriate
extension of the original phase space.  A basic example is provided by
taking  where
 are conversion variables and  depend on
phase space variables only.

In what follows we prefer to work in terms of generating functions (operators)
and not in terms of constraints. To this end let us introduce ghost variables
 and  associated either to
constraints  or . One assignees the 
following
Grassmann parities to the
ghost variables:





We also choose standard commutation relations and ghost number gradings
for variables  and 




The ghost number operator is then assumed to have the following
form:



Generating operators encoding constraints 
and  are denoted by  and 
respectively; their expansions with respect to ghost variables start as




and are subjected to the following ghost number prescriptions:
 


We are interested in constructing first-class constrained (gauge) system
equivalent to the original second-class one and entering constraints 
and  in a symmetric way. To this end we are looking for a pair
of generators  and  satisfying
 
 and  are to be understood as appropriate
extensions of the original generating operators  and
 respectively.

It is useful to introduce the following condensed notations:
 
The ghost number assignments then take the form
 
where the only nonvanishing components of  are
 and . We also introduce operator 
defined by



In terms of new notations conditions eq:nilpotency 
read as
 


In order to find  satisfying eq:nilpotency-short 
consider the following anzatz for 



where an operator  has been introduced.
Equations eq:nilpotency-short  take then the form:
 
2^a  ^b  
=
^a   ^b   
=


=
^a  ^b -()^-2 Z Z ^b    
+


+
4()^-1 
Z ^ab  
+2()^-2 
Z Z ^ab   =0.
It is natural to make this conditions satisfied by imposing the following
stronger conditions
 
so that second and third lines in eq:explicit  vanish separately.
It follows from eq:cond1  that  acts on
 as projector:
 


Given  and  such that eq:cond1  holds one arrives at a pair
of commuting and nilpotent BRST-like charges . They can be
understood as BRST and anti-BRST generators. To explain this in more details
let us consider explicitly lowest order equations coming
from eq:nilpotency .
Introducing the lowest
order structure functions according to
 
one arrives at the following explicit form
of the lowest order equations:
 
T  ^T_=0,

T_ T_ =
i U ^_ T_,
T  ^ T  ^ =
iT  ^U  _^ ,

T_ T  ^ 
=
i(U  ^ _T_+
T  ^U ^_ )+O(^2).
These relations coincide with those familiar from the standard BRST-anti-BRST
symmetric formulation.

Let us also note that the algebra formed by  and 
coincide with that in the  symmetric formalism with
 being a counterpart of the "new ghost number"
operator 

Formulation in terms of the quantum antibracket Generating equations eq:cond1  can be interpreted as
a type of master equations formulated in terms of the so-called
quantum antibracket . To show that consider the
following bracket operation:
 
In the case where  this structure is know as the
quantum antibracket . In terms of this structure
equations eq:cond1  take the following form:
 

One can also reformulate these equations in terms of
a projection operator 



so that one can express  as follows



Indeed, it follows from eq:masterZ  that 
satisfies
 


More special formulation  
As we have seen conditions eq:cond1  ensure nilpotency
and mutual commutativity of . One can either
consider  and  as independent quantities to be
defined by eq:cond1  or try to reduce the number
of unknowns. The later option leads a priory to a more
restricted class of solutions to eq:cond1 .
We choose this option and express   through 
by the following anzatz
 
where  with  being antisymmetric 
and
. As a consequence operators ,
and  satisfy the following relations:
 
where notations




are introduced.


In the case where  is given by eq:Z  conditions eq:cond1 
can be satisfied by imposing the following stronger ones:
 
These are to be understood as equations on 
ensuring nilpotency and mutual commutativity of
.
It also follows from Eq. eq:basic  that



This in turn implies that one can consider the following a little
bit more general expression for :




which are nilpotent provided  or
.



It is instructive to rewrite equations eq:basic 
in a condensed form directly in terms
of :
 
where





and  with . One can
then check that this equations does contain all relations eq:basic .

Contracting equation eq:Delta-comm  with 
and  one arrives at
 
and
 
respectively. The later equation is not equivalent to eq:Delta-comm 
while the former is in fact equivalent. It can also be rewritten
in terms of  as
 


It follows from nilpotency eq:nilpotency-short  and ghost number
grading eq:ghost  of
 that it can be considered as a BRST charge
of a gauge system equivalent to the original second
class one.  At the same time  can be understood
as respective anti-BRST charge. To illustrate the idea consider
the simplest case where original second-class constraints
are "Abelian" i.e. their commutators form a constant
operator-valued matrix 
. In this
case one can identify constraints 
with conversion variables . The simplest choice
is to require the following commutation relations of variables
:




One can then check that  and 
given by
 
are such that equations eq:basic  hold. Indeed, this fact can be 
easily seen
from the explicit expressions of  and 
 
The respective BRST and anti-BRST charges  and  have the 
form
 
Let us also consider explicitly the lowest order equation
on the constraints and structure functions encoded in Eqs. eq:basic .
For simplicity we consider the Poisson bracket version
(classical limit) of equations eq:basic . We also take all
constraints  and  to be bosonic.
The most general form of  allowed by the ghost number
and Grassmann parity prescriptions reads as:
 
^1=^_+
^^^_ 
_+,

^2=^_+
^ ^ ___+.
The expansion for  then has the form
 
^^_  +,

_ =_ _ -
^_ _

-^ __+,

^ =^ ^ -
^ _^ ,
and
 
In the lowest orders in ghost variables equations eq:basic 
then imply
 
_ ^ =^_,

Z_0 _  
+Z^_[ _] =0,
 ^  Z_0 
+ ^[   Z_^] =0.


To complete the section let we also present relations between
,
, and  which are simple consequences 
of the basic equations eq:basic . First, it is easy to see that
 
  =i(Z-G) , 
  =i(Z+G) ,

  =2 i, 
  =2i,
or in the short-hand notations



One further arrives at
 
  Z ^a =i^a

  =0,   =0.
 and
 
    =i ,
    =i .

An important consequence of the above relations is the fact that operator 
algebra
generated by  is a finite-dimensional Lie superalgebra
that contains all the generating operators. As a basis in the algebra one
can take the following operators:



 

Hamiltonian  Besides BRST generators  formulation of 
the quantum theory requires
specification of a unitarizing Hamiltonian. The first step
is to introduce pre-Hamiltonian  that satisfies
 
and whose expansion with respect to ghost variables starts as



Here, the ghost-independent term  is an "original Hamiltonian".
In the lowest orders in ghost variables classical limit of
Eq. eq:Hcond  implies






Here, we made use explicit expansions eq:Omega-exp 
of  and  with respect to the ghost variables.


A next step in gauge fixing is to introduce nonminimal variables
 and . They are assumed to 
have
the standard Grassmann parities and ghost numbers
 
and are also subjected to the following commutation relations
 

Nonminimal BRST charges are introduced according to
 
We use unified notation  with  and . Unlike
the  symmetric formalism  these nilpotent charges
do not commute:
 

The constrained system under consideration can be described just
by nilpotent BRST charge  and BRST-anti-BRST-invariant Hamiltonian 
.
(it can be also equivalently described by 
and ). Then there exists two natural proposals for unitarizing Hamiltonian




where  and  are respective gauge fixing fermions.
In order to remove gauge degeneracy it is sufficient to take
 and  in the "minimal" form:
 
where  and  are gauge conditions which
are supposed to be nondegenerate in the following sense:
matrices 




are nondegenerate. One can see that  and  are to be understood
as gauge fixing conditions associated to constraints  and
 respectively.

In spite of the fact that each pair  or 
can be used to describe correct physics we are interested in the
class of unitarizing Hamiltonians (and gauge fixing conditions)
respecting the symmetry between  and . To this end let
us consider a class of  corresponding to
 of the form 
for some even operator  of ghost number . The expression
for  then takes the form
 
It can be represented as
 
_complete =(i)^-2  _ab Q^a 
Q^b F  
+1 4 (i)^-2  g_ab Q^a Q^b  F 
=


=
-2  _ab Q^a Q^b F  
+1 2 (i)^-2 g_ab _^+_
^ F 
.
We note that besides the third term the expression for 
coincides with that in the -symmetric formalism. However,
presence of this (actually unavoidable) term reflects breaking down of
the  symmetry. The residual symmetry is that preserving both
 and  and its algebra can be shown to be
isomorphic to .

We also note that discussion of the unitarizing Hamiltonian also
applies to any commuting and nilpotent BRST charges  with
appropriate ghost numbers and boundary conditions. In particular, the
same expression works for a wider class of BRST charges considered in
Sec. sec:basics .




Conclusion  

We have constructed a conversion scheme that results in the
BRST-anti-BRST symmetric formulation of the effective first-class
constrained (gauge) system.  This is achieved by requiring an explicit
symmetry between the original second-class constraints 
and the extra degrees of freedom (conversion variables).  These
degrees of freedom enter the formalism as new constraints
 dual to the original constraints .
In the BFV-BRST framework, the two sets of constraints are encoded in
a pair of generators  and .  At the level of the
converted system, they are promoted to nilpotent and commuting
generators  and  that are identified as BRST and
anti-BRST charges.  The symmetry between the constraints  and
 then appears as a BRST-anti-BRST invariance of the
effective system.

It seems natural that generating equations of the BRST-anti-BRST
symmetric conversion can be recast to a master equation form if one
makes use of the quantum antibracket structure  (see
also ).  Indeed, a quantum antibracket master equation
encodes projector properties of the "master action" (either  or
 in the paper), which allow constructing nilpotent generators
 and  from the original generators  and
.   From this general standpoint, the conversion can be
understood as a certain projection procedure.

The existence of the BRST-anti-BRST symmetric conversion follows from
the explicit solution eq:solution-exp  given in
Sec. sec:special  for the "Abelian" constraints (in the
general situation, one can always bring constraints to an "Abelian"
basis and then apply the inverse transformation to the generating
operators.  Therefore, there always exists a solution to the
generating equations that correctly describes the physical sector).
But there remains an open problem to describe the structure of a
general solution to the generating equations.  The difficulties are
here related to a rather nonstandard structure of the equations.

As a final remark, it is worth mentioning another point of view on the
method developed in the paper.  Instead of treating the dual
constraints  as extra variables, we can assume that
the second-class system at hand is determined by a set of second-class
constraints that splits into two halves  and
 such that each half is itself a set of
second-class constraints.  In this case, our approach results in a
BRST-anti-BRST symmetric effective gauge system that involves the
constraints  and  in a symmetric way.  In this
approach, however, the constraints  and  are
required to satisfy some additional relations coming from generating
equations.




Acknowledgments  We are grateful to 
A.M. Semikhatov and I.V. Tyutin for illuminating discussions.  The
work of I.A.Batalin  was supported by the President grant
00-15-96566, RFBR grant 02-02-16944, and INTAS grant 00-00262.  The work
of M.A.Grigoriev  was supported by the RFBR grant 02-01-00930,
INTAS grant 00-00262, and RFBR grant 02-01-06096 for support of young 
scientists.

 33 

         Batalin I.A. and  Vilkovisky G.A.,
         Relativistic S-matrix of dynamical systems with boson
         and fermion constraints, 
         Phys. Lett. B 69  (1977) 309-312.          

         Fradkin E.S. and Vilkovisky G.A. Quantization
         of relativistic systems with
         constraints,   Phys. Lett. B 55  (1975) 224-226.  

         Batalin I.A. and Fradkin E.S.,
         A generalized canonical formalism and quantization of
         reducible gauge theories, 
           Phys.Lett. B 122       (1983) 157-164.   

         Batalin I.A. and Fradkin E.S.
         Operatorial quantization of relativistic dynamical systems
         subject to first class constraints, 
         Phys.Lett. B 128  303-308 (1983).             

         Batalin I.A., Fradkin E.S.
         Operatorial quantization of dynamical systems subject to
         constraints. A further study of the construction, 
         Ann Inst. Henri Poincare  49  (1988) 145-214.


 L.D. Faddeev, S.L. Shatashvili, Realization of the
Schwinger term in the Gauss law and the possibility of
correct quantization of a theory with anomalies ,
 Phys. Lett. B 167 , 225 (1986)

 I.A. Batalin and E.S. Fradkin,
Operator Quantization Of Dynamical Systems With Irreducible
First And Second Class Constraints,  Phys. Lett. B180 , 157 (1986).

 I.A. Batalin and E.S. Fradkin, Operatorial Quantization Of Dynamical Systems Subject To Second Class
Constraints,  Nucl. Phys. B279 , 514 (1987).




I. A. Batalin, S. L. Lyakhovich and I. V. Tyutin,
"Split Involution And Second Class Constraints," 
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 7 , 1931 (1992).


I. Batalin and R. Marnelius,
"Gauge theory of second class constraints without extra variables," 
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 16 , 1505 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0106087].



 I.A. Batalin and I.V. Tyutin, Existence theorem for the effective gauge algebra in the generalized
        canonical formalism with Abelian conversion of second class
        constraints,  Int. J. Mod. Phys. A6 , 3255 (1991).


I.A. Batalin, E.S. Fradkin and T.E. Fradkina,
Generalized Canonical Quantization Of Dynamical Systems With
  Constraints And Curved Phase Space, 
Nucl. Phys. B332 , 723 (1990).

I. A. Batalin, M. A. Grigoriev and S. L. Lyakhovich,
"Star product for second class constraint systems
from a BRST theory," 
Theor. Math. Phys.  128 , 1109 (2001)
[Teor. Mat. Fiz.  128 , 324 (2001)]
[arXiv:hep-th/0101089].


















I. Batalin, S. Lyakhovich and R. Marnelius,

Phys. Lett. B 534 , 201 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0112175].




I. Batalin and R. Marnelius,
"General quantum antibrackets," 
Theor. Math. Phys.  120 , 1115 (1999)
[Teor. Mat. Fiz.  120 , 358 (1999)]
[arXiv:hep-th/9905083].

"Quantum antibrackets," 
Phys. Lett. B 434 , 312 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9805084].



I. A. Batalin and I. V. Tyutin,

Phys. Lett. B 302 , 47 (1993).



I. A. Batalin and I. V. Tyutin,

Phys. Lett. B 317 , 354 (1993)
[arXiv:hep-th/9305167].







Canonical Formalism With Abelian Conversion Of Second Class







I. A. Batalin, P. M. Lavrov and I. V. Tyutin,
"Extended Brst Quantization Of Gauge Theories In The Generalized 
Canonical Formalism," 
J. Math. Phys.  31 , 6 (1990).


Igor Batalin and Igor Tyutin,
"BRST-Invariant Constraint Algebra in Terms of Commutators and Quantum 
Antibrackets" , [arXiv:hep-th/0301043].




