
























  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 

(corresponding author : _speaker) 
 

  
 

1truecm
 

5truemm
1truecm
Abstract: 
1truecm
 








Mod. Phys. Lett.                 
Nucl. Phys.                       
Phys. Lett.                       
Phys. Rev.                        
^                        

equation section 

g    
N   
O   
W   
C   
R   
    
   
Im  
Re   

                 









Nontrivial RR two-form field strength and     
SU(3)-structure                               
                                              
                                              
                                              


 










peter.kaste@cpht.polytechnique.fr





  




















Peter Kaste, Ruben Minasian, Michela Petrini and  Alessandro 
Tomasiello




 












Centre de Physique The orique, Ecole 
Polytechnique(Unite  mixte du CNRS et de l'EP, UMR 7644) 
 
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France

  

kaste, ruben, petrini, tomasiel@cpht.polytechnique.fr










 









We discuss how in the presence of a nontrivial RR two-form field
strength and nontrivial dilaton
the conditions of preserving supersymmetry 
on six-dimensional manifolds lead to  
generalized monopole and Killing spinor equations. 
We show that the manifold is
Kahler in the ten-dimensional string frame if .
We then determine explicitly the intrinsic torsion of the
SU(3)-structure on six-manifolds that result via 
Kaluza-Klein reduction from seven-manifolds with
G-structure of generic intrinsic torsion.
Lastly we give explicitly the
intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure for an =1 supersymmetric
background in the presence of nontrivial RR
two-form field strength and nontrivial dilaton.

 






Introduction 









 
A better understanding of =1 supersymmetric compactifications of
string theory to four dimensions is an important step towards more
realistic string theories. A promising avenue to take is to break the
=2 supersymmetry of the well-studied Calabi-Yau compactifications
of type II string theories down to =1 by including a background
of RR field strength that may describe either internal RR fluxes or
spacetime filling D-branes. Of course their presence back-reacts on the
metric. In particular the new
supersymmetric ground state is no longer a Calabi-Yau manifold. It is
an interesting question to study the geometry of these minimally
supersymmetric ground states and to characterize how their structure
deviates from the one of a Calabi-Yau. 

In these questions have been addressed for
compactifications of type IIA with a background of nontrivial RR
two-form field strength and nontrivial dilaton. This is the situation
that is easiest to analyze, since the triple  of the
groundstate metric , the background two-form field strength  and
the dilaton  can be described in terms
of a G manifold . Namely this is the internal manifold of the
purely geometrical M-theory compactification which via Kaluza-Klein
reduction gives rise to the above type IIA configuration.

In these proceedings we first 
construct explicitly an SU(3)-structure 
 on the six-dimensional base
space  obtained by Kaluza-Klein reduction from a seven-dimensional
manifold  with G-structure. We then analyze 
the constraints that preserving =1 supersymmetry in four dimensions
imposes on this SU(3)-structure by requiring the G-structure on
 to be torsion-free. These constraints can be cast into a primitivity
constraint on , a monopole equation relating  to  and
a Killing spinor equation on the associated SU(3)-invariant spinor. 
It immediately follows that the manifold  is Kahler 
in the string frame if
the primitive part of  vanishes.

Next we compute explicitly the intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure
 on  for a generic G-structure on . Specializing
this result to the case of torsion-free G-structure, we give the
intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure for an =1 supersymmetric
background in the presence of nontrivial RR
two-form field strength and nontrivial dilaton. 
Concretely,
we show that
in the notation of its components are given by
, , 
 and 
.
 
This intrinsic torsion is the obstruction for the Levi-Civita
connection of  to have holonomy SU(3). It can therefore be
seen as a measure of how the manifold fails to be a Calabi-Yau. 
Recently the concept of intrinsic torsion of -structures has been
applied to compactifications with background fields in
. 
In it is
in particular argued to describe the mirror of NS three-form fluxes
in an otherwise purely geometrical mirror compactification. 
For =1 supersymmetric compactifications to three dimensions in
the presence of background fields  and  and for further
references we refer to.
                                           
From a G-structure to an SU(3)-structure 

Let  be the seven-dimensional manifold 
to which one lifts in M-theory and
 the background metric on . 
Via Kaluza-Klein reduction it is related to the
background metric  on the internal space  of the type IIA
compactification by
 
where  is the RR one-form potential and  the dilaton of
type IIA. The parameters  and  determine the frame of
 in ten-dimensional type IIA. 
They take the values = for 
the string frame.

Suppose  carries a G-structure. 
The latter is specified by the doublet
 where  is a G-invariant, nowhere vanishing
three-form on . It can be represented as
 
where  for  is a frame of orthonormal one-forms
w.r.t.  and  are the structure constants of the
imaginary octonions. Moreover, the G-structure singles out a
unique G-invariant spinor . It is real (Majorana) 
and satisfies
 
If and only if the G-structure is torsion-free, the Levi-Civita
connection associated to  has holonomy in  and in that case
the spinor  will be covariantly constant w.r.t. the Levi-Civita
connection.    
This spinor  on  is then the internal part of the supersymmetry
generator in the =1 supersymmetric M-theory compactification on
. 
It is projectible onto  along the U(1)-fibers of the
Kaluza-Klein bundle  if it is constant along these
fibers. In that case it becomes the internal part of the
supersymmetry generator in type IIA. 
Note that since this constant
along the fiber may vary over , the spinor  as seen on 
has a U(1) gauge symmetry. In particular  need only carry a
Spin-structure and not a Spin-structure.  

If  is projectible and
whether the G-structure is torsion-free or not,
the identity () projects on  onto
  
where we have defined  and 

for  and where  is the chirality
operator on . Furthermore
 
The spinor  on  can hence be used to build nowhere vanishing
forms 
 
on . Moreover, 
since , this   
defines a natural almost complex structure on  with respect to
which  is automatically hermitian, with associated two-form
. Splitting each tangent plane into a holomorphic and
antiholomorphic space w.r.t.  one sees that  is the
real part of a -form . In particular
the forms  and  are not only nowhere vanishing on , they
are also by construction invariant under the action of SU(3) on the
tangent bundle . Altogether, the triple  defines
an SU(3)-structure on . Its associated SU(3) invariant spinor is
. 

In summary, if  is a (Kaluza-Klein) U(1)-bundle over  and has
a G-structure with an associated projectible G-invariant
spinor, then the base  carries an SU(3)-structure. This implies
that the structure group of  is SU(3). However, the
SU(3)-structure on  will generically have torsion, even if the
G-structure was torsion-free. 
I.e. although
there exist connections on  that are compatible with the metric
and have holonomy SU(3), generically none of them will be torsion-free. In
that case the Levi-Civita connection cannot have holonomy SU(3) and
 is not a Calabi-Yau. The intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure
 is the obstruction for it to be a Calabi-Yau.

In order to see how  fails to be a Calabi-Yau, we look at the
differential equations satisfied by  on  or alternatively by
 and .

The monopole and Killing spinor equations  
   
Let the G-structure on  be torsion-free so that we preserve
=1 supersymmetry in four dimensions.
The covariant constancy of  on  reduces to the following
system on 
  
 
where we have defined 
 and where  denotes
the covariant derivative w.r.t. the Levi-Civita connection on . 
Since  are
linearly independent, the latter of these equations gives
  

 
 
where  denotes the contraction of forms w.r.t. the metric
.
On a Kahler manifold the first of these would imply that
 is primitive and even though  might not be Kahler we
will refer to () as a primitivity constraint. 
The second equation is a generalized monopole
equation. It relates  to the  and  parts of
 w.r.t. the almost complex structure. 
Inserting these into () leads to the following Killing
spinor equation on  for ,
  
This implies that the only nonvanishing components of the Nijenhuis
tensor associated to the almost complex structure 
 are
 
where we have used the holomorphic/antiholomorphic basis of 
w.r.t. . The almost complex structure defined by the spinor
 is therefore integrable if and only if 
. Since  we find that in this case  is
Kahler for , i.e. defines a torsion-free U(3)-structure. 
The Killing spinor equation on  then reduces to
 
Since  is not covariantly constant w.r.t. the Levi-Civita
connection for nontrivial ,  and , 
the SU(3)-structure  however still has torsion. 



The general relation between the intrinsic G-torsion and
  SU(3)-torsion 


The intrinsic torsion of the G-structure  
takes values in , where 
so(7)= and can be decomposed as  
where  denotes -forms that transform in the
representation  of G. In particular these
representations imply that
  
where  denotes the contraction of forms w.r.t. the
metric .
The components ()
are determined through  and  as  
 
Let us furthermore introduce the notation
 
Then the constraints () take the form
  
 
In the following all the contractions will be taken w.r.t. the metric
 and we will drop the label, i.e. 
. 

Analogously the intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure  
takes values in su(3), where 
so(6)=su(3)su(3). It can be decomposed as

 

where  denotes -forms that
transform in the 
representation  of SU(3). In particular these
representations imply that
 
We can similarly 
express the components of its intrinsic torsion through ,
 and  as  
 
where we have used the (3,0)-form
  
as well as
   
The minus signs on the imaginary parts result from the fact that
compared to we use the opposite
orientation, where . 

Using 
  
 
equations (), () and
()-(), as well as 
,
one derives the following four identities,
  
 
From these equations we can project onto the various 's by
suitable contractions and express them through the intrinsic torsion
 of the G-structure. 
To this end it is convenient to decompose forms as
  
 
where subscripts "0" denote primitive forms.
Using projectors such as
  
the components  of the intrinsic torsion of the SU(3)-structure
 can be expressed through the components 
 of the intrinsic torsion of the G-structure
 as,
  
 
The decomposition of the 's into the
's at the level of representations
figures already in. Equations 
()-() determine the explicit coefficients that
appear in this decomposition for a metric () of the form
that appears in Kaluza-Klein reductions to an arbitrary frame.

Let's now specialize again to the case of torsion-free
G-structure, where all the right hand sides vanish. From
() and () we recover the primitivity constraint
()
 
whereas equations (), () as well as 
(),() and their complex conjugates give us the
monopole equation ()
 
In addition to these two constraints, the components of the intrinsic
torsion of the SU(3)-structure in the case of torsion-free
G-structure are given by
 

Moreover, we recover the result from the previous section that 
for  the manifold  is
Kahler if , since then the only nonvanishing component 
of the intrinsic torsion of  is .

   
 



Acknowledgement  

We would like to thank B. Acharya, D. Calderbank, M. Douglas, 
D. Martelli and A. Moroianu for useful discussions. 
PK would furthermore like to thank the organizers of the 35th
Ahrenshoop Symposium for the invitation to participate in a
stimulating conference and the opportunity to present this work.  
This work is supported in part by EU contract HPRN-CT-2000-00122 and by 
INTAS contracts 55-1-590 and 00-0334. PK and MP are supported by 
European Commission Marie 
Curie Postdoctoral Fellowships under contract numbers  
HPMF-CT-2000-00919 and HPMF-CT-2001-01277.  

 77 

P. Kaste, R. Minasian, M. Petrini and A. Tomasiello, 
"Kaluza-Klein bundles and manifolds of exceptional holonomy,"
JHEP 0209  (2002) 033, arXiv:hep-th/0206213. 

  
S. Chiossi, S. Salamon, 
"The intrinsic torsion of  and  structures" 
Proc. conf. Differential Geometry Valencia 2001, math.DG/0202282. 

J.P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, S. Pakis and D. Waldram,
"G-structures and wrapped NS5-branes," arXiv:hep-th/0205050.

S. Gurrieri, J. Louis, A. Micu and D. Waldram,
"Mirror symmetry in generalized Calabi-Yau compactifications,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211102.

G.L. Cardoso, G. Curio, G. Dall'Agata, D. Lust, P. Manousselis,
G. Zoupanos, "Non-Kahler string backgrounds and their five torsion
classes," arXiv:hep-th/0211118.

J.P. Gauntlett and S. Pakis, "The geometry of d=11 Killing spinors,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212008. 

E. Goldstein and S. Prokushkin, "Geometric model for complex
non-Kahler manifolds with SU(3)-structure,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212307. 

 
M. Cvetic, G. W. Gibbons, H. Lu and C. N. Pope,  
"Almost special holonomy in type IIA and M theory,"  
Nucl. Phys. B 638  (2002) 186,  
arXiv:hep-th/0203060.  

















