


A gauge invariant and string independent fermion correlator in 
the Schwinger model  
D. G. Barci, L. E. Oxman and S. P. Sorella    


UERJ, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro    

Instituto de Fi sica, Departamento de Fi sica
Teo rica,    

 Rua Sa o Francisco Xavier 524, 20550-013 Maracana ,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil    
 
We introduce a gauge invariant and string independent two-point fermion correlator 
which is analyzed in the context of the Schwinger model (). We also derive an effective infrared worldline action for this correlator, thus enabling the computation of its infrared behavior. Finally, we briefly discuss possible perspectives for the string independent correlator in the  effective models for the normal state of HTc superconductors.

 
Introduction 

In the last years, a renewed interest in the study of quantum electrodynamics 
(QED) in lower dimensions ( and ) is observed. One of the reasons is that 
several models of strongly correlated electrons are described in terms of fermions 
coupled to gauge fields. For instance, one promising model for the pseudo-gap phase 
of an underdopped cuprate system is based on a  gauge theory. More precisely, 
this model describes the low energy fermionic excitations of a d-wave superconductor in 
such a way that the nodal quasi-particles are associated to massless Dirac fermions 
interacting with a gauge field, which represents the phase fluctuations of the superconductor 
gap. Vortex phase configurations play an important role for the dynamics of the model, after a coarse graining process they lead to a partition function coinciding with that of noncompact, parity conserving .

In the abovementioned systems, the absence of quasi-particles above the critical temperature , observed in ARPES and tunneling experiments, suggests that the electron (hole) propagator has a Luttinger like behavior,
 
where  is the anomalous dimension that controls the infrared (IR) behavior. Note that, in configuration space, a positive  corresponds to an electron propagator with a decaying behavior which is faster than the noninteracting one (). 

Wether the non-Fermi liquid behavior () is verified or not in the  model is  a nontrivial problem, since a detailed relationship among real electrons or holes and  fermions is unavailable. As a consequence, in the recent literature, a few proposals for the electron propagator have been introduced. In Refs., the authors showed that an important requirement is that this propagator should be gauge invariant. In particular, they 
considered the correlator
 
where  is a straight line running from  to .

A nonperturbative calculation of the anomalous exponent  for the correlator () is a very hard task, while most perturbative approaches are very difficult to control, giving rise to some conflicting results about this parameter-. In fact, some of these calculations indicate a negative , invalidating the interpretation of () as the propagator for electron modes with repulsive interactions-. This led to the search of other candidates to represent this propagator, such as the two-point correlation function of the nonlocal operator , or to look for anomalous nonfermionic response functions. However, the identification of a proper correlator to represent the electron propagator still remains an open problem (see the discussion in).

In this work we shall consider the following gauge invariant, string independent two-point fermion correlator 
 
where  represents the average over classes of strings, running from  to , which are equivalent under reparametrizations. Our aim is to present a detailed computation of the IR behavior of () in the simpler and more tractable case of the Schwinger model. This is motivated by the following reasons. 

Firstly, in  as well as in  the coupling constant is dimensionful, so that in both cases there is nothing to prevent the correlator () from a dependence on the shape of the string . Then, in both cases the string averaging in () will produce nontrivial modifications with respect to (). 

Secondly, in Ref., the negative value of  for the  string dependent correlator () was compared to the situation in , where this correlator also displays an anomalous negative exponent (see Eq.()).(Note however that the  correlator is not singular at , because of the dynamical mass generation for the gauge field.)  Then, by studying the effect the string averaging has on the IR behavior of the  string independent correlator in , we expect to shed some light on the behavior this correlator could possibly display in the physically relevant  case. 

In , unlike the  case, there is a great simplification as () can be computed exactly for an arbitrary string . In this way we can concentrate ourselves to obtain an effective IR string or "worldline" action for , and then to study the effect the worldline path integration has on the correlator.
In section 2, we review the calculation of the fermion two-point Green's function by means of 
the decoupling technique. In section 3, we compute the effective IR worldline action in 
. The IR behavior of the gauge invariant, string independent correlator is presented 
in section 4, while the worldline path integration is detailed in the appendix.
Section 5 is devoted to the presentation of our conclusions and to the discussion of possible perspectives for the case of .

Two-point  fermion Green's function 

As a warm up, and in order to present our conventions, we review in this section the 
decoupling technique for the computation of the Schwinger model Green's function,
 
 
We work in euclidean space, and consider a representation where . In the Lorentz gauge, the gauge field 
can be written according to . The fermion and gauge degrees of freedom can be decoupled by means of a chiral change of variables, 
, , that is,
 
In terms of the new variables we have
 
and the fermion correlator reads
 
where  is Fujikawa's anomalous Jacobian:
 
This corresponds to a regularization where the gauge symmetry 
 
is preserved at the quantum level.

The different components of the matrix in (), have the form
 
where
 
The diagonal components vanish, as they involve
 and  correlations. On the other hand, the
-factor associated with the off-diagonal components is the same for both  
 and  correlations. Therefore, performing the gaussian path integral the well known result is obtained,
 
where  is the free massless Dirac propagator and
 
 
Note that  can be absorved by means of a wave function renormalization. For large
 the massive Green function decays exponentially, while . Therefore, the asymptotic behavior of the fermion correlator in the Schwinger model is 
(see Ref.),
  


Effective IR worldline action for  

Let us consider the gauge invariant, string dependent correlator () for the Schwinger model, that is,
 
where  is a smooth open string running from  to . Using decoupling techniques, this correlator has been computed for a straight line in Refs..
Again, the only nonvanishing components in () are the
off-diagonal ones. For instance, the component containing the  correlation function reads
 
where
 
and , with
 
The -gaussian integral in () is
 
where
 
This exponent can be written as , where  collects the terms involving one -field and one -current, and  (resp. ) is the term containing two -fields (resp. two -currents). In particular,  is the same exponent 
that appears in the two-point fermion Green's function (), so that,
 
The term containing two -currents results
 
For the crossed term we have,
 
where we have used the property that  is a function of .
When the points  and  are joined by a straight line,  vanishes, as ,  and  are parallel along this curve.

Let us compute now the large distance approximation for the worldline action, that is, the string dependent part of (). To this aim, we make use of the approximation  () and we consider a smooth string , satisfying
 
We underline that the worldline action is reparametrization invariant, it only depends on the worldline's shape. For the class of strings () we can redefine the parameter , according to
 
Of course, in the new parametrization we have
 
which implies
 
where  gives the string transverse deformation with respect to the straight line.
As the string runs from  to , we must have
 
Then, we can write
 
This is a double-line integral with a kernel which is localized on a scale of the order of . Therefore, for a fixed , the leading contribution to  comes
from values of , where 
. On this range, and for smooth strings (),
we can make use, in the integrand of (), of the approximations
 
and
 
to obtain,
 
The integral over  can be estimated by taking the limit . Moreovere, by means of the change of variables , we get 
 
Summarizing, 
 
where
 

Let us turn now to the analysis of the crossed term (). In general, using (), this term contains two contributions coming from the massive and massless Green's functions, respectively.
 
At large distances, or equivalently, when  is large, the massive -functions in () are well localized near the extrema  or  of the string .  Thus, as before, the contribution to () coming from this small (almost straight) segments is suppressed. Then, the large distance behavior of  comes from the massless Green function and reads
 
Using , we obtain
 
where the limits are performed along the string . We can also write
 
where  (resp. ) is the angle relative to the direction of  of 
the vector tangent to the string at the point  (resp. ). We note that the angle  must be considered as positive (resp. negative) when the tangent vector is obtained from an anti-clockwise (resp. clockwise) rotation of .

Summarizing the results we have obtained, () is given by
 
and at large distances,
 

The gauge invariant, string independent  correlator and its IR behavior 

Now, let us consider the gauge invariant, string independent correlation function
() for the Schwinger model. Using (), () and (), the off-diagonal component in (), containing the  correlation function, reads
 
It is interesting to note that for every path  running from  to , we have a path  which is obtained by reflecting  with respect to the straight 
line joining  and . It is easy to see that , while 
. Therefore, the ,  pair contribution to the path integral is
 
When the ,  correlation function is considered, we have to replace   in the equation (), which implies . Then, from (), the factor coming from the string path integral coincides for both correlation functions, and we can write
 

Now, in order to obtain the infrared behavior of , we will consider the large distance approximation () and the path integral in () performed over the subset of smooth strings characterized by the condition (). On this subset, each equivalence class can be represented by means of the parametrization (), that is, we will path integrate over the string transverse fluctuations . We note that in terms of , the 
approximated  in () is, 
 
After a field renormalization we get
 
where the  path-integral is performed with the boundary conditions given in (). Of course, the saddle point contribution () in () corresponds to the asymptotic behavior of the string dependent correlator () evaluated on a straight line,
 
However, the path integral over the string introduces in () a nontrivial modification with respect to the asymptotic behavior (). In fact, the integration over the 
string transverse fluctuations in () is equivalent to a problem of quantum mechanics, that is, 
the evaluation of the propagator for a one dimensional "free particle" with position , plus perturbations at the boundaries. This propagator is computed in the appendix and reads,
 
Then, at large distances, the gauge invariant, string independent two-point correlation 
function receives a factor  coming from the factor  in Eq.(), that is, 
 

Note that the behaviors () and (), corresponding to 
the string dependent and string independent correlators, respectively, can be written as
 
while
 
As a consequence, we obtain the low-momentum behaviors,
 
From the expressions () and () it is apparent that the string path integration  yields a different exponent with respect to the case where a fixed curve  is considered.   


Discussion 

In this work, we have computed the effective IR worldline action for the string independent correlator () in the context of . We have 
obtained the IR behavior for this correlator, showing that the integration over the string fluctuations leads to an infrared decay which is faster than that associated with the string dependent one. Of course, in , the dynamical mass generation for the gauge field prevents a singular behavior of the correlators in () when the limit  is considered.

In the physically interesting noncompact, parity conserving  models for the normal phase of HTc superconductors, such dynamical mass generation is absent (see and references therein). 
Despite this difference,  and  share some similarities.

Both models display a negative anomalous exponent for the string dependent correlator (). In particular, in , some authors- have obtained the Luttinger like behavior () with ,   being the number of flavors.

Also, both models contain a dimensionful coupling constant, so that a nontrivial worldline action is expected in . In particular, based on the string independent  correlator in Eq.(), which contains an additional factor  coming from the string average, we expect that a similar effect could take place in the case of . This would imply a string independent  correlator with a power like decaying behavior which is faster than the string dependent one. If this is the case, depending on the number of flavors , the positive correction to  coming from the string average could give a final positive anomalous dimension.

This leads us to conjecture that the gauge invariant, string independent correlator () is a candidate to represent a sensible electron propagator in  models for HTc superconductivity.
 
In this regard, it would be very useful to obtain a reliable approximation scheme where these points could be checked, as well as to analyze the possibility of deriving the string averaged correlator by means of a careful coarse graining process in the underlying model for the phase fluctuations of the superconductor gap.



Acknowledgements 

The Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnolo gico
CNPq-Brazil, the Fundac  a  o de Amparo a   Pesquisa do Estado
do Rio de Janeiro (Faperj) and the SR2-UERJ are acknowledged for the
financial support.

Appendix 

Here, for completness, we compute the path integral over the strings in the second line of (). In general, we have
 
where , , and the limit  
() is understood. We can also write,
 
Now, we can change variables  and 
, and integrate the -functions:
 
and performing the quadratic integral, we get
 
where , and .   
Of course, when  we have the usual free particle propagator. 
In the case we are interested (see Eq.()) we have , , , and , the path integral factor is real and coincides with the result showed in ().


 99 

 W. Rantner and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86  3871 (2001).

 J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 227003 (2001); Z. Tesanovic and M. Franz, ibid  87 , 257003 (2001).

  M. Franz, Z. Tesanovic, O. Vafek,
Phys. Rev. B66 , 054535 (2002), cond-mat/0204536.

 W. Rantner and X.-G. Wen, cond-mat/0105540.

 D.V. Khveshchenko, Nucl. Phys. B642 , 515 (2002).

 D.V. Khveshchenko, Phys. Rev. B65 , 235111 (2002); cond-mat/0205106.

 V.P. Gusynin, D.V. Khveshchenko, M. Reenders, cond-mat/0207372.

 M.Franz, T. Pereg-Barnea, D.E. Sheehy and Z. Tesanovic, cond-mat/0211119.

 J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 128 , 2425 (1962).

 R. Roskies and F.A. Schaposnik, Phys. Rev. D23 , 558
(1981).

 C.M. Naon, Phys. Rev. D31 , 2035 (1985). 

 K. Fujikawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42  1195 (1979) ; Phys. Rev. D21 , 2848 (1980).

 K. Stam, J. Phys. G9 , L229 (1983).

 I. Sachs and A. Wipf, Helv. Phys. Acta 65 , 652 (1992).

 J.V. Steele, J.J.M. Verbaarschot and I. Zahed, Phys. Rev. D51 , 5915
(1995).

