








theorem Theorem 
acknowledgement [theorem]Acknowledgement 
algorithm [theorem]Algorithm 
axiom [theorem]Axiom 
case [theorem]Case 
claim [theorem]Claim 
conclusion [theorem]Conclusion 
condition [theorem]Condition 
conjecture [theorem]Conjecture 
corollary [theorem]Corollary 
criterion [theorem]Criterion 
definition [theorem]Definition 
example [theorem]Example 
exercise [theorem]Exercise 
lemma [theorem]Lemma 
notation [theorem]Notation 
problem [theorem]Problem 
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
remark [theorem]Remark 
solution [theorem]Solution 
summary [theorem]Summary 

 
 
CAMS/03-01


 
Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking for Massive Spin-2
Interacting with Gravity  Ali  H.
Chamseddine (email: chams@aub.edu.lb)   
Center for Advanced Mathematical Sciences (CAMS)
and

Physics Department, American University of Beirut, Lebanon.
 
 
Abstract 
An action for a massless graviton interacting with a
massive tensor field is proposed. The model is based on coupling
the metric tensor to an  gauge theory spontaneously broken
to . The symmetry breaking is achieved by using a Higgs
multiplet containing a scalar field and a vector field related by
a constraint. We show that in the non-unitary gauge and for the
Fierz-Pauli form of the mass term, the six degrees of freedom of
the massive tensor are identified with  two tensor helicities, two
vector helicities of the Goldstone vector, and two scalars present
in the Goldstone multiplet. The propagators of this system are
well behaved, in contrast to the system consisting of two tensors.

Introduction 

It is well known that the action for massive spin-2 field does not have a
smooth limit to the massless case, and there are many
doubts in the literature about the consistency of this theory,
,. The Fierz-Pauli mass term is required to give mass to
the five dynamical degrees of freedom expected for a massive spin-2 field
 . In a covariant formulation, the massive spin-2 field is
represented, like the graviton, by a symmetric tensor. However, gauge freedom
associated with diffeomorphism invariance guarantees that the graviton is
massless. This means that there are six degrees of freedom associated with the
symmetric tensor for the massive spin-2 field, as the four gauge degrees of
freedom resulting from diffeomorphisms, having been used for the graviton, are
not available. The Fierz-Pauli choice for the mass term decouples the
independent sixth scalar degree of freedom from the five massive spin-2
degrees of freedom, only at the linearized level,. Quantum
corrections do not preserve the Fierz-Pauli form of the mass term, and implies
that the sixth degree of freedom will have ghost interactions. The
renewed interest in massive spin-2 fields (also referred to as massive
gravitons) comes from different directions, mainly from brane models where a
different metric is taken on each of the branes,,
. As there is only one diffeomorphism to be preserved by the full
system, only one combination of the metric tensors can be associated with the
massless graviton. The other combination(s) will not have diffeomorphism
invariance and will (each) correspond to six degrees of freedom.  The mixing
of the metrics is governed by the Fierz-Pauli choice, which guarantees that
the sixth scalar mode decouples at the linearized level.  When quantum
corrections are taken into account, one finds that the scalar mode acquires a
kinetic term with ghosts.  The propagator of the massive field does not have
a smooth  limit, and suffers from the Dam-Veltman
discontinuity,. Recently, it was shown by Arkani-Hamed,
Georgi and Schwartz, that the pathological behavior of the massive
graviton propagator could be regulated by spontaneously breaking the symmetry
of the two diffeomorphisms. This was done by introducing a Goldstone vector
field which maps the coordinates of one brane to the other. This is similar to
the use of Stueckelberg field for the description of massive gravity
.

The idea in is closely related to an approach proposed many years
ago by Chamseddine, Salam and Strathdee for strong gravity
. The system considered in is based on the gauge symmetry
 broken spontaneously to  through a Higgs field
transforming under both gauge groups(In a supergravity
system based on gauging the graded algebra  was
considered. Here we shall only consider the bosonic version.) . It was shown
that in the unitary gauge a Fierz-Pauli term does arise for one combination of
the gauge fields associated with the massive graviton, while the other
combination gave a massless graviton. The interactions of the Higgs field
could be evaluated by working in the non-unitary gauge where the Goldstone
mode is kept. The work in depends on the idea that the
gravitational field could be formulated as a gauge theory of the  gauge
group where the spin-connection is taken as the gauge field of the 
subgroup of  The vierbein is the gauge field of the four remaining
generators of ,. The massive graviton was tuned to
have a very heavy mass and very strong coupling. This arrangement is not
necessary, and it is now preferable to have a very light graviton with weak
coupling. Although this formulation is very elegant, the Higgs structure in
the non-unitary gauge is complicated making the analysis of the Goldstone
multiplet non transparent. The complication is due to the fact that no
space-time metric is used but instead gauge fields are introduced, which then
produce a metric as a product of the vierbein gauge fields. To simplify this
model and keep track of the Higgs interactions, we shall consider instead the
coupling of the metric tensor to a gauge theory based on  spontaneously
broken to  through the Higgs mechanism. In this way the structure of
the massive spin-2 field coupled to a massless graviton will be transparent.

The plan of this paper is as follows. In section two the action representing
the interaction of a metric tensor coupled to  gauge field and a Higgs
multiplet is constructed. In section three the action is expanded in terms of
 representations of the  fields. In section four the action is
analyzed in the unitary gauge. In section five the analysis of the action is
done in a non-unitary gauge and the degrees of freedom identified. Section six
is the conclusion.

The action for graviton coupled to a massive spin-2 field 

Consider a metric tensor  on a manifold  and the
Einstein-Hilbert action associated with it



where  Consider also the gauge group  and the
gauge field  associated with it. This can be expanded in terms of the
 subgroup,





which satisfies the symmetry condition




where  is the charge conjugation matrix. It also satisfies the reality
condition



implying that  and  are real. The  gauge
transformation of the gauge field is given by



where the gauge parameter  can be expanded in terms of the 
components




The component form of the infinitesimal gauge transformations read
* 
The gauge covariant field strengths are defined by




which transforms as  This
can be resolved into




where
* 
Now introduce the Goldstone field  in the antisymmetric
representation of 



also subject to the reality and tracelessness conditions



Therefore we can decompose  in the form




where  and  are real fields. In order to isolate the massive
graviton degrees of freedom, we can eliminate one scalar degree of freedom by
imposing a gauge invariant constraint on the multiplet 


which in component form reads



The gauge transformation of  is  so that
the covariant derivative is given by



transforming as  The
simplest action for the fields  and  and not involving the
space-time metric is
* 
Notice that both terms with the  coefficients are needed for the
action to be Hermitian. One can also add to this action the term




but in the unitary gauge this will only change, apart from adding a
Gauss-Bonnet topological term, the coefficients of the terms already present.

The next step is to add a mixing terms between the two sectors. To do this
define the field




and add the interaction term





It is important to note that the multiplet  has the following gauge
transformations in component form
* 
This implies that by an appropriate choice of  it is possible to
use the unitary gauge



so that the constraint simplifies to , and corresponds to a
non-linear realization of the symmetry breaking from  to 
The action in component form 

To derive the action in component form we first write




where
* 
The action is then given by
* 
where





The action in unitary gauge 

It is easy to analyze the action in the unitary gauge  as this
implies
* 
where  In this case the action simplifies to
* 
where
* 
We can write





where we have defined  It is also
well known that when the field  is eliminated by its equations
of motion the above term reduces to



where  is the curvature of the metric tensor 
 Without any loss in generality we can set  This system is known
to give the coupling of a massive graviton to a massless graviton with the
Fierz-Pauli choice  The massive graviton has mass of the order
, which can be arranged to be small by an appropriate choice
of  The choice  is not stable under quantum corrections and the
propagator does not have a smooth  limit. When  there
is a ghost mode in the tensor  which will propagate. To
find the order of the quantum corrections it is essential to the study the
coupled system in other gauges, and to separate the six degrees of freedom of
the massive tensor into two massless tensor polarizations of , the
two vector polarizations in  and  two scalar modes.

The non-unitary gauge 

To examine the degrees of freedom in a different gauge, we shall keep the
field  present, and use the gauge degrees of freedom  to
impose a gauge choice of the form




or something equivalent. This will guarantee that the only propagating degrees
of freedom present in  are the two tensor degrees of helicities
 and . This is easy to see because the system for  is
identical to the massless graviton with the only difference being that the
diffeomorphism parameters  are used instead of the parameters
 to impose the above gauge condition. From the explicit form of
the action it is evident that all derivatives on the field  coming from
the terms with coefficients  and  are antisymmetrized, implying
that these terms do not give kinetic energy for  The only terms that
contain second order derivatives for  come from the mass mixing term
with coefficient .  To see this we first express the field 
 in terms of the component fields
* 
where  and 
 and we have used the
relations
* 
after substituting the  equation of motion. The fields 
and  are related by a constraint, and it is possible to express
 or simply constrain one degree of freedom in
 It is then clear that to leading order




Then the mass mixing term gives, to lowest order, the following contribution
to the kinetic energy of 
* 
After integration by parts and setting , this can be rewritten in the
form





This describes the two spin-1 vector polarizations of the massive spin-2
field. There is a  spin-0 polarization which can represented by the mass term
of  in addition to  the scalar field  This  is so because
three components of the vector  propagate, so the constraint can be
thought to be a restriction on the fourth component of  In this way
 is represented as



where  are fluctuations. Although  does not have
a direct kinetic term it occurs as a scaling factor for the curvature scalar
 Isolating the relevant contributions we have





where we have used the constraint on  and  to simplify
 to 
 By a Weyl scaling of the field  the field
 acquires a kinetic energy term, just as the dilaton in string
theory, or when gravity is compactified to lower dimensions. By substituting
the constraint one finds that the mass term for  is



To conclude, in the unitary gauge, the tensor  has six degrees of
freedom, five for the massive graviton coupled to an additional scalar degree
of freedom. In the non-unitary gauge, there are two tensor polarizations of
helicities  (corresponding to the tensor ), two
polarizations of helicities  corresponding to the transverse components
of  and two scalar polarization of spin-0 corresponding to the field
 and the longitudinal component of  The ill behavior of the
massive graviton propagator can be avoided by considering instead of the
  system, the coupled constrained system of
    and . The instability of
the Fierz-Pauli choice of  would occur at the quantum level, but as
explained in, the corrections would occur at a cut-off energy,
where the ghost mode would start to propagate. At energies much lower than the
cut-off scale, the corrections could be ignored, and the system is well behaved.

Conclusions 

We have shown that it is possible to formulate an action for a massless
graviton interacting with a massive spin-2 field as a theory obtained by
coupling a metric tensor to a gauge theory of  spontaneously broken to
 The symmetry breaking is done through a Higgs multiplet containing
a scalar field and a vector field related by a constraint, employing a
non-linear realization for the symmetry breaking. The action consists of three
parts. The first part is the Einstein-Hilbert action for the metric tensor
 on a space-time manifold  The second part is metric
independent and  gauge invariant. The third is a mixing term between
the metric and the gauge sectors. In the unitary gauge the Goldstone vector
field  is set to zero and the field  to a constant. The action
reduces to the Fierz-Pauli form of a massless graviton interacting with a
massive tensor. In the non-unitary gauge, the degrees of freedom of the
massive spin-2 field and the scalar are given by the tensor polarizations of
helicities  in , the vector polarizations of helicities
 in  and two scalars  of helicities  in  and 
. In this form the propagators of the separate modes are well behaved and
have a smooth  limit. Quantum corrections to the Fierz-Pauli
choice of the mass term would be damped by the cut-off energy. At energies
much below the cut-off the action is well behaved. What remains to be seen is
an explicit computation to show how the massless limit is attained. More
importantly is to have a variant of this action where the system is treated
more symmetrically with the two tensors corresponding to the two metrics on
the separate sheets of two membranes. This can be done either by considering a
purely metric theory as in, or by considering a gauge theory based
on the gauge group  broken to  This is indeed
possible as shown in, but is complicated by the fact that the Higgs
field transforms under  and has  components requiring
the introduction of a good number of constraints. The resulting model is very
similar to what is described here and is fairly straightforward in the unitary
gauge. But the analysis is more complicated in the non-unitary gauge as one
has to keep track of all independent components of the Goldstone fields.

Acknowledgments 

I would like to thank the Alexandar von Humboldt Foundation for support
through a research award. I would also like to thank Slava Mukhanov for
hospitality at the Ludwig-Maxmilians University in Mu nich where part of
this work was done.

 99 
H. van Dam and M. Veltman, Nucl. Phys.  B22 
(1970) 397.

V. I. Zakharov, JETP Lett.  12  (1970) 312.

D. G. Boulware and S. Deser, Phys. Rev.  D6
 (1972) 3368.

M. J. Duff, C. N. Pope and K. S. Stelle, Phys. Lett.
 B223  (1989) 386.

C. R. Nappi and L. Witten, Phys. Rev.  D40  (1989) 1095.

M. Fierz and W. Pauli, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.  A173
 (1939) 211.

Thibault Damour and Ian I. Kogan, Phys. Rev.  D66
 (2002) 104024.

Abdus Salam and J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev.  D14
 (1976) 2830.

I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou, G. G. Ross and J.
Santiago, Nucl. Phys.  B584  (2000) 313.

R. Gregory, V. A. Rubakov and S. M. Sibiryakov, Phys.
Rev. Lett.  84  (2000) 5928.

I. I. Kogan and G. G. Ross, Phys. Lett.  B485
 (2000) 255.

Nima Arkani-Hamed, Howard Georgi and Mathew D. Schwartz,
"Effective Field Theory for Massive Gravitons and Gravity in Theory
Space",  hep-th/0210184.

M. B. Green and C. B. Thorn, Nucl. Phys.  B367
 (1991) 462; W. Siegel, Phys. Rev.  D49  (1994) 4144.

Ali H. Chamseddine, Abdus Salam and J. Strathdee, Nucl.
Phys.  B136  (1978) 248.

C. J. Isham, Abdus Salam and J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev.
 D3  (1971) 867.

F. Mansouri and L. N. Chang, Phys. Rev.  D13
 (1976) 3192.

Ali H. Chamseddine, Ann. Phys.  113  (1978) 113.

S. Coleman, J. Wess and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev.  177
 (1969) 2239.

Ali H. Chamseddine, Nucl. Phys.  B131  (1977) 494.

