
 
   

1.2 
6 pt
 
 


equation section 
.equation  


 








scaled1
 
 TIT-HEP-490 
       January 2003 
       hep-th/0301226 
   

 
 Effective Superpotentials for SO/Sp 



with Flavor 
 



from Matrix Models
 




 Yutaka Ookouchi (
      e-mail address : ookouchi@th.phys.titech.ac.jp)  and 
 Yoshiyuki Watabiki (
      e-mail address : watabiki@th.phys.titech.ac.jp) 

Department of Physics, 
  Tokyo Institute of Technology,

  Tokyo 152-8511, Japan
 

   

 

We study matrix models related to  gauge theories with flavors. We give the effective superpotentials for gauge theories with arbitrary tree level superpotential up to first instanton level. For quartic tree level superpotential we obtained exact one-cut solution. We also derive Seiberg-Witten curve for these gauge theories from matrix model argument. 












Introduction 


Recently Dijkgraaf-Vafa proposed that a holomorphic information in 
 gauge 
theories with classical gauge groups derive from matrix model. 
In particular the effective superpotentials
for the gauge theories
are given by the genus zero free energies which are the summations of
planar diagrams in matrix models. This perturbative sum of planar
diagrams turns out to be a nonperturbative sum over fractional
instantons in the  gauge theory. 

Dijkgraaf and Vafa have reached this duality via string theory route using the model with one adjoint matter. It was discussed that in large  dual of  
 gauge theory deformed
 by certain tree level superpotential is realized as type IIB string theory on 
Calabi-Yau 
threefold with fluxes.  The discussion for type IIB superstring was extended in. The equivalence of effective
superpotential for  gauge theory with that of type IIB
superstring theory on Calabi-Yau manifold with fluxes was proved in.

There are many discussions on this D-V conjecture [19]-[70] .
The generalization of D-V duality to the 
gauge theories 
with massive flavor was discussed in. In perturbative analysis of the matrix model, which corresponds to U(N) gauge theories with arbitrary tree level superpotentials.  information was derived these perturbative results including the Seiberg-Witten curve. The analysis beyond the planar limit was discussed in. In this note we apply these perturbative result with  gauge theories.

   

In  gauge theories were studied using the superspace method that was developed in. In antisymmetric matrix model was considered as a generalization of DV to  gauge theory. On the other hand real symmetric matrix model was used in. 

The organization of this paper is as follows: In section 2, we review the discussion in and generalize to the case with massive flavor. In section 3 we give perturbative result for the effective superpotential of  gauge theory in terms of the relations discussed in section 2. In section 4 we give exact solution for the case with quartic tree level superpotential with massive matter. In section 5 from the matrix context we derive Seiberg-Witten curves for the gauge theories.

Note added:  After completion of this note, we have received, which have some overlaps this paper.



Relations among Free Energies  

In this section we represent some relations between free energies. These relations are used following section for the computation of effective superpotentials.



General Property 

In the standard large  expansion the partition function of matrix model has topological expansion,
 
where  is Euler number of the surface. In this letter we will take into account the surface with crosscap, because we discuss  gauge theory. Euler number with crosscap  is described as , where  are the number of genus, boundaries and crosscaps respectively. The leading contribution comes from  with Euler number . We denote this free energy as . The Euler number of  is  that is equal to the Euler number of orientable one boundary surface, disk topology. We denote this one crosscap contribution and one boundary contribution as 
 

Now let us define matrix models corresponding to  gauge theories. The partition function of matrix models is given by,
 
where  is  real antisymmetric matrix(Note that matrix size  have not relation to gauge group rank.)  or real matrix with relation,  where  denotes the  invariant skew symmetric form
 
 is  dimensional vector. For simplicity we dropped volume factor for the gauge group, which gives Veneziano-Yankilowicz term. We assume that tree level superpotential  is even function, i.e.
 

On these two matrix models and Hermitean matrix model that correspond to  gauge theory, some relations are already known. For the free energy coming from disk topology
 
where gauge groups denote the matrix models corrsponding to these gauge theories. The argument  denote coefficients of tree level superpotential. Note that for  case the tree level superpotentials are even function then using this relation we assume that the matrix model corresponding to  gauge theory also have even function tree level superpotential. And for genus zero free energy we have
 
Multipicating  over all factor to  and replaceing  to , namely multipling  to all coefficent of superpotential, it equals to  and . Next relation is the one between  and ,
 
where  sign for antisymmetric matrix and  sign for the matrix corresponding to  gauge theory respectively and  is 'tHooft coupling that defined next subsection. These relations were checked in perturbatively in the viewpoint of field theory using superspace formalism and in using loop equation for antisymmetric matrix models. We give another derivation for these relations. In the relation between the  corresponding to the  gauge theory and the one  gauge theory.


With these relations we can obtain effective superpotentials for  gauge theory from matix models. In the experssion was given,
 
It is interesting that two free energy  and  that are the same Euler number, appear to effective superpotential having different coefficient. For the latter convenience let us introduce new notation , which means that  and . In section 3 and section 4 we will see effective superpotentials for multicut case and one cut case, using these formulae.



Matrix Model for SO(N) with Flavor  


In this subsection we discuss the antisymmetric matrix model. These matrix model  was studied in for the generalization of DV proposal to the  gauge theory. We want to extend these discussion to the model with massive matter. The partition functions of these matrix models are given in (). As discussed in we can integrate out  and diagonalize matrix ,
 
where we used notation  as eigenvalues of matrix . Then  are pure imagenary value. Using these variables  we can rewrite as follows,
 
 
where third term come from the factor . The equation of motion for  is given by
 
As usual let us introduce resolvent ,
 
In the large  limit with  fixed, it is convenient to introduce density of eigenvalues,
, where  is necesary in the delta function becauce  are pure imaginary. With this new variables we can write loop equation as follow,
 
where third term in () supressed in this limit. As in, introducing new variable, , we can rewrite loop equation as hyperelliptic curve,
 
Generally this Riemann surface has  cuts, we can express the filling number of eigenvalues in terms of the integral around the cut,
 
Since 's have , these 's have the relation, .
We can rewrite partition function up to constant term,
 
Then we can read off the contribution from disk from () as follows,
 
We can rewrite this integral as follow,
 
where we defined function  and  is one of two infinity on the -plane.


Perturbative Analysis 

In this section we give effective superpotential for the  gauge theories with arbitrary tree level superpotential up to first instanton correction. In the previous section we study the relation between real symmetric matrix model and unitary matrix model. Using the relation we can obtain real symmetric matrix model result form unitary matrix model result and explicitly give effective superpotential for the  gauge theories. Since in perturbative expression for the genus zero free energy and disk amplitude of unitary matrix model was given, we can give the ones for real symmetric matrix model. For this purpose we rewrite equations in for the case with even tree level superpotential and symmetric distribution of eigenvalues.
We write the tree level superpotential as
 
Let us introduce new variables ,
 
We evaluate matrix integral perturbatively about and extremal point .
 
 
We fix the gauge and introduce Grassmann-odd ghost matrices  and . The partition function is given by the gauge-fixed integral
 
 
 
where  with ,  and 
 
Note that these relations are the one for the unitary matrix model. Then the effective superpotential given by this matrix model is the one for  gauge theory. However we can obtain real symmetric matrix model free energy replacing  to  and multiplying the over all factor .



Genus zero free energy 
Using the relation between  and  discussed in section 2, we can get the following result,
 
where we denoted free energy of third order in  as . These result comes from the following Feynman diagrams. 






 
2-loop diagrams contributing to the third order of .  Striped double lines correspond to ghost propagators. Note that we does not compute unoriented diagram but modify the result for Hermitean matrix model with even function tree level superpotential.   
 

Though we are considering the tree level superpotential, which is even functions polynomial, perturbative expansion around classical solution gives potential, which is not even function, (). Thus we have cubic interactions in Feynman diagrams. 

We can check this result for the special case, i.e.  case. Let  are the critical point for the tree level superpotential. Thus  and ,
 
We will see that this result agree with the one in obtained by Calabi-Yau with fluxes. We review the result in Appendix of, computation of period of Calabi-Yau manifold with fluxes. The computation was done in semi classical limit . Then the period of compact cycle that interpreted as glueball superfield was small. The period of noncompact cycle was described as the perturbative expansion of the period of compact cycle up to 4-th order. Using the prepotential perturbative part of the result is written as follows,
 
 
First order terms agree with (). In using these perturbative expansion of periods effective superpotential coming from the flux was given. Then integrating out glueball superfield effective superpotential that was written as  and parameters in tree level superpotential was described. These superpotential can be compared with confining phase superpotential given purely field theory analysis. A few ensamples show agreement these two result. Then the analysis of matrix model describes precisely field theory result.




Disk amplitude 
For the disk amplitude there is no difference for two models, then the perturbative result is given in terms of the results in,
 
These result comes from the following Feynman diagrams,


 
2-loop diagrams with one boundary contributing to the second order of . Fat lines represent a boundary that comes from the propagation of 's. As in the case  we consider Hermite matrix model and then modify the result for the real symmetric matrix model case.
   
 

Let us also for this amplitude give explicit representation for the  case,
 

Finally we obtain effective superpotential from matrix model calculation up to second order in , namely up to first instanton correction,
 
where first term comes from volume factor.



Exact Effective Superpotential for Unbroken Gauge Group 

In this section we discuss one-cut solution for  case with flavor.  For  case there are exact one-cut solutions in. We want to generalize these results to a quartic tree potential case,
 
The one-cut Riemann surface is already discussed in,
 
where . One of two cut shrinks to be singularity. Using this  we can obtain following relations. It behaves as  when  goes to infinity. This constraint gives following relation,
 
With the relation given in section  we can calculate the effective superpotential
 
 
where .


Since  divergent piece can be renormalized to bare coupling , we can replace  to , which is interpreted as dynamically generated energy scale. Until now we used  for simplicity, but correct dimesional parameter is  so we replace the parameter. And using the matching relation, , where  is massmatrix that eigenvalues are , we can obtain effective superpotential,
 


Now let us consider  limit. There are many discussions for this model with  gauge theory. In this limit we obtain the following result. The effective superpotential for this case is described as 
 
This is exactly the same as the result from the discussion for flux with Calabi-Yau geometry in. And If we have introduce new function  we can rewrite as,
 
This result agree with matrix model analysis in up to non-ecessial convension of . 













SW Curves from Matrix Models 

In section 2 we reviewed the knowledge that for introducing the contribution  we have only to replace  to . Thus with this lesson we can straight forwardly extend the derivation for Seiberg-Witten curve for the  in to  model. To get  information, at first we consider  theory with tree level superpotential is  and then choose the special vacuume, . Next we should turn off the tree level superpotential, namely . In this vacuum effective superpotential is given by
 
where  is the closed loop through -th and -th cut.


As in  case we use equation of motion for 's . The derivative of  with respect to  is holomorphic function and form a complete basis. Let us introduce one forms, which form complete basis to holomorphic differentials, 
Using this notation the equation of motions, , can be written as 
 
Thus from Abel's theorem there exists a function  on the Riemann surface with an  th order pole at , an  th zero (or pole if ) at , and simple zeros at .
For the  we find the function  as follow,
 
where  are airbitrary polynomials defined below and  are constant.
These function have  th order pole at  and  th order zero at  and 1 th order zero at  respectively. For  to be a function on the Riemann surface the square root in  must be proportional to , 
  
where 's are the proportional function. 


We can determine these quantity by taking classical limit . In this result matrix model curve  becomes . So It is natural that  and  are propotional to charactristic function , which becomes  under the classical limit,
 
For the constants  classical value of  are zero, it is natural that  are proportional to . With these relation we have the following results in this limit,
 
Then we have the following result,
 
These are the Seiberg-Witten curve for the gauge theory. Here we have derived these results using only matrix-model methods.

 
Acknowledgements  
The authors are obliged especially to Hiroyuki Fuji for 
stimulus discussions and useful suggestions. 






 100 


R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"Matrix models, topological strings, and supersymmetric gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 3 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206255].



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"On geometry and matrix models,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 21 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207106].



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"A perturbative window into non-perturbative physics,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0208048].



R. Dijkgraaf, S. Gukov, V. A. Kazakov and C. Vafa,
"Perturbative analysis of gauged matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0210238].



C. Vafa,
"Superstrings and topological strings at large N,"
J. Math. Phys.  42 , 2798 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0008142].



F. Cachazo, K. A. Intriligator and C. Vafa,
"A large N duality via a geometric transition,"
Nucl. Phys. B 603 , 3 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0103067].



F. Cachazo, S. Katz and C. Vafa,
"Geometric transitions and N = 1 quiver theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0108120].



F. Cachazo, B. Fiol, K. A. Intriligator, S. Katz and C. Vafa,
"A geometric unification of dualities,"
Nucl. Phys. B 628 , 3 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0110028].



H. Fuji and Y. Ookouchi,
"Confining phase superpotentials for SO/Sp gauge theories via  geometric transition,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0205301].



J. D. Edelstein, K. Oh and R. Tatar,
"Orientifold, geometric transition and large N duality for SO/Sp gauge  theories,"
JHEP 0105 , 009 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0104037].



K. Dasgupta, K. Oh and R. Tatar,
"Geometric transition, large N dualities and MQCD dynamics,"
Nucl. Phys. B 610 , 331 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0105066].



K. Dasgupta, K. Oh and R. Tatar,
"Open/closed string dualities and Seiberg duality from geometric  transitions in M-theory,"
JHEP 0208 , 026 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0106040].



K. Dasgupta, K. h. Oh, J. Park and R. Tatar,
"Geometric transition versus cascading solution,"
JHEP 0201 , 031 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0110050].



S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten,
"CFT's from Calabi-Yau four-folds,"
Nucl. Phys. B 584 , 69 (2000)
[Erratum-ibid. B 608 , 477 (2001)]
[arXiv:hep-th/9906070].



S. Gukov,
"Solitons, superpotentials and calibrations,"
Nucl. Phys. B 574 , 169 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9911011].



T. R. Taylor and C. Vafa,
"RR flux on Calabi-Yau and partial supersymmetry breaking,"
Phys. Lett. B 474 , 130 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9912152].




F. Cachazo and C. Vafa,
"N = 1 and N = 2 geometry from fluxes,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0206017].



Y. Ookouchi,
"N = 1 gauge theory with flavor from fluxes,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211287].



L. Chekhov and A. Mironov,
"Matrix models vs. Seiberg-Witten/Whitham theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0209085].



F. Ferrari,
"On exact superpotentials in confining vacua,"
Nucl. Phys. B 648 , 161 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0210135].



F. Ferrari,
"Quantum parameter space and double scaling limits in N = 1 super  Yang-Mills theory,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211069].



H. Fuji and Y. Ookouchi,
"Comments on effective superpotentials via matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0210148].




D. Berenstein,
"Quantum moduli spaces from matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0210183].



A. Gorsky,
"Konishi anomaly and N = 1 effective superpotentials from matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0210281].



Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik,
"Effective matter superpotentials from Wishart random matrices,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211082].



M. Aganagic, A. Klemm, M. Marino and C. Vafa,
"Matrix model as a mirror of Chern-Simons theory,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211098].



R. Gopakumar,
"N = 1 theories and a geometric master field,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211100].



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
"The N = 2 U(N) gauge theory prepotential and periods from a  perturbative matrix model calculation,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211123].



H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,
"The Dijkgraaf-Vafa prepotential in the context of general  Seiberg-Witten theory,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211245].



H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,
"Experiments with the WDVV equations for the gluino-condensate  prepotential: The cubic (two-cut) case,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211259].



H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,
"Calculating gluino condensate prepotential,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212032].



S. Seki,
"Comments on quiver gauge theories and matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212079].



R. Argurio, V. L. Campos, G. Ferretti and R. Heise,
"Exact superpotentials for theories with flavors via a matrix integral,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0210291].



J. McGreevy,
"Adding flavor to Dijkgraaf-Vafa,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211009].



R. Dijkgraaf, M. T. Grisaru, C. S. Lam, C. Vafa and D. Zanon,
"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211017].



H. Suzuki,
"Perturbative derivation of exact superpotential for meson fields from  matrix theories with one flavour,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211052].



I. Bena and R. Roiban,
"Exact superpotentials in N = 1 theories with flavor and their matrix  model formulation,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211075].



F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Chiral rings and anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theory,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211170].



N. Seiberg,
"Adding Fundamental Matter to "Chiral Rings and Anomalies in Supersymmetric Gauge Theory","
[arXiv:hep-th/0212225].



F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Phases of N=1 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories and Matrices,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0301006].





R. Dijkgraaf, A. Neitzke and C. Vafa,
"Large N strong coupling dynamics in non-supersymmetric orbifold field  theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211194].



Y. Tachikawa,
"Derivation of the Konishi anomaly relation from Dijkgraaf-Vafa with  (bi-)fundamental matters,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211189].



Y. Tachikawa,
"Derivation of the linearity principle of Intriligator-Leigh-Seiberg,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211274].





B. Feng,
"Seiberg duality in matrix model,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211202].



B. Feng and Y. H. He,
"Seiberg duality in matrix models. II,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211234].



I. Bena, S. de Haro and R. Roiban,
"Generalized Yukawa couplings and matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212083].




K. Ohta,
"Exact mesonic vacua from matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212025].



H. Suzuki,
"Mean-field approach to the derivation of baryon superpotential from  matrix model,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212121].



C. Hofman,
"Super Yang-Mills with flavors from large N(f) matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212095].



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
"Matrix model approach to the N = 2 U(N) gauge theory with matter in the  fundamental representation,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211254].



V. Balasubramanian, J. de Boer, B. Feng, Y. H. He, M. x. Huang, V. Jejjala and A. Naqvi,
"Multi-trace superpotentials vs. Matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212082].



A. Klemm, M. Marino and S. Theisen,
"Gravitational corrections in supersymmetric gauge theory and matrix  models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211216].



R. Dijkgraaf, A. Sinkovics and M. Temurhan,
"Matrix models and gravitational corrections,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211241].



R. Dijkgraaf, A. Neitzke and C. Vafa,
"Large N strong coupling dynamics in non-supersymmetric orbifold field  theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211194].




H. Ita, H. Nieder and Y. Oz,
"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials for SO(N) and  USp(N),"
[arXiv:hep-th/0211261].



S. K. Ashok, R. Corrado, N. Halmagyi, K. D. Kennaway and C. Romelsberger,

[arXiv:hep-th/0211291].




R. A. Janik and N. A. Obers,
"SO(N) superpotential, Seiberg-Witten curves and loop equations,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212069].



Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik,
"Explicit factorization of Seiberg-Witten curves with matter from random  matrix models,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212212].



B. Feng,
"Geometric dual and matrix theory for SO/Sp gauge theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0212010].



C. Ahn and S. Nam,
"Supersymmetric SO(N) gauge theory and matrix model,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212231.




P. C. Argyres, M. R. Plesser and A. D. Shapere,
"The Coulomb phase of N=2 supersymmetric QCD,"
Phys. Rev. Lett.  75 , 1699 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9505100].



P. C. Argyres and A. D. Shapere,
"The Vacuum Structure of N=2 SuperQCD with Classical Gauge Groups,"
Nucl. Phys. B 461 , 437 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9509175].



A. Hanany,
"On the Quantum Moduli Space of N=2 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 466 , 85 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9509176].



A. Hanany and Y. Oz,
"On the quantum moduli space of vacua of N=2 supersymmetric SU(N(c)) gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 452 , 283 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9505075].



M. E. Peskin,
"Duality in supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,"
[arXiv:hep-th/9702094].



I. Affleck, M. Dine and N. Seiberg,
"Dynamical Supersymmetry Breaking In Supersymmetric QCD,"
Nucl. Phys. B 241 , 493 (1984).



D. Bessis, C. Itzykson and J. B. Zuber,
"Quantum Field Theory Techniques In Graphical Enumeration,"
Adv. Appl. Math.  1 , 109 (1980).



H. Ooguri and C. Vafa,
"Worldsheet derivation of a large N duality,"
Nucl. Phys. B 641 , 3 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205297].



C. Ahn,
"Supersymmetric SO(N)/Sp(N) Gauge Theory from Matrix Model:Exact Mesonic Vacua,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0301011].



C. Ahn and S. Nam,
"N=2 Supersymmetric SO/Sp Gauge Theories from Matrix Model,"
arXiv:hep-th/0301203.
































