= -.5cm = 0cm = 16cm = 24.5cm
= -1cm = -1cm
Finite Order BFFT Method 
M. Monemzadehe-mail: monemzadeh@sepahan.iut.ac.ir  
 A. Shirzadshirzad@ipm.ir  
  

   Department of  Physics, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT) 

Isfahan,  Iran,  

  Institute for Studies in Theoretical Physics and Mathematics (IPM) 

P. O. Box: 19395-5531, Tehran, Iran.  
 
 
We have proposed a method in the context of BFFT approach that leads to truncation of
the infinite series regarded to constraints in the extended phase space, as well as
other physical quantities (such as Hamiltonian). This has been done for cases where
the matrix of Poisson brackets among the constraints is symplectic or constant. The
method is applied to Proca model, single self dual chiral bosons and chiral Schwinger
models as examples.
Introduction 
The Dirac procedure is well-known for canonical quantization of the first class
constrained systems. The corresponding analysis in the path integral
approach was also initiated by Faddeev for gauge theories. To quantize a
second class constrained system in Dirac approach, it is necessary to replace Poisson
brackets by Dirac brackets. Converting Dirac brackets to quantum commutators
sometimes implies factor ordering problem and quantization of these models is not
formal. Batalin and his collaborators proposed the conversion of the second class
constraints into first class ones by defining a set of new auxiliary variables
. In this method (the BFFT method) one can find correction terms
for constraints and Hamiltonian in an iterative process, the first correction is
linear in the new variables, the second is quadratic and so on. In this way one
obtains a gauge theory and then applies the well-known mechanisms for their
quantization. It is important to notice that this idea
is a logical following of the original notion of Stu ckelberg who converted second
class theories to first class ones by extending the configuration space with some
scaler fields (Stu ckelberg scalers).

In this paper we show that there exist some arbitrary parameters that if suitably
chosen then the series of the correction terms of constraints and Hamiltonian do
terminate. We call this approach "the finite order BFFT method". In section 2 we
briefly review the essence of the BFFT method. Without losing the generality we assume
a system with second class constraints only. In section 3 we show that in principle it
is possible to chose the arbitrary parameters in such a way that the correction terms
terminate, provided that the matrix of Poisson brackets of constraints is either
symplectic or constant. We apply our process to the Proca model, single self dual
chiral bosons and chiral Schwinger Model in sections 4,5 and 6 respectively. Section
7 is devoted to conclusions.
 Brief Review of the BFFT Formalism 
Consider a second  class constrained system described by Hamiltonian  in phase
space with coordinates  where . Assume the system is under the
influence of a set of second class constraints, 
, satisfying the algebra
  
where  means Poisson bracket and  is an invertible
matrix. For converting a second class system into a true gauge system one can enlarge
the phase space by introducing auxiliary variables, one for each constraint. We
denote the variables by  with the following algebra:
  
where  is an antisymmetric matrix which we assume  it to be
constant. The first class constraints in the extended phase space 
are defined by
  
  with the boundary conditions
   
In the abelian BFFT embedding method one demands that these
extended constraints are strongly involutive:
  
The solution of the above equation can be obtained by considering  as:
  
where  is of order  with respect to 's. According
to the boundary condition () we have
  
Substituting Eq. () into Eq. () leads to a set of
recursive relations. Vanishing the term independent of 
gives:
 
and vanishing the terms of order  with respect to 's for 
gives
   
where
   
and
   
The suffix  in the above equations means that the Poisson brackets must be
evaluated with respect to  variables only, otherwise they are calculated in the
basis . The above equations are used iteratively to obtain the correction terms
. Since   is linear with respect to  we may write
  
Substituting this expression into Eq.() and using Eqs.() and
() we obtain:
  
This equation contains two unknown elements;  and
. One should at first assume a suitable anti-symmetric matrix
for  and then solve Eq. () to determine the
coefficients . Since  and
 are anti-symmetric matrices, there are totally
 independent equations for , while the number
of 's are . Therefore there exist an infinite number of
solutions for  and we are allowed to chose any solution we wish.
Using this possibility, 's can be chosen such that the process of
determining the correction terms  terminate at this stage, i.e.
 vanishes. We will come to this point in the next section. It can be seen
that the general solution of Eq. () is given by  
where  and  are inverse to
 and  respectively.

To construct  the corresponding Hamiltonian  in the extended
phase space we demand
   
 and
   
Similar to , suppose
   
where  is of order  with respect to 's and
  
Substituting from Eqs. () and () in Eq. () gives:
    
where  as the generators of the  are defined as
follow
   
   
   
It can be shown that the general expression for  is
  
Similarly for every function  in the phase space one can
write
  
where  is of order  with respect to 's and
  
In this relation  can be derived similar to  in Eqs.
(-) by replacing  with .

This completes the BFFT construction of the first class system which is strongly
involutive. As can be seen the correction terms of  and
 are derived iteratively from Eqs.() and ().
Generally, there is no guarantee that the series terminate at some definite order.
However, the series will terminate if  and 
vanish for a certain order .
Finite Order Method 
In this section we want to solve the iterative equations for  and
 in such a way that the corresponding series terminate as soon as
possible. We remember that  can be chosen arbitrarily. On the
other hand Eq. () for 's is not so much restrictive. We
use these possibilities to find a systematic method to truncate infinite series
encountered in BFFT method. However, the problem seems difficult for a general second
class system. In the following we solve it for two special cases, i.e. where the
matrix  given in () is symplectic or constant.

A-  Suppose , where  is the symplectic
matrix: 


 In principle it has been shown that one can usually redefine the second
class constraints as pairs of coordinates and momenta with the symplectic algebra
. The algebra of the new variables  and unknown
coefficients  can be chosen as
  
It is easy to check that  and  in Eq. () satisfy the basic
equation Eq. () for . So the first correction term of the
constraints is
  
Since  is only a function of , it can be seen in a
straightforward way that  vanish for . As a result
 series terminate at this step. The new set of constraints are found to
be
  
One can directly check that 's are strongly involutive. To complete our
procedure we should also construct the extended Hamiltonian. Inserting ()
into (), the correction terms of Hamiltonian are deduced as
  
It is necessary to evaluate the  as the generators of ;
i.e. . For the the zeroth order we have
  
 The next correction term for  is
  
This should be inserted into Eq. () to find
  
where
  
Similarly can be derived from Eq. () as
   
This process continue until  become a function of 's only. If
 is at most quadratic with respect to phase space coordinates, it would be clear
that  in Eq. () is constant and ; and
consequently . In this case one can finally write
  
 In a more general case, when  is a function of order  with respect to coordinates
  and the constraints are linear with respect to coordinates and momenta, the series of 
 will be finished at th step; i.e.
  
Eqs. () and () represent a finite order gauge theory in abelian
BFFT approach. In this way we can convert every second class constraint system to a
rank zero gauge theory , in which the structure functions 
 and  defined in
  
vanish in the extended phase space.

Assuming again that  is the symplectic matrix, one can also select
. Then the basic Eq. () implies that
  
As stated in Eq.(),  satisfy the above equation. On the other hand,
as is well-known, a canonical transformation from the set  to
 is represented by
  
where
  
Comparing Eq. () with Eq. () shows that any canonical transformation
in phase space of  can introduce a solution to the basic equation ().
In this way a large class of solutions are obtained, among them those with constant
elements for  give truncated series for constraints.

 B-  In most physical examples of second class systems the
-matrix in () emerge as a matrix with constant elements. In this case
we can choose
  
So the basic Eq. () can be written as
  
It is easy to see that  satisfies the above equation. Then the new set of
constraints are of the form
  
The correction terms of the Hamiltonian can be derived as(Notice that the
indices  have not tensorial mining. i.e. there is no metric to
rase up or lower down the indices. Therefore the reader should not be worried
 about up-down indices on matrix  in Eq. (), etc.) 
  
where  are defined in Eqs. (-). For a Hamiltonian
which is a polynomial of order  with respect to the original phase space
coordinates , the generators  will be only a function of
auxiliary variables. Therefore the  series will terminate at th step and
the constraints () and  with correction terms () represent
a rank zero gauge theory.

The significance of the above method can be better seen in the context of the chain by
chain method introduced recently in. Suppose we have only one chain
of second class constraints with the recursion formula:
  
Suppose  is a matrix with constant elements and we choose our arbitrary
parameters  and  in such a way that the new set of constraint are given
by Eq.(). It is clear from () and () that
  
So the first correction term of  is
  
It can be seen that
  
As we know from Eq.();  and
  
If  is a polynomial of finite order  with respect to the phase space
coordinates, then Eq. () shows that its correction terms do terminate at most
after  steps.

Now we apply the above procedures to some definite models.
The Proca Model 
As the first example we consider the Proca model, whose dynamics is described by the
Lagrangian density
  
where
  
It is well-known that the second term in Eq. () breaks the gauge symmetry of
the usual Maxwell's theory given by the first term. The canonical momenta are defined
as
  
From Eqs. () and () there is only one primary constraint field
   
 where the symbol  means weak equality. The canonical Hamiltonian is
   
The total Hamiltonian is defined as
  
where  is the Lagrange multiplier field.
 Following the algorithm of Dirac, we find that the consistency in time of the primary constraint (i.e. 
) leads to the secondary constraint field
  
The consistency condition of  just determines the Lagrange multiplier
. The algebra of the second class constraints in Eqs. () and
() satisfy the basic condition(Since the constraints are space-time
fields, a three dimensional Dirac -function should be understood in Poisson
bracket of constraints. More precisely we have
 
However, we omit the -functions when not needed.)  . For
simplicity in our calculation we apply the following canonical transformation
   
The new set of constraints and Hamiltonian are found to be
   
   
where
  
 In order to convert the above gauge non-invariant theory to a first class one, we
 make use of two new auxiliary fields  and . According to Eq. () we
 choose
  
The first class constraints are deduced from Eq. () as
  
The generators in the first correction term of  are
  
and from Eq. () one finds that
  
Explicit calculations from Eq. () yield the last correction term as
  
So the embedded Hamiltonian is
  
One can easily check that Eqs. () and () represent an abelian gauge
theory.
Gauge-Invariant Single Self Dual Chiral Bosons 
The gauge non-invariant Srivastava model for single self dual Chiral bosons in
 dimensions is described by the Lagrangian density:
  
 where  and .

In this section we use the Lorentz metric diag (+1, -1). The canonical
momenta can be derived as:
  
where  and  are the momenta conjugate to the fields  and
 respectively. There is one primary constraint 
. The canonical Hamiltonian density corresponding to 
is
  
Consistency condition of the primary constraint leads to a
secondary constraint
  
Since  the constraint chain finishes at this
step. We have two second class constraints satisfying the symplectic algebra which
represent a gauge non-invariant model. This model was considered in Stu ckelberg
method with enlarging the Hilbert space
 of the theory and introducing a full quantum field , called Wess- Zumino field, to obtain the modified Lagrangian density as:
  
In this section we concentrate on this model in BFFT method and
introduce  and  as auxiliary fields with the
algebra
  
According to the procedure defined before and Eq.() the new abelian first
class constraints are:
  
The embedded Hamiltonian density in the extended phase space with
the mention to (-) are derived as
  
where
  
First class constraints () and Hamitonian ()
represent a rank zero gauge theory.
Gauge Invariant Chiral Schwinger Models 
In this section we use our formalism in a theory in which the -matrix has
constant elements. The gauge non-invariant bosonized chiral Schwinger model
, in  dimensions with regularization parameter  is
described by the Lagrangian density:
  
in which  is a scalar field and  is a vector field. There appear four
second class constraints:
   
where ,  and  are momenta conjugate to , , and 
respectively. The canonical Hamiltonian density corrsponding to Eq. () is
   
It is clear that Eq. () represent a second class constrained system with the
algebra
  
where
  
As before we can omit the -function and discuss about the discrete part
. For construction a first class theory, it is necessary to define four
auxiliary fields  where . In agreement with Eq.
() we chose them such that
  
Remembering that the trivial choice  satisfy () and  according to
(), the new set of constraint are found to be:
   
From Eqs. () and () the correction terms of the embedded Hamiltonian
density are derived. As a result
   
where
   
and
   
It can be checked that Eqs. () and () represent a rank zero gauge
invariant theory in the extended phase space.
Conclusion 
As discussed in the previous sections, BFFT approach is a method for converting a
second class constrained system to a first class one which can be quantized according
to the usual quantization methods of first class systems; for instance canonical
quantization or path integral approach. In this method the series of correction terms
for constraints and every function in phase space, in principle have infinite terms.
In the master equation of BFFT method, Eq.(), there exist arbitrariness for
some basic parameters. It is possible to make truncated series for functions of the
phase space provided that we chose these parameters in a convenient way. This is done
for some special models in Refs., but a systematic method
has not been proposed for the general case. However, it seems difficult to truncate
series in BFFT method for an arbitrary second class system; i.e. a system in which
the elements of -matrix are functions of phase space. We solved this problem
when - matrix is in symplectic form or its elements are constants. These
cases for -matrix do not lose the generality of the problem. In fact it has
been shown that one can convert every second class constrained system to a symplectic
system. On the other hand, in most covariant physical models
the -matrix has constant elements as we showed for some of them in sections
4-6. The method can be applied to several second class systems in the similar way.
Acknowledgment 
The authors thanks F. Loran for useful discussion and comments.

 99 
 P A M Dirac, "Lectures on Quantum Mechanics ", Belfer graduate School, Yeshiva Univ. Press,
New York, 1964
 L D Faddev, Theo. Math. Phys.1 , (1970) 1.
 I A Batalin and E S Fradkin, Nucl. Phys. B 279 , (1987) 514; Phys. Lett. B 180 , (1986) 157.
 I A Batalin and I V Tyutin, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 6 , (1991) 3255.
 E S Fradkin and G A Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. B 55 , (1975)
224.
 C Becchi, A Rouet and R Stora, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 98 , (1976)
287.
 M Henneaux and C Teitelboim, Phys. Rep.  C 126 , (1985) 1;
"Quantization of Gauge Systems " Princton Univ. Press, 1992.
 E C G Stu ckelberg, Helv. Phys. Act. 30 , (1957) 209.
 N Banerjee, R Banerjee and S Ghosh, Ann. Phys.241 ,
(1995) 237.
 F Loran, Phys. Lett. B 554 , (2003) 207.
 F Loran and A Shirzad, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17 , (2002)
625.

 H Goldstein, "Classical Mechanics " 2nd edition, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
 P P Srivastava, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 , (1989) 2791.
 J Wess and B Zumino, Phys. Lett.  B 37 , (1971) 95.
 R Jackiw and R Rajaraman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54 , (1985) 1219.
 P Mitra and R Rajaraman, Phys. Lett.  B 225 , (1989) 267.
 U Kulshreshtha, D S Kulshreshtha and H J W
Mu ller-Kirsten, in "Constraint Theory and Quantization Methods " World
Scientific Press, Singapore, 1994, 305
 N Banerjee, R Banerjee and S Ghosh, Phys. Rev. D 49 , (1994) 1996; W Oliveira and J A Neto, Nucl. Phys.
 B 533 , (1998) 6110; R Banerjee, Phys. Rev.  D 48 , (1993) R5446;R
Banerjee, H J Rothe and K D Rothe, Phys. Rev.  D 49 , (1994) 5438; R Banerjee,
H J Rothe, Nucl. Phys.  B 447 , (1995) 183; W T Kim and Y J Park, Phys. Lett.
B 336 , (1994) 376; R Banerjee and J B Neto, Nucl. Phys.  B 499 , (1997)
453; E Harikumar and M Sivakumar, Nucl. Phys.  B 565 , (2000) 385.

