 
Radiative corrections to the Chern-Simons term at finite
temperature in the noncommutative Chern-Simons-Higgs model 
L. C. T. de Brito 
M. Gomes 
Silvana Perez 
 [Also at] Departamento de Fisica, Universidade Federal do
Para, Caixa Postal 479, 66075-110, Belem, PA, Brazil; e-mail:silperez@ufpa.br 
A. J. da Silva 
Instituto de Fisica, Universidade de Sa o Paulo,
 Caixa Postal 66318, 05315-970, Sa o Paulo - SP, Brazil 
lcbrito,mgomes,silperez,
  ajsilva@fma.if.usp.br 

 
The one-loop radiative correction to the Chern-Simons coefficient is
computed in noncommutative Chern-Simons-Higgs model at zero and at
finite temperature. At high temperature, we show that the static limit
of this correction is proportional to , in contrast with
the commutative case, where it goes like . Our results are analytic
functions of the noncommutative parameter.

Introduction 
    
The analysis of the radiative corrections to the Chern-Simons coefficient
has stimulated considerable interest in the recent years.  These studies
pointed out that the well known nonrenormalization theorem
 may become invalid outside perturbation or even
perturbatively whenever infrared singularities occur.  Typical of the
last possibility are situations which potentially modify the long
distance behavior of the relevant models. Examples in this direction
are the breakdown of some continuous symmetry, thermal effects and
the possible noncommutativity of the underlying space. 
In this work
we are going to focus on the changes in the Chern-Simons coefficient
due to thermal effects and the noncommutativity of the space.
 
The appearance of noncommutative coordinates has an old history
 but gained impetus more recently, mainly due to its
connection with string theory. One peculiar aspect of
these theories is the infrared/ultraviolet (IR/UV) mixing
, i. e., the presence of infrared singularities even in
theories without massless fields. Such behavior may be ameliorated in
some supersymmetric models. The absence of IR/UV mixing
has also been verified for the pure  Chern-Simons model which
actually seems to be a free theory.


At finite temperature, many features of noncommutativity have been
examined and applied to different field theoretical models
. One of the motivations for the studies in
noncommutative Quantum Field Theory (QFT) is to understand how the
thermal properties of physical systems are affected by the
noncommutativity.  At finite temperature, it is known that for small
momenta the amplitudes are, in general, not well behaved and this
feature is understood in terms of the new structure
introduced by the temperature, the velocity of the heat bath
. On the other hand, in a noncommutative manifold, the
new structure is the  tensor, which measures the
noncommutativity of the space, and it also leads to an infrared
nonanalytic behavior, at least at zero temperature. As argued in
, unless for some special limits, in noncommutative
finite temperature QFT there are many difficulties to evaluate
amplitudes in a closed form. Thus, to simplify matters, those authors
in particular have considered a generalization of the hard thermal
loop limit, which involves the noncommutative parameter.

    In a noncommutative manifold, it will appear trigonometric factors
  and, because of them, the amplitudes are separated in two parts, the
  planar and nonplanar ones. The first of them is proportional to the
  corresponding amplitude in the commutative case. The effects coming
  from the noncommutativity of the space can be extracted from the
  nonplanar contribution. In this paper we will study the corrections
  to the Chern Simons coefficient at finite temperature arising from
   the one-loop contributions to the gauge field two point
  function. To fix the notation, we first consider a commutative
  manifold. In, it was shown that, in the
  Chern-Simons-Higgs model in the spontaneously broken phase,  the
  coefficient increases like  in the static limit (in that work
  this result was extracted as a particular limit of the
  Maxwell-Chern-Simons-Higgs model). Here, we are going to extend this
  study to the noncommutative case and prove that it increases
  like  in this limit. As expected, although we are
  considering the Abelian model, because of the noncommutativity,
  there will be strong resemblances with the nonabelian theory.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section  the
noncommutative version of the Chern-Simons-Higgs model in the broken
phase is presented. Section  contains the one loop
corrections to the Chern-Simons coefficient in both commutative as
well as noncommutative case and at finite temperature in the imaginary time
formalism. The zero temperature results are obtained as consequence
of this evaluation. Finally, in Section  the conclusions are
presented.


Noncommutative Chern-Simons-Higgs model 

Noncommutative quantum field theories are defined in a manifold where
the coordinates do not commute among themselves. Rather, the
commutator between two position operators is postulated to be

 

where  is an antisymmetric matrix, which
commutes with the 's. The algebra of operators in such a kind
of manifold has extensively been studied, and many
properties are known (see for a review). For example,
due to the Wigner-Moyal correspondence, instead of working with
functions of the above noncommutative coordinates, one may use
ordinary functions of commutative variables embodied with the so
called Moyal product, defined as

 


Using this definition, one can   study quantum field theories in
 a noncommutative space, by replacing the standard pointwise product 
of fields by the Moyal one. For simplicity, in this
paper we shall keep .

 Let us consider the Chern-Simons-Higgs model in a noncommutative
space defined by the Lagrangian density

 

with 
. The above Lagrangian is invariant under the infinitesimal
 gauge transformation






 

In the spontaneously broken phase, 
, one can choose the decomposition 
 and rewrite
Eq. () as

 



where we have chosen the  gauge, specified by the gauge
fixing Lagrangian

 

which has the merit of canceling the nondiagonal terms in
the quadratic part of the model. We have also defined


 

Furthermore, the notations  and 

stand, respectively, for the commutator and anticommutator using the
Moyal product.

 To complete the Lagrangian of the model, one has to add to
  Eq. () the contribution of the Faddeev-Popov  ghost
  field  given by

 

where  and  are the ghost fields.


 
The propagator  for the gauge field is 

 


 where .  The propagators for the other  fields
 are the standard ones (
,   and ). These
propagators are not affected by the noncommutativity.

At finite temperature and using the imaginary time formalism, the
gauge propagator is ( in the Euclidean
space)

 

with . 

One-loop results 

In this section we will compute the one-loop radiative correction to
the Chern-Simons coefficient of the above model in both commutative
and noncommutative cases  at finite temperature in the imaginary
time formalism.


Commutative case 

 Let us start by evaluating the parity violating part of the
polarization tensor  in the commutative case. There is
only one diagram,  Fig. 1, to evaluate.  At one loop, the ghost
field does not contribute to the parity violating part,
 as can be seen from . Thus, we have



 

The consideration of the static
limit, where  and  is small, yields

 

Note that, in the static limit,  vanishes
due to the antisymmetry of the integrand in
Eq. (). We have also introduced the notation
 and 
. Using that

 
 

where , we write Eq.  ()
for small external momentum as

 

After that, we evaluate the sum in  through the use of

 

where the prime in the sum indicates that it runs only over the residues of the
poles of . Thus, we find

 

Using that , we can separate
 the zero temperature from the finite temperature part. The first
one can be computed straightforwardly, giving

 

The finite temperature part of Eq. () is more complicated
but can be expressed in terms of polylogarithm functions as

 
 
where  

 


and

 

In the high temperature limit, the above expression
furnishes 

 

The results () and () agree with the
corresponding ones in the Chern-Simons-Higgs limit of the
Maxwell-Chern-Simons-Higgs model calculated in,
as commented in the introduction.

Noncommutative case 

Next, let us determine the parity violating part of the polarization
tensor in the noncommutative Chern-Simons-Higgs model. In this case,
 both diagrams in Fig. 1 contribute. As in the commutative case,
at one-loop the ghost field does not give a parity violating part
correction to the polarization tensor. The diagram in Fig.  1  gives

 
 
where 
.  Again, we will consider only the static limit. Therefore,
we have

 

To compute this integral, let us note that, while the denominator has
only sums of  and  and so can be expanded for small
values of , as we have done in the commutative case, the
numerator has the product  which is not
necessarily small for small . To avoid possible problems, we
will proceed as follows. We define a new variable 
 such that . Afterwards, we
evaluate the sum, by expanding the denominator for small  as in
Eq. () and then  use Eq. (), yielding


 

where  and  are respectively the planar and
non-planar contributions to ; 
the  limit will be taken shortly.

The planar part is exactly one half of Eq. (). Thus, going
to the non-planar contribution,  from Eq. () 
we have

 

where we have used polar coordinates such that

 
 
The angular part of the above integral  can be expressed in terms of
Bessel functions, as follows

 


These integrals
 are evaluated in the appendix . Here, we will only write the
 final results. So, we have:

 

and

  


where . Note the apparent singularity
in Eq. () at ; this kind of
structure is the well known infrared singularity, characteristic of
noncommutative field theories.  Here, however, as
 we will shortly see, this singularity cancels in the final
result. Next, let us check if these results are consistent with the
  limit, namely, if in this limit we obtain the 
other half of Eqs. () and (), so that the
 commutative result is recovered. For the zero temperature part,
expanding Eq. () for small values of , we
 get

 

When , we obtain one half of
Eq. (), completing the expected result for the
commutative case.

Now, looking at the temperature dependent part,
Eq. (), when , we found that the result is
again proportional to function defined in
Eq. ():

  

From the asymptotic behavior of the polylogarithm functions
, we found that in the high temperature limit,
Eq. () behaves as

 

Once we have obtained the commutative limit, we consider next the first
correction,  which in this case is proportional to . The
computations for this term are similar to the ones that we have done 
 so far, and finally, we can write the result, up to , as


 
 
Before proceeding to the computation of the remaining diagram, it is
worth noting that both the temperature independent as well as
temperature dependent parts of , Eqs. () and
(), are analytic functions of : no infrared
singularities shows up.

Evaluating the  graph in Fig. 1., we have

 

and considering only the parity violating part of this diagram,
we obtain

 


The integrals that appear in this expression are similar to the
ones we have computed before. So, without going into details, for
   and ,  the
calculation gives

 

and, for high temperature limit and also small
 and 
 

where

 

It is worth noting here the gauge dependence of
. Naively, we could expect that there would be no
gauge dependence at this point of the calculation, as it happens
in the commutative
case. But, this graph gives a purely noncommutative contribution to
, which will disappear when  goes to
zero. Therefore, there is no relation between it and what
is found in the commutative case. We recall that a dependence on the gauge
parameter was also  obtained in the commutative studies of the
nonabelian gauge models.


Conclusions 

The graphs computed in section  suffice to obtain the
one-loop contribution to the parity violating part of the polarization
tensor and so, to the Chern-Simons coefficient.  Collecting the
results coming from  and , we obtain
the zero and finite temperature contributions to
. So,


 

and

  



 From Eqs. ()
and () we can see that the commutativity can
be recovered straightforwardly, by considering the limit 
. In other words, there are no Seiberg poles appearing
in this limit.

Furthermore, looking at the finite temperature result,
Eq. (), in the static limit we can extract the leading
behavior in the high temperature regime and first order correction in
the noncommutative parameter as being proportional to 
. So, our calculation provides a logarithm correction to
the result obtained in for the commutative version of
the same model. 

Concerning gauge invariance it should be pointed out that
previous studies of noncommutative gauge theories have shown that, 
as it happens in the commutative non-Abelian CS model,
invariance under large gauge transformation requires that the CS coefficient
be quantized. At finite temperature, the 
verification of this property for the effective action is a highly non
trivial task which probably involves all orders of perturbation and
also other (nonlocal) interactions. Even in the
commutative setting, invariance under large non-Abelian gauge
transformation was verified only in simplified situations
. In our calculations large gauge transformation is
certainly partially  broken. In spite of that, our result should still
be a good approximation for small couplings.


Possible extensions of this work are the analysis of the parity even
part of the gauge field two point function and the investigation of
the properties of its effective action under small gauge
transformation. This last study requires the calculation of the gauge
field three and four point functions.  Such work is in progress.

After the completion of this work, we became aware of reference
, where similar studies were made for Maxwell gauge field
coupled with Majorana fermions.

Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by  Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) and
 Fundac ao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP).


 
Useful Integrals. 
In this appendix, we will compute the integrals that appear in
Eq. (). Let us define

 

Using that 

 

we can rewrite  as

 

 These integrals can be evaluated using the standard result
 

Then, it is straightforward to verify that

 

Note that here we have computed both zero temperature and finite
temperature parts together,  although in sections  and
 they occur separately.



 10   

  For a recent review, see G. V. Dunne, Aspects of Chern
Simons Theory . Lectures at the 1998 Les Houches Summer  School Topological
Aspects of Low Dimensional Systems , hep-th/9902115.

  S. Coleman and B. Hill, Phys. Lett. B159 , 184
 (1985).

 R. Jackiw, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 108 , 30
 (2002).
 
 N. Seiberg and E. Witten, JHEP 9909 , 032 (1999).  

   Shiraz Minwalla, Mark Van Raamsdonk, Nathan Seiberg
 JHEP 0008 , 008 (2000). 
 
  H. O. Girotti, M. Gomes, V. O. Rivelles and A. J. da
 Silva, Nucl. Phys. B587 , 299 (2000); H. O. Girotti, M. Gomes,
 A. Yu. Petrov, V. O. Rivelles and A. J. da Silva, Phys. Lett.  B521 , 119 (2001).

  Ashok Das and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, JHEP 0106 ,
 028 (2001).  

  W. Fischler, J. Gommis, E. Gorbatov,
 A. Kashani-Poor, S. Paban and P. Pouliot, JHEP 05 , 024 (2000);
 K. Landsteiner, E. Lopez and M. H. G. Tytgat, JHEP 09 , 027
 (2000); G. Arcioni and M. A. Vazquez-Mozo, JHEP 01  028
 (2000); F.T. Brandt, Ashok Das, J. Frenkel, D.G.C. McKeon,
 J.C. Taylor, Phys. Rev. D66 , 045011 (2002).

  P. Arnold, S. Vokos, P. Bedaque and A. Das,
 Phys. Rev. D47  4698 (1993); J.I. Kapusta, Nucl. Phys.  B148 , 461 (1979).

  F. T. Brandt, J. Frenkel and D. G. C. McKeon,
 Phys. Rev. D65  125029 (2002).

 
  V.S. Alves, Ashok Das, Gerald V. Dunne and
 Silvana Perez, Phys.Rev. D65 , 085011 (2002).

  H. J. Gronewold, Physica (Amsterdan) 12 ,
 405 (1946); H. Weyl, Z. Physik 46 , 1 (1949); J. E. Moyal,
 Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 45  , 99 (1949); S. Doplicher,
 K. Fredenhagem, J. E. Roberts, Commun. Math. Phys. 172 , 187
 (1995).

  M. R. Douglas and N. A. Nekrasov, Rev. Mod. Phys.,
 73 , 977 (2001); R. J. Szabo, hep-th/0109162 (2001); M. Gomes,  XI
 Jorge Andre Swieca Summer School, Sao Paulo, Brazil (2001).

 Leon Lewin ,Dilogarithms and associated functions .
Macdonald (1958).

  J.I. Kapusta, Finite
 Temperature Field Theory . Cambridge University Press (1989).

  Robert D. Pisarski and Sumathi Rao, Phys. Rev  D32 , 2081 (1985); Robert D. Pisarski, Phys. Rev. D35 , 664 (1987). 
 
  V. P. Nair and A. P. Polychronakos,
 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 030403 (2001); M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari,
 Phys. Lett. B510 , 247 (2001); D. Bak, K. Lee and J.H. Park,
 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 030402 (2001); Guang-Hong Chen and
 Yong-Shi Wu, Nucl. Phys. B593 , 562 (2001). 

  G. Dunne, K. Lee and C. Lu, Phys. Rev. Lett.   78 , 3434(1997); S. Deser, L. Griguolo and D. Seminara,
  Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 , 1976 (1997); Phys. Rev. D 57 , 7444
  (1998) ; Commun. Math. Phys. 197 , 443 (1998); hep-th/0212140;
 C. D. Fosco, G. L. Rossini and F. A. Schaposnik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79  
 1980 (1997); 79 , 4296(E) (1997); F. T.  Brandt, Ashok Das and J. 
Frenkel, Phys. Rev. D65 , 065013 (2002); F. T.  Brandt, Ashok Das,
  J. Frenkel, S. Pereira and J. C. Taylor, ibid  64 , 065018 (2001).


  B. Chandrasekhar and Prasanta K. Panigrahi,
 hep-th/0301030.


  I. S. Gradshteyn and M. Ryzhik, Table of
 Integral, Series and Products . Academic Press, New York, (1980).




* 
One loop graphs contributing to the parity violating part of the
 two point function.  









