 
 
 
 diag 
P.C. Schuster and R.L. Jaffe Quantum Mechanics on Manifolds Embedded in
Euclidean Space 
Quantum Mechanics on Manifolds
 Embedded in Euclidean
Space 
P.C. Schuster(Email: schuster@mit.eduHomepage:
http://web.mit.edu/schuster/Public/homepage.html) and
R.L. Jaffe(Email: jaffe@lns.mit.edu) 

                     

Center for Theoretical Physics and Department of Physics   

Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139   
MIT-CTP-3344  
 

Quantum particles confined to surfaces in higher dimensional spaces are acted
upon by forces that exist only as a result of the surface geometry and the
quantum mechanical nature of the system. The dynamics are particularly rich
when confinement is implemented by forces that act normal to the surface. We
review this confining potential formalism  applied to the confinement
of a particle to an arbitrary manifold embedded in a higher dimensional
Euclidean space. We devote special attention to the geometrically induced
gauge potential that appears in the effective Hamiltonian for motion on the
surface. We emphasize that the gauge potential is only present when the space
of states describing the degrees of freedom normal to the surface is
degenerate. We also distinguish between the effects of the intrinsic and
extrinsic geometry on the effective Hamiltonian and provide simple
expressions for the induced scalar potential. We discuss examples including
the case of a 3-dimensional manifold embedded in a 5-dimensional Euclidean
space. 



Introduction 

In quantum mechanics the problem of constraining particle motion to a spatial manifold embedded
in a Euclidean space  is conventionally treated in one of two ways. In the intrinsic
quantization  approach, the motion is constrained to the manifold a priori. A classical Hamiltonian is
constructed from coordinates and momentum intrinsic to the surface and the system is quantized
canonically. In this case, the embedding space  is irrelevant and the quantum system depends
only on the geometry intrinsic to the manifold. In the confining potential  approach, the particle
is confined by a strong force that acts normal to the manifold. An effective Hamiltonian for
propagation on the hypersurface is obtained by freezing the motion normal to the surface in a low
state of excitation of the confining potential. This effective Hamiltonian depends on the intrinsic
geometry and  on the way that the hypersurface is embedded in . The intrinsic
quantization scheme suffers from ordering ambiguities that allow for multiple consistent quantization
procedures that differ by a term proportional to the scalar curvature of the
hypersurface . On the other hand, the confining potential approach yields a unique
effective Hamiltonian that depends on the physical mechanism of the constraint. In any real physical
system we know of, constrained motion is the result of a strong confining force, and so one can argue
that the confining potential formalism offers a physically more realistic model of constraints.
Although intrinsic quantization has been studied since the earliest days of quantum theory, the
confining potential approach has only received serious attention in the last decade or two
. 

The confining potential approach has now been studied for a variety of
systems using a variety of different confining forces. It has been
applied to the study of both spinless and spin- particles
confined to thin tubes and especially under the assumption that the
curvature of the tube is small and slowly
varying . Spinless particles confined to
surfaces in three dimensional space have also been studied by da Costa , and
the generalization to an arbitrary -dimensional manifold  embedded in a
-dimensional Euclidean space has been carried out by subsequent
authors . Extensions of the
confining potential approach have been applied to solitons with
confined collective degrees of freedom  and to systems
for which the effective Hamiltonian on the hypersurface admits
supersymmetric states . Notable applications of the
confining potential formalism include the study of rotational spectra
of molecules  and the study of electrons in Quantum Hall
devices . In this paper, we review and develop the
confining potential formalism in the spirit of Refs.  and
. We devote special attention to the group-theoretic
structure of the torsion-dependent terms that appear in the effective
Hamiltonian, as well as the role played by symmetries of the confining
potential. We also recast the mathematical form of the curvature-dependent potentials found by
previous authors in terms of "principal curvatures" so that the effects of the embedding structure on
the effective dynamics can be more easily understood.

Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly discuss the
physical motivation behind the confining potential approach. In Section 3, we
introduce an adapted coordinate system that allows one to separate normal
from tangential degrees of freedom on . In Section 4, we derive the
effective Hamiltonian governing motion on  by rescaling the collective
normal coordinates and developing a perturbative expansion in small
parameters of the complete Hamiltonian as found in. In Section
5, we discuss in detail the gauge structure of the effective theory with
special attention devoted to the representation content of the gauge fields.
In Section 6, we discuss the intrinsic versus extrinsic geometrical
contributions to the effective theory on  and give examples that
illustrate the possible physics for  embedded in . Section 7 concludes with final
thoughts and discussion.



The Confining Potential Approach 
We limit ourselves to the case of a scalar confining potential, although
magnetic-like vector potentials and gravitational-like tensor potentials are
physically relevant in some instances and have received attention in the
literature . A strong confining potential is introduced in all
directions normal to the hypersurface. The effect of this potential is to
constrain the particle to the manifold by raising the energy of normal
excitations far beyond the energy scale associated with motion tangent to the
hypersurface. The Hamiltonian then separates into a term governing high
energy confined motion in the directions normal to , a term governing
low energy motion tangent to , and interaction terms that couple the
normal and the tangential degrees of freedom. To obtain an effective
Hamiltonian on , the total Hamiltonian is projected onto a low-lying multiplet of normal states,
typically the ground state. The effective Hamiltonian governing dynamics on  is found to be the
Laplacian on  coupled minimally to a background gauge field plus a
scalar quantum effective potential that depends on the principal
curvatures of . The gauge group is whatever subgroup
of SO() is preserved by the confining potential. The strength
and representation content of the gauge terms appearing in the
effective theory depend not only on the properties of the embedding of
, but also crucially on the symmetries of the space of normal
states. When the normal space is trivial, the gauge interaction in the
effective Hamiltonian vanishes identically. Only in cases where the
normal space is nontrivial (i.e., possesses degeneracies) will the
gauge interaction be nonzero. Thus static external SO() gauge fields
can be geometrically induced by confining particles to manifolds that
are embedded nontrivially in a higher dimensional Euclidean space
using confining potentials that admit a degenerate space of normal
states.



Geometry 
To study the quantum mechanics of a spinless particle confined to an
-dimensional manifold  embedded in -dimensional Euclidean space ,
we first define a coordinate system that facilitates the separation of the
degrees of freedom normal to  from those that are tangential. With
 denoting an embedding of  in ,
and   a local coordinate system on , we introduce
an adapted coordinate frame   defined by a smooth assignment of
 linearly independent tangent vectors
, and  orthogonal normal
vectors . In a sufficiently small
neighborhood of , the Cartesian coordinates, , for a point
in  can be reexpressed as
 
where  denotes an appropriate set of the  and  a set of distances  from 
in the directions . The metric in the frame  is defined by
 
where , and derivatives are taken with respect to adapted frame coordinates,
 and . To calculate , we need expressions for
 and
.  Applying a generalized form of the Frenet-Serret equations
, we may write
  
where
  and "" is the standard inner product on . In
the language of differential geometry, ,
, and  are the first fundamental form
(the metric on ), the second fundamental form, and the normal
fundamental form, respectively. The  are the
usual Christoffel symbols, but they will play little role in the
discussion that follows. We follow conventional notation in that lower
indices on tensors are obtained from upper indices by contraction with
.

Note that the choice of an adapted coordinate frame is not unique. In
particular, one adapted coordinate frame is carried into another by a
point-dependent rotation of the . Under the action of
a rotation, , on the normal vectors ,
 transforms as an  vector, and 
as an  gauge connection
 
The metric can be determined from eqs. () and (), and is given by
 
where  is given by
 
Calculating the determinant of , we find , where  is the determinant of . Moreover, a calculation of the inverse of the metric tensor yields the exact expression, 
 
where  is the inverse of
.(It should be noted that in the literature
 is sometimes confused with .)  


Derivation of the Effective Hamiltonian 

Having developed a convenient characterization of the geometry of 
embedded in , we can construct the Hamiltonian  on . The
quantum description of dynamics on  is unambiguously defined by
the free Hamiltonian  on  together with the potential that
confines the particle to . To obtain the effective Hamiltonian on
, we rewrite  in terms of our adapted frame coordinates, and
then project it onto the space of states describing the confined normal
degrees of freedom. In Cartesian coordinates  , and
working in units where  and the mass of our particle is equal to
unity, we have   
 
where  denotes derivatives taken with respect to Euclidean coordinates, and  is the confining potential that depends only on the normal coordinates.
Following convention, we normalize the wave function  of the system according to the condition
 
Changing coordinates to  and , the Hamiltonian given in eq. () becomes
 
and the normalization condition of eq. () becomes
 
Since we want to obtain a wave function describing a quantum mechanical probability density
for a particle moving on , we rescale the wave function  by
, where  is the determinant of , 
. Likewise, we rescale the Hamiltonian 
, .  is then normalized
on
 as 
 
and so  can be interpreted as a probability density for a particle moving
on  defined with respect to the conventional manifold measure .
Returning to , we may use the explicit form for  in eq. () to obtain
 
Introducing ,
where the  are the angular momentum operators  in the
space normal to , we may compactly rewrite eq. () as
 

Next we implement the constraint imposed by the confining potential . To do this, we
exploit the fact that  is a function of the normal coordinates  alone and  has a deep
minimum at . Thus, we may expand  as a power series in the  about its
minimum,  
 
where we have assumed that  is symmetric in the  up to quadratic
order.(Asymmetric scalar confining potentials are considered in Ref.) 
Since  has a deep minimum, we can neglect terms of order  and higher. In
neglecting these terms, we are assuming that  is much larger than the scale of
curvatures on , denoted by . More specifically, .
Following the approach of Refs.  and, we adsorb the scale of the
frequency  in eq. () into a small dimensionless parameter ,
, so that the rescaled  is of order
. We then use  as a natural perturbative parameter in the theory. Thus,
the dominant pieces of the Hamiltonian in eq. () that act on the transverse space
are
 
Formally, we want to consider the limit . However, the divergence in
the potential  in the  limit
complicates the analysis. To avoid this problem, we rescale the coordinates , as
, which allows us to rewrite eq. () as
 
Thus, we can study the  limit unambiguously by considering . 
We apply this approach to the complete Hamiltonian to develop an expansion of  in
powers of , 
 
where
 
and(To obtain eq. () for , we have used

.) 
 
Equation (), which forms the basis of the subsequent analysis, was first obtained in full generality by Maraner and Destri . Given that we are interested in the  limit, the only term beyond  relevant in the
perturbative expansion in eq. () is . From here on we keep only  which
survives as
.

To obtain an effective Hamiltonian on , we need to "freeze" the normal degrees of freedom.
We separate the wave function  into a function depending on the normal coordinates , and
a function depending on the manifold coordinates 
 
where the index  labels any degeneracy that exists in the spectrum of the
 Hamiltonian  governing the normal degrees of
freedom.  is degenerate because of the SO() symmetry of , and so the
eigenstates of  can be decomposed into irreducible SO() multiplets. For the case of a
-dimensional symmetric harmonic oscillator, the ground state of  belongs to the trivial
representation of SO(), while the first excited state belongs to the -dimensional "fundamental"
representation of SO(). The  satisfy to 
 
where  gives the largest  contribution to the total energy  of the
system. Upon projection onto the space of states spanned by , 
becomes a  matrix  with components
 
 acts on the wave function  (with components ), and the dynamics on 
is determined by
 
where  is the  correction to the total energy  of the system.




Gauge Structure 

To better understand the structure of the effective Hamiltonian , we return to expression (). 
Defining  matrices  and  by
 
and using eq. (), the effective Hamiltonian on  can be rewritten as
 
where  and  are the  matrices
 
and  is the  identity matrix. 

The algebra leading to eq. () generates a term  which is kept explicitly by other workers. Since the confining potential  possesses a SO() symmetry, all of the 's commute with  and  forms a complete set of
states for the subspace spanned by  for all .
Consequently,
 is zero.
       
 is the Hamiltonian for a spinless particle in a curved space in the presence of
background SO() gauge fields and a geometrically induced potential. We emphasize that the gauge
potentials are only present if the normal wavefunction lies in a degenerate, nontrivial representation
of SO(). The effective physics on  governed by  remains invariant under local
SO() gauge transformations of the normal coordinates. Under SO() rotations of the
,  transforms as a gauge field in the adjoint representation of
SO(), while  transforms in some -dimensional representation  of SO().
In particular, under the transformation
 
where  is an element of the vector representation of SO(), , , and  transform as
 
where  is in the  matrix representation of SO(). As promised, the invariance of  under SO()-rotations is realized as an SO() gauge invariance of the effective theory on .

The field strength tensor, , associated with the gauge potential  is given by
 
Although a nonvanishing field strength is a sufficient condition for the gauge potential  to have a physical effect, it is not necessary. As Takagi and Tanzawa have noted, even in cases with vanishing field strength, global Aharonov-Bohm effects can exist when
the constraint hypersurface has nonvanishing torsion. Subsequent authors have further
explored the connection between Aharonov-Bohm effects and the geometry of the constraint
hypersurface for the case of  embedded in .

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Geometry Contributions 
In this section, we consider two questions: First, what features of  cannot  be purely attributed to the intrinsic geometry of ? Second, what type of embedding structure is needed
to generate nontrivial geometrically induced physics effects for the case of  embedded in
? 

Upon examining eqs. () and (), we see that the intrinsic  contributions to
 are from the Laplacian on  involving the adapted frame metric .
Extrinsic  contributions to  occur through the momentum independent potential
 and through the minimally coupled gauge field .  depends on the
extrinsic geometry of the embedding of  in  and is purely quantum mechanical (i.e., does
not survive in the classical limit).  was generated by rescaling the Hamiltonian to adaptive
coordinates, so it represents a quantum "fictitious" force associated with the adapted frame
. In order to understand better how the embedding generates the effective potential, we
rewrite  in terms of the geometrically invariant principal curvatures of . There are
 principal curvatures for each normal vector  given by the eigenvalues of the
matrix
 
Denoting the  principal curvature corresponding to the  normal  as , we introduce the linear and quadratic polynomials symmetric in the  for each  independently, 
 
In terms of the  and , we have
 
As first pointed out in Refs.  and, the effective potential for the
cases of  embedded in  is given by, 
 
where  is the curvature of the curve , and  are the principal curvatures of . For both of these cases, the effective potential is strictly negative. For the more general case of  embedded in , the effective potential can locally equal any real valued smooth function defined on . 
For example, with  denoting principle curvatures
 
for the case of  embedded in . 

The "fictitious force" potential  is nonzero for a general embedding of  in . The
other geometry-dependent interaction that can appear in  is the gauge term
. For the simplest 3-dimensional case of  embedded in ,  is a
1-dimensional potential with nondegenerate energy eigenstates, and so  vanishes.
For  embedded in ,  can be nonzero when the 
are locked into a degenerate subspace of . In the degenerate cases, the gauge interaction has
U() symmetry for  and , and SO() symmetry for  and . 

To further illustrate the physics for a 3-dimensional manifold, consider the embedding of a
hypersurface  in  given by
 
In this example, the  and  coordinates have been mapped onto a helical surface in a 3-dimensional subspace of  and the remaining  coordinate mapping is flat. Using an adapted frame field
 
we may calculate the nonvanishing components of the fundamental forms and obtain
, 
, 
 
and .
Moreover, the field strength tensor  has nonvanishing components
 
where  is the expectation value of the normal state angular momentum operator
. The induced potential  can be obtained from
, 
 
and is given by
 
Given a confining potential with Abelian SO()  U() invariance, a nonvanishing field strength tensor implies that the U() induced gauge potential  cannot be transformed away. Assuming that the normal states are locked into a subspace with nonvanishing angular momentum , the gauge potential is given by
 
and the corresponding background magnetic-like field is
  
For fixed , an observer on  would feel the presence of a magnetic field along the
-direction and an attractive -dependent scalar potential centered at , both of which tend
to zero as  goes to infinity. 

In addition to curves and surfaces embedded in , other examples that have received attention in the literature include SO() embedded in , as well as generalized curves  and S embedded in . 

Conclusion 

Confinement of particle motion to a curved manifold generates gauge fields as well as fictitious forces
in the effective theory on the manifold. We have applied the confining potential formalism to the
study of systems with confined degrees of freedom, and demonstrated that in the adiabatic limit of
slowly varying curvature, the strength and representation content of the gauge terms appearing in
the effective theory depends crucially on the space of normal states. The gauge terms vanish when
the normal state is nondegenerate.

In addition to gauge terms, fictitious forces that depend on the extrinsic geometry of the constraint
manifold also appear in the effective theory. The extrinsic geometric contributions to the theory
highlight a fundamental difference between confinement in classical versus quantum physics. In
classical mechanics, dynamics on the constraint manifold is independent of the directions normal to
the manifold and therefore depends only on intrinsic geometry. In quantum mechanics, the
Schrodinger wave function of the system is always nonzero in some neighborhood of the
constraint manifold and is therefore sensitive to both intrinsic and extrinsic geometry.



Acknowledgments  
This work is supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. Department of Energy (D.O.E.) under cooperative research agreement DF-FC02-94ER40818.



  9 
 B. De Witt, Phys. Rev.  85 , 635 (1952)
 H. Jenson and H. Koppe, Ann. of Phys.  63 , 586 (1971)
  R.C.T. da Costa, Phys. Rev.  23 , 1982 (1981)
  S. Takagi and T. Tanzawa, Prog. Theo. Phys.  87 , 561 (1992)
 P. Ouyang, V. Mohta and R.L. Jaffe, Annals Phys.  275 , 297 (1999)
  P. Maraner and C. Destri, Mod. Phys. Lett. A  8 , 9 861 (1993)
  P. Maraner, J. Phys. A  28 , 2939 (1995)
  P. Maraner, Annals Phys.  246 , 325 (1996)
  K. Fujii, N. Ogawa, S. Uchiyama, and N.M. Chepilko, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  12 , 5235 (1997)
  N.M. Chepilko and K. Fujii, Physics of Atomic Nuclei  58 , 1063 (1995)
 See: The Quantum Hall Effect , ed. R.E. Prange and S.M. Girvin (Springer-Verlag, 1989)
 P. Maraner, hep-th/9809189 
 M. Spivak, Differential Geometry  Vol. IV (Publich or Perich Inc., 1975)
  P. Maraner, Rept. Math. Phys.  40 , 265 (1997); P. Maraner,
hep-th/0102034; P. Maraner, J. Phys. A  31 , 9309 (1998); P. Maraner, J. Phys. A 
30 , 2163 (1997); P. Maraner, J. Phys. A  29 , 2199 (1996); I.G. Moss and N.
Shiiki, Nucl. Phys. B  565 , 345 (2000)

