




footnote  

A determination of  and the
non-perturbative vacuum energy of Yang-Mills theory in the Landau
gauge  
D. Dudal
Research Assistant of the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders,
Belgium.  david.dudal@rug.ac.be   and H.
Verscheldehenri.verschelde@rug.ac.be  


Ghent University    

Department of Mathematical Physics and Astronomy    

Krijgslaan 281-S9   

B-9000 Gent, Belgium    R.E.
Brownerebrowne@amtp.liv.ac.uk   and J.A.
Graceyjag@amtp.liv.ac.uk  


Theoretical Physics Division    

Department of Mathematical Sciences    

University of Liverpool     

P.O. Box 147, Liverpool, L69 3BX, United
Kingdom    

 
 LTH-569 

 
We discuss the 2-point-particle-irreducible  expansion,
which sums bubble graphs to all orders, in the context of 
Yang-Mills theory in the Landau gauge. Using the method we
investigate the possible existence of a gluon condensate of mass
dimension two, 
, and the corresponding non-zero vacuum energy. This
condensate gives rise to a dynamically generated mass for the
gluon.


Introduction.  Recently there has been growing
evidence for the existence of a condensate of mass dimension two
in  Yang-Mills theory with  colours. An obvious
candidate for such a condensate is 
. The phenomenological background of this
type of condensate can be found in
. However, if
one first considers simpler models such as massless 
 theory or the Gross-Neveu model and the
role played by their quartic interaction in the formation of a
(local) composite quadratic condensate and the consequent
dynamical mass generation  for the originally massless
fields, it is clear that
the possibility  exists that the quartic gluon interaction
gives rise to a quadratic composite operator condensate in Yang
Mills theory and hence a dynamical mass for the gluons. The
formation of such a dynamical mass is strongly correlated to a
lower value of the vacuum energy. In other words the causal
perturbative Yang Mills vacuum is unstable. From this viewpoint,
mass generation in connection with gluon pairing has already been
discussed a long time ago in, for example,
. There the analogy with the BCS
superconductor and its gap equation was examined. It was shown
that the zero vacuum is tachyonic in nature and the gluons achieve
a mass due to a non-trivial solution of the gap equation.
Moreover, recent work using lattice regularized Yang Mills theory
has indicated the existence of a non-zero condensate,
,
. There the authors invoked the operator
product expansion, (OPE), on the gluon propagator as well as on
the effective coupling  in the Landau gauge. Their
work was based on the perception that, even in the relatively high
energy region (GeV), a discrepancy existed between the
expected perturbative behaviour and the lattice results. It was
shown that, within the momentum range accessible to the OPE, that
this discrepancy could be solved with a  power
correction(The  power correction due to the
 condensate is too weak at such
energies to be the cause of the discrepancy.) . They concluded that
a non-vanishing dimension two condensate must exist. Further, the
results of give some evidence that
instantons might be the mechanism behind the low-momentum
contribution to condensate. As has been argued in
, only the low-momentum content of the
squared vector potential is accessible with the OPE. Moreover,
they argue that there are also short-distance 
non-perturbative contributions to 
.

It is no coincidence the Landau gauge is used for the search for a
dimension two condensate. Naively, the operator  is not
gauge-invariant. Although this does not prevent the condensate
 showing up in gauge variant
quantities like the gluon propagator, we should instead consider
the gauge-invariant operator 
, where  is the
space-time volume and  is an arbitrary gauge transformation in
order to assign some physical meaning to the operator. Clearly
from its structure this operator is non-local and thus is
difficult to handle. However, when we impose the Landau gauge, it
reduces(Although this equality is somewhat disturbed by
Gribov ambiguities. In this paper Gribov
copies are neglected since we will work in the perturbative Landau
gauge and sum a certain class of bubble diagrams in this
particular gauge. It is a pleasant feature of the Landau gauge
that  can be given a gauge
invariant meaning. In another gauge, the bubbles will no longer
correspond to  and the
correspondence with 
is more of academic interest.)  to the local operator .
Moreover, it has been shown that 
 is (on-shell) BRST invariant
. Another
motivation for studying  is
the perceived connection between the gluon propagator and
confinement. (See and references therein.)
More precisely, the gluon propagator exhibits an infrared
suppression, as has been reported in many lattice simulations,
 and using the
Schwinger-Dyson approach,
. A dynamical
gluon mass might serve as an indication for such a suppression. An
attempt has already been made to explain confinement by a dual
Ginzburg-Landau model or an effective string theory, in the Landau
gauge, with the help of 
. The fact that 
 might be central to confinement, is
supported by the observation that it undergoes a phase transition
due to the monopole condensation in three dimensional compact QED
.

From these various analyses the importance of 
 must have become clear. Therefore, the aim
of this article is to provide some analytical  evidence that
gluons do condense. To our knowledge, is
the only paper which effectively calculates 
, without referring to lattice
regularization. In the standard way of
calculating the effective potential for a particular quantity was
followed, and all the problems concerning the fact that the
considered quantity was a composite operator were elegantly
solved.

In a previous paper, we have discussed the 
expansion for the Gross-Neveu model and found results close to the
exact values for the Gross-Neveu mass gap and the vacuum energy.
The  expansion does not rely on the effective action
formalism of. Instead it is directly
based on the path integral and the topology of its Feynman
diagrammatical expansion. In this paper we will discuss how to
apply it to  Yang-Mills theories in the Landau gauge. Of
course, it is not our aim to provide a complete picture of
 but rather give further
evidence for its existence since it lowers the vacuum energy.

The  expansion.  The  Yang Mills
Lagrangian in -dimensional Euclidean space time is given by
 
where  is the gluon field strength,   
 ,  implements the Landau
gauge and its corresponding Faddeev-Popov part and  and
 denote the ghosts and anti-ghost fields
respectively. Issues concerning the counterterm part of ()
will be discussed later. First, we consider the diagrammatical
expansion for the vacuum energy which we denote by . As is well
known, this is a series consisting of one particle irreducible,
, diagrams. These  diagrams can be divided into two
disjoint classes:
 
those diagrams not falling apart into two separate pieces
when two lines meeting at the same point  are cut, which we
call 2-point-particle-irreducible, (); (an example is given
in Fig. 1) those diagrams falling apart into two separate
pieces when two lines meeting at the same point  are cut which
we call 2-point-particle-reducible, (), while  is called
the  insertion point; (an example is given in Fig. 2).
                 
         

        A  vacuum bubble. 
                 

        A  vacuum bubble.  is the  insertion point. 
        We may now resum this series of  and  graphs, where
the propagators are the usual massless ones, by retaining only the
 graphs, whereby the  insertions, or bubbles, are
resummed into an effective 
. The bubble graph gluon polarization
is then given by
 
where  are the  structure constants. We define the
vacuum expectation value of  as
 
The global  symmetry can then be used to show that
 
Substitution of () in () yields
 
which results in an effective mass, , running in the 
propagators, given by
 
If we let  be the sum of the  vacuum bubbles,
calculated with the effective  propagator, then this
 is not  equal to the vacuum energy , because
simply removing all  insertions is too naive. For instance,
there is a double counting problem which is already visible in the
 diagram of Fig. 2 where each bubble can be seen as a 
insertion on the other one. However, we can resolve this
ambiguity. A dimensional argument results in
 
where  will accomodate the double counting. To determine
the appropriate value of , we use the path integral which gives
 
The first two terms contribute unambiguously to the  part.
For the last term, we rewrite
 
Using () and the properties of the structure constants
, we obtain
 
From (), we derive
 
Combining (), () and () gives
 
Then a simple diagrammatical argument gives
 
which is a local gap equation, summing the bubble graphs into
. Using this together with () finally gives
 
It is easy to show that the following equivalence holds
 
To summarize, we have summed the bubble insertions into an
effective , . The vacuum energy is
expressed by
 
We stress the fact that () is only meaningful if 
the gap equation () is satisfied. This means we cannot
consider  or  as a real variable on which 
depends. It is a quantity which has to obey its gap equation,
otherwise the  expansion loses its validity. This also means
that , or equivalently , is not a function
depending on  (), in contrast(
also makes sense if .)  with the usual
concept of an effective potential  which is a function
of the constant field .

In order to ensure the usefulness of the  formalism for
actual calculations, we should prove it can be fully renormalized
with the counterterms available from the original (bare)
Lagrangian, (). However, it is sufficient to say that all
our derived formulae remain valid and are finite when the
counterterms are included. This also implies the  mass 
is renormalized and gives rise to a finite, physical
mass( is the
pole of the gluon propagator.) ,
. Furthermore, no new
counterterms are needed to remove the vacuum energy divergences.
The renormalizability of the  expansion has been discussed
in detail in in the case of the Gross-Neveu model.
Since the arguments for Yang Mills theory are completely
analogous, we refer to for technical details
concerning the renormalization.

Another point worth emphasising here, is the renormalization group
equation, (RGE), for . The first diagram of  is given
by the O-bubble. Using the  renormalization
scheme in dimensional regularization in  dimensions, we find
 
Since  is a physical quantity, it should not depend on the
subtraction scale . This is expressed by the RGE
 
where  governs the scaling behaviour of the
coupling constant
 
and  is the anomalous dimension of 
 
The coefficients can be found in for
 and in
 for
,
 
When we combine all this information and determine 
 up to lowest order in , we find
 
Apparently, it seems that  does not obey its RGE. However, this
is not a contradiction because of the demand that the gap equation
() must  be satisfied. The gap equation implies that
.
The consequence is that all leading logarithms contain terms of
order unity. Hence, we cannot show that the RGE for  is obeyed
order by order. The same phenomenon extends to higher orders. In
other words, knowledge of  up to a certain
order , would require knowledge of all  leading and
subleading log terms to order , to show explicitly that
  . We must therefore be careful not to
interpret the non-vanishing of the RGE as a reason to introduce a
"non-perturbative" -function, as is sometimes done,
.

 Results. 
     
         

        The first diagrams contributing to  
    Up to 2-loop order in the  expansion (see Fig. 3), we find
in the  scheme
 
where  is the Riemann zeta function,
 
and  is the Clausen function. We have
computed the relevant two loop vacuum bubble diagrams to the
finite part using the massive gluon and massless ghost propagators
which are respectively
 
in the Landau gauge. The expressions for the general massive and
massless two loop bubble integrals were derived from the results
of and implemented in the symbolic manipulation
language Form ,. It is easy to check that solving
the gap equation   , with
 set equal to 
to kill potentially large logarithms, gives no solution at 1-loop
or 2-loop, apart from the trivial one   . This does not
imply  does not exist but
that the  scheme might not be the best choice for the 
expansion. To address this we first remove the freedom existing in
how the mass parameter  is renormalized by replacing
 by a renormalization scheme and scale independent
quantity . This can be accommodated by(Barred
quantities refer to the  scheme, otherwise any other massless
renormalization scheme is meant.) 
 
with
 
A change in massless renormalization scheme corresponds to
relations of the form
 
With these, it is easily checked that () is
renormalization scheme and scale independent. The explicit
solution of () reads
 
Since the gap equation is still a series expansion in
 and we hope to find (at least
qualitatively) acceptable results,  should
be small. We will therefore choose to renormalize the coupling
constant in such a scheme so that  is of the form
 
where
 
Otherwise, we remove all the terms of the form
,
and only keep the terms that contain a power of the logarithm .
This is always possible by calculating the  value of  as
in () and using () to change the coupling
constant renormalization by a suitable choice for the coefficients
. In the corresponding gap equation, we will set
  
 so that all logarithms vanish.
In other words   . This means, that if  is a
solution of the gap equation, then we will always have
 
If the constructed value for  is small
enough, then we can trust, at least qualitatively, the results we
will obtain. Now we are ready to rewrite () in terms of
. After a little algebra, one finds
 
with
 
Next, we determine  and  so that () reduces
to
 
We find that  is
 
We do not list the value for  since it is no longer
required.  We note that the gap equation () is translated
into    since
. From the
-function we find the two loop expression for the coupling
constant is
 
where  is the scale parameter of the corresponding
massless renormalization scheme. We will express everything in
terms of the  scale parameter . In,
it was shown that
 
We will also derive a value for the

condensate from the trace anomaly
 
This anomaly allows us to deduce for    the following
relation between the vacuum energy and the gluon condensate
 
At 1-loop order, the results for    are
 
where we have used    which was
the value reported in. We see that the
1-loop expansion parameter is quite large and we conclude that we
should go to the next order where the situation is improved. We
find
 
A combined lattice fit resulted in 
  ,
. We cannot really compare this with our
result for , since the lattice value was obtained with
the OPE at a scale    in a specific
renormalization scheme (MOM). However, it is satisfactory that
() is at least of the same order of magnitude. More
interesting is the comparison with what was found in
 with the local composite operator
formalism for . In the 
scheme at 2-loop order, it was found that
 while
  
which is in quite good agreement with our results. An estimate of
the tree level gluon mass of   was also given
in which compares well with the lattice
value of  of
. With the  method, one does not really have
the concept of a tree level mass. Instead, the determination of
 would need the
calculation of the highly non-trivial 2-loop  mass
renormalization graphs which is beyond the scope of this article.

In conclusion we note that the perturbative Yang-Mills vacuum is
unstable and lowers its value through a non-perturbative mass
dimension two gluon condensate 
. We have omitted quark contributions in
our analysis but it is straighforward to extend the 
expansion to QCD with quarks included. Indeed an idea of the
effect they have could be gained by an extension of
.

 Acknowledgement.  This work was
supported in part by Pparc  through a research studentship,
(REB).

 99 
K.G. Chetyrkin, S. Narison  V.I. Zakharov, Nucl. Phys. B 550  (1999), 353.

F.V. Gubarev, L. Stodolsky  V.I. Zakharov, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86  (2001), 2220.

F.V. Gubarev  V.I. Zakharov, Phys. Lett. B 501  (2001),
28.

D.J. Gross  A. Neveu, Phys. Rev. D 10  (1974), 3235.

H. Verschelde, Phys. Lett. B 497  (2001), 165.

G. Smet, T. Vanzieleghem, K. Van Acoleyen  H. Verschelde, Phys.
Rev. D 65  (2002), 045015.

R. Fukuda  T. Kugo, Prog. Theor. Phys. 60  (1978), 565.

R. Fukuda, Phys. Lett. B 73  (1978) 33; erratum ibid. B
74  (1978), 433.

P. Boucaud, A. Le Yaouanc, J.P. Leroy, J. Micheli,
O. Pne  J. Rodriguez-Quintero, Phys. Rev.
D 63  (2001), 114003.

P. Boucaud, J.P. Leroy, A. Le Yaounac, J. Micheli, O. Pe ne, F.
De Soto, A. Donini, H. Moutarde  J. Rodriguez-Quintero, Phys.
Rev. D 66  (2002), 034504.

L. Stodolsky, P. van Baal  V.I. Zakharov, Phys. Lett. B 552  (2003), 214.

G. Curci  R. Ferrari, Nuovo Cim. A 32  (1976), 151.

G. Curci  R. Ferrari, Phys. Lett. B 63  (1976), 91.

K.I. Kondo, Phys. Lett. B 514  (2001), 335.

K.I. Kondo, T. Murakami, T. Shinohara  T. Imai, Phys. Rev. D
65  (2002), 085034.

K. Langfeld, in 'Confinement, Topology and other Non-perturbative
Aspects of QCD' edited by Jeff Greensite 
tefan Olejnk, NATO
Science Series, 253-260, hep-lat/0204025.

P.O. Bowman, U.M. Heller, D.B. Leinweber  A.G. Williams, Phys.
Rev. D 66  (2002), 074505.

F.D. Bonnet, P.O. Bowman, D.B. Leinweber, A.G. Williams 
J.M. Zanotti,  Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001), 034501.

C. Alexandrou, P. de Forcrand  E. Follana, Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001), 094504.

R. Alkofer  L. von Smekal,  Nucl. Phys. A 680  (2000),
133.

R. Alkofer  L. von Smekal, Phys. Rept.  353  (2001), 281.


C. Lerche  L. von Smekal, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002),
125006.

K.I. Kondo  T. Imai, hep-th/0206173.

H. Verschelde, K. Knecht, K. Van Acoleyen  M. Vanderkelen,
Phys. Lett. B 516  (2001), 307, Erratum-ibid. Phys. Lett.
 B to appear.

D. Dudal  H. Verschelde, Phys. Rev. D67  (2003), 025011.

D.J. Gross  F.J. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30  (1973),
1343;

H.D. Politzer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30  (1973), 1346;

D.R.T. Jones, Nucl. Phys. B75  (1974), 531;

W.E. Caswell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33  (1974), 244;

O.V. Tarasov  A.A. Vladimirov, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 25 
(1977), 585;

E. Egorian  O.V. Tarasov, Theor. Math. Phys. 41  (1979),
863;

S.A. Larin  J.A.M. Vermaseren, Phys. Lett. B303  (1993),
334.

J.A. Gracey, Phys. Lett. B 552  (2003), 101.

D. Dudal, H. Verschelde  S.P. Sorella, Phys.  Lett. B 555  (2003), 126.

J.F. Yang  J.H. Ruan, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002), 125009.

C. Ford, I. Jack  D.R.T. Jones, Nucl. Phys. B 387  (1992),
373.

J.A.M. Vermaseren, math-ph/0010025.


W. Celmaster  R.J. Gonsalves, Phys. Rev. D 20  (1979),
1420.

C. Alexandrou, P. de Forcrand  E. Follana, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002), 114508.

K. Langfeld, H. Reinhardt  J. Gattnar, Nucl. Phys. B 621 
(2002), 131.


