

d   
Tr   

u 
v 

A  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
H  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
S  
T  
V  
Z  
  
  


_0   
sign    
h  
  

 


C   
T   
R   
Z   
H   
L   
N   
1   
tr   
D    
ad   
1 2  
i 2  



0 in
0 in
0.75 in
6.375 true in
8.675 true in


 

Spectral flow of the Dirac spectrum in intersecting 
vortices(supported by DFG under grant-No. DFG-Re
856/5-1)  

H. Reinhardt, T. Tok


University of Tubingen 






  
The spectrum of the Dirac Hamiltonian in the background of
crossing vortices is studied. To exploit the index theorem, and in
analogy to the lattice the space-time manifold is chosen to be
the four-torus . For sake of simplicity we consider two idealized 
cases: infinitely fat and infinitely thin transversally intersecting
vortices. The time-dependent spectrum
of the Dirac Hamiltonian is calculated and in particular the 
influence of the vortex crossing on the quark spectrum is investigated.
.5truecm
PACS: 11.15.-q, 12.38.Aw

Keywords: Yang-Mills theory, center vortices, index theorem,
zero modes


Introduction 


Center vortices offer an appealing picture of confinement 
, 
for a recent review see . 
Furthermore, the deconfinement phase
transition can be understood as a depercolation transition 
 and the free energy of a center vortex vanishes
in the confinement regime.
In fact there is mounting evidence that center vortices play an important
role in the QCD vacuum. Lattice calculations show that 
when center vortices are removed from the Yang-Mills ensemble 
the string tension as well as the quark 
condensate and topological charge is lost. 
In  space-time dimensions 
center vortices represent closed surfaces of quantized electromagnetic 
flux which produce a non-trivial center element for a Wilson
loop when they are topologically non-trivially linked to the latter
. The topological charge of center vortices 
is given by their (oriented) intersection number 
. 
According to the index
theorem a non-zero topological charge implies zero modes of the Dirac
operator. In the quark 
zero modes in transversally intersecting
vortex surfaces have been studied. It was found that these modes are
localized at the vortex sheets, in particular at their intersection
points. In  dimensions a center vortex represents generically a 
time-dependent closed flux loop. In it was shown 
that the topological charge of generic center vortices can be expressed 
by the temporal change of their writhing number, and furthermore 
transversal intersection points in  correspond to crossing of 
vortex lines in . Thus vortex crossings carry topological charge
and by the index theorem should consequently manifest themselves in the
quark spectrum.

In this paper we study the quark spectrum in the background of 
time-dependent crossing 
center vortices. In particular we investigate how the crossing 
of vortices manifests itself in the quark spectrum. This might bring 
some light on the mechanism of spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry 
in the vortex picture, since it is believed that chiral symmetry breaking
is tightly related to the topological properties of gauge fields. 
Throughout this paper the space-time-manifold is chosen to be the 
four-torus . There is a variety of reasons for studying : 
first,  allows to use the Atiyah-Singer index theorem in
a stringent fashion and allows for normalizable spinors in the
background of integer flux. Second, the torus simulates a periodic 
arrangement of vortices. This is much closer to a percolated vortex 
cluster than two isolated vortices in . Finally, the torus 
is the space-time manifold that is also used in lattice calculations.
 
The organization of the paper is as follows:
In the next section we consider the mathematical idealization of infinitely
thick transversally intersecting vortices, i.e. we consider "vortices"
which are homogeneously distributed over the transversal dimensions, so that
they represent homogeneous field configurations of constant electromagnetic
flux. We consider two orthogonally homogeneously distributed fluxes, which 
can be considered as two infinitely thick intersecting vortices, where the 
intersection "point" is smeared out over the whole universe. Accordingly 
the topological charge is homogeneously distributed over space-time. We 
will study then the eigenmodes of the Dirac Hamiltonian as function of 
the adiabatic time-evolution of the vortex flux assuming that the 
three-space is given by a three-torus. In section  
we study the opposite case of infinitely thin transversally 
intersecting vortices assuming that the two intersecting 
vortices are orthogonal to each other. We study the spectral flow of 
the quarks in this vortex background. Finally in section
 we allow the intersecting vortex sheets 
to be non-orthogonal and calculate again the spectral flow of the quarks. 
Some concluding remarks are given in section . 


Fermions in homogeneously intersecting "vortex" fields 

The topological charge of a gauge field configuration 
 
consisting of center
vortices is located at the intersection points of the vortices
. In 
the evolution in time of the topological charge of crossing center 
vortex configuration has been 
studied. It is the aim of this paper to investigate the spectral flow of 
the Dirac Hamiltonian in the background of crossing vortices.

As space-time manifold we choose the four-torus . 
It can be seen as  

modulo the lattice




where  are four orthogonal
basis vectors with lengths .

To demonstrate how the spectral flow emerges for intersecting center
vortices we start with the following  gauge field configuration 
on the four-torus 
 
This gauge potential describes two intersecting "vortices" whose
fluxes are spread out over the whole -- and --,
respectively, planes. Indeed, this configuration has constant non-zero 
field strength components
 
so that their fluxes are given by
 
which is twice the flux of a center vortex. The line integrals appearing
here represent the only non-vanishing contributions from the Wilson
loops encircling the whole -- and --plane,
respectively, see fig. .
 
cmadia-flux.eps  
Wilson loop encircling the whole --plane. 
cmspectralflow-const.eps  
Illustration of the spectral flow of left and right handed fermions in 
topologically non-trivial constant background 
field strength as function of time . 
We choose the flux of these configurations to be twice the flux of a
center vortex since a single center vortex cannot be accommodated by the
torus with fermions in the fundamental representation of the gauge
group, see the discussion given below eq. ().

Furthermore, the configuration () carries topological 
charge  which is homogeneously distributed over space-time, 
i.e. the intersection "point" of these two very fat vortices is smeared 
out over the whole space-time. The gauge potential () 
satisfies the boundary conditions
 
where the transition functions  can be
chosen as follows:
 
In general the transition functions have to fulfill the cocycle
condition
 
where  are elements from the center of the gauge group.
Throughout this paper we consider fermions in the fundamental
representation of . This implies that all  are equal
to , because fermions in the fundamental representation cannot 
tolerate twisted boundary conditions which imply the presence of a 
single center vortex. For later use we also note that under a gauge 
transformation  the transition functions transform 
 
Furthermore, since our gauge configuration () satisfies
the Weyl gauge  its topological charge () can
be expressed in terms of the (in general non-Abelian) Chern-Simons
action  as  
 
For well localized center vortices (representing closed flux loops in
) the Chern-Simons action is nothing but their writhing number
. For the particular gauge potential 
() the Chern-Simons action reduces to
 
so that eq. () yields indeed  when the vortex
evolves from  to .



We are interested in the time-evolution of fermions in the intersecting
center vortex background described by the gauge potential 
(). Specifically we want to study the time-evolution 
of the spectrum of the three dimensional Dirac-Hamiltonian



i.e. the Dirac energies  as function of the dimensionless 
time . 

The Dirac Hamiltonian of a massless fermion 
reads(The representation of the Dirac matrices used in this
paper can be found in Appendix .) 
 
where  is the covariant derivative. 



Under gauge transformations  the Dirac spinors in the 
fundamental representation of  transform as
 
In view of equation () this implies the following 
boundary conditions for fermionic fields 
 
Because the gauge potential () and the transition 
functions () are purely Abelian the two color components 
of the fermionic field decouple from each other. Therefore it is 
sufficient to consider only 
one of the two color components, i.e. we restrict ourselves to spinors 
with the lower color component equal zero. To get the desired results
for spinors with the opposite color one has to change the sign of the
energy and to exchange the upper with the lower color component. 
If not stated otherwise, in the following we will always consider the
upper color component of the Dirac field. 

Coming back to the Dirac 
spectrum one first observes that it is invariant under the shift 
. This is because the two corresponding gauge 
potentials are related by the periodic gauge transformation 
 which leaves the above 
introduced transition functions  invariant, 
see eq. (). 

Since  commutes with  the eigenvectors of  can be chosen
as eigenvectors of . Hence the eigenvectors of  
carry good chirality. It remains to find the eigenvectors 
 of the Dirac operator 
 
in three dimensions. Because of the periodicity in the 
-direction () one can make the ansatz




Inserting this ansatz into the eigenvalue equation ()
the latter reduces to the eigenvalue problem
 
where  is the
massless Dirac operator in two dimensions.
For the gauge potential () the eigenvectors and
eigenvalues of  are known:
  
According to the index theorem for Abelian gauge fields in  
dimensions, (for each color component) there is exactly one zero 
mode of  , namely . This zero mode is 
left handed, 
i.e. only the lower component of this two-spinor is non-zero.
Therefore, the two-spinor 
 
is eigenvector of  with eigenvalue ,
see eq. (). The explicit form of the function 
 is written down in eq. ().
For   the eigenvectors  () are given
by linear combinations of 
and  




Putting this ansatz into eq. () and noting 
that(This is because   and  anticommute.)  
 one gets the following 
eigenvalue problem for the vector :
 
This eigenvalue problem has for fixed  two solutions:
 
where the sign is given by the sign of .
One of the two solutions corresponds to positive  and the other 
to negative . Therefore we set 
. The corresponding 
coefficients  and  can be calculated from
().

Using the tensor product notation  
for right handed () and left handed () four-spinors
 
the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the Dirac Hamiltonian  
()can be written as
 
 
Obviously, only the  level can cross zero energy. 
As the time  evolves from  to  the left handed 
() modes show a spectral flow from
positive to negative energy and the right handed () modes from
negative to positive energy, and there is a level crossing through zero 
energy for , see fig. .
The eigenmodes of the lower color component show the opposite behavior.

Semiclassically, one can interpret the spectral flow induced by 
the time-evolution 
 as the creation of a (right handed) particle and a
(left handed) anti-particle, i.e. the number of right-handed particles  
increases by . Correspondingly the Chern-Simons action 
 changes by .

The probability density of the spinor  
is plotted in fig.  for fixed . This density is 
independent of  and of the adiabatic parameter . 
The probability density has a zero and, obviously, breaks the translational 
invariance of the field strength(This phenomenon is already
known from the localized Landau orbits in a constant magnetic field.)  
(). In 
 it has been shown that the position of this zero
can be moved by adding a constant background gauge potential which does
not change the field strength and the boundary conditions.
 
cmprob-const.eps  
Probability density of the mode  at constant . 

Let us now come back to the four-torus. From the index theorem in  
it is  known that there is exactly one left handed zero mode  
of the Dirac operator with the above defined gauge potential. This zero 
mode can be explicitly written down and is given
in appendix . 
One can show that this zero mode  can be written as the sum over 
all left handed eigenmodes  of the Dirac Hamiltonian 
 which cross zero energy as the time  passes from  
to , which are the states with the quantum numbers 
. The time dependence 
of a solution  of the 
(Euclidean) time-dependent Dirac equation
 
is given by
 
The right-handed () solutions are exponentially growing 
for  whereas the left-handed solutions () are 
exponentially decreasing. Therefore one can construct a solution which 
is quasi-periodic(The solution will be periodic under 
 up to a gauge transformation with the transition function 
, see eq. ().)  
in  from the left-handed solutions  by 
a simple summation over all modes , putting 
:
 
Here  is the theta function which
is defined in eq. ()
Comparing with eqs. (,) one observes 
that this is precisely the zero 
mode  of the Dirac operator on the four-torus. In the limit 
 and  the part of the sum in 
eq. () with  dominates, i.e. the sum can be 
approximated by . Neglecting the  dependence one obtains the 
eigenvector  which crosses zero energy for 
, i.e. the zero mode on the four-torus approximates the 
time-evolution of that adiabatic eigenvector 
of  who crosses zero energy during the evolution.



One reason for getting the strict 
relation () between the zero mode on  and the
eigenmodes of the Dirac-Hamiltonian on  is that the eigenstates
 are independent of . Therefore the adiabatic 
approximation becomes exact and the  dependent adiabatic solutions 
of the stationary Dirac equation are exact zero modes 
of the Dirac equation on .



Spectral flow for orthogonally intersecting vortices 










In this chapter we consider two thin but smeared out 
vortices carrying both twice the flux of a center vortex in .
We choose one vortex to be parallel to the - plane and located 
at  and the other parallel to the 
- plane and located at . 
The gauge potential of these two vortices can be written 
down in terms of theta functions. To this end
one introduces complex variables :
  
In terms of the new variable 
the gauge potential  corresponding to the first vortex reads 
  
where  and the profile function  
is defined in terms of theta functions(Our conventions 
concerning theta functions can be found in appendix .) :
 
The parameter  is a measure for the thickness of the
vortex,  is approximately the ratio between the
transversal vortex extension and the area of the two torus. 
The gauge potential  of the second vortex is analogously given
by
  
Obviously the gauge potential of the complete vortex configuration is
given by the sum . For the subsequent considerations 
it is important that the gauge potential of the first vortex is 
given by components  and  which are independent of
 and the gauge potential of the second one by 
components  and  which are independent of . 
This means that the covariant derivatives  and  depend only 
on  and the covariant derivative  depends only 
on  and . Under this assumption the spectrum of the Dirac
operator  in  dimensions can be written 
down if the spectrum of the Dirac operator 
 on the two torus (spanned by the basis 
vectors ) is known. 

One further remark is in order here. The Dirac Hamiltonian
() is usually calculated in the Weyl gauge 
. A gauge transformation of the gauge potential given in 
eq. () into the Weyl gauge will not change 
the transition functions , because  is periodic in 
these three directions. Therefore it makes no difference to calculate 
the eigenspinors and eigenvalues of  with the original gauge
potentials given in 
eqs. () or the 
gauge potentials in the Weyl gauge - the difference is simply a periodic 
gauge transformation. The transformation of the transition function
 is irrelevant in this context, because we are only interested in 
the spectrum of the Dirac Hamiltonian at a constant time .



As in the case of constant field strength one can construct the eigenstates 
of  with the help of the eigenstates 
 of the Dirac operator 
 
with vortex background gauge potential on the two torus. 
As before from the index theorem in  dimensions it follows that there 
is exactly one left handed zero mode for the upper color index of  
on the two torus, i.e. , if and only if  
(c.f. eq. ()). Assuming that the eigenstates 
 of  are known one can make the ansatz
(c.f. eq. (,))
 
where  is an eigenfunction of :



which depends on  and .
Noting the periodicity of  (because ) one obtains the
solution
 
Inserting this ansatz into the stationary Dirac equation 



yields (as in the case of constant field strength considered before) 
eigenvalue equation () for the 
eigenvectors  and the energies .
The energy eigenvalues are given by
 
Obviously, only eigenvectors with  can cross 
zero energy. The integral in eq. () is directly 
related to the field strength component :
 
Therefore, one obtains
 
i.e. the energy  changes most rapidly where the field 
strength is peaked and this is at the location of the vortex in the 
- plane (which is of course the time where the two orthogonal
vortices intersect on ), see figs.  and 
.
 
cmadia-fig2.eps  
 Integration path on the two torus. 
cmadia-flux2.eps  
 Spectral flow of the energy levels 
in the case of orthogonally intersecting vortices. Shown is the left
(right) handed energy level for the upper (lower) color component. 
It turns out that left handed () and right handed () spinors 
cross zero energy level starting from positive to negative energies and 
vice versa. The time  for which the 
crossing through zero energy takes place can be shifted if one adds a 
constant to the gauge potential . This addition of a constant will 
not change the field strength, but it can obviously change the time at
which the zero energy crossing occurs. Therefore, the precise time 
 of the level crossing seems to be irrelevant.

Obviously, in the case of crossing vortices the adiabatic approximation is 
(especially in the neighborhood of the vortex) not very good, because the
eigenstates  depend strongly on . Therefore in this case
we do not have such a simple relation between the zero mode on the four-torus
and the adiabatic eigenstates of the Dirac Hamiltonian, 
see eq. ().

The probability density  of the eigenvectors  is 
independent of  and of the adiabatic parameter . 
In fig.  the probability density of the mode 
 has been plotted for constant . As in the case of
constant field strength there is a zero of the density. But, in
addition, here the density is peaked 
at the position of the vortex in the  plane. 



Spectral flow for non-orthogonally intersecting vortices 


As before we will consider a configuration on  which describes 
two intersecting center vortices. On a spatial torus  one vortex 
is static and parallel to the -axis located at 
. The other vortex is time-dependent and 
parallel to the -axis and located at 
, 
see fig. . The two vortices intersect in  at 
. 
The gauge potential of the second vortex can be constructed from the
potential of a vortex which is originally parallel to the  plane
by rotation in the --plane. 


Note that the rotated vortex has magnetic
and electric field strength (the original vortex only has an electric
field strength).
To write down the gauge potential of the vortex configuration one 
again introduces complex variables :
  
The gauge potential  of the first vortex is again  given by
  
The gauge potential  of the second (time-dependent) vortex 
is slightly more involved: 
  
The gauge field configuration  has topological charge 
 and the transition functions are given by
 
 
cmprob-vortex.eps  
 Probability density of the eigenvector 
 at constant . 
cmadia-fig1.eps  
Location of the two vortices on the three-torus. 
In this case the eigenvectors of the Dirac Hamiltonian  do not
factorize as in the examples considered before. In a numerical study we
obtained a spectral flow of left handed four-spinors from positive to
negative energy in accordance with the existence of a left-handed zero
mode of the Dirac operator in , see fig. . 
From the figure  one can argue that (as in the case 
of orthogonally intersecting vortices) the largest
gradient of the spectral flow with respect to time  is where the
vortices intersect, , i.e. where the topological charge 
is localized. 
Further it seems that all eigenmodes cross zero energy level as time 
 evolves from  to . This is different from the
case of orthogonally intersecting vortices considered before. There one
has different branches in the spectral flow, 
compare eq. (),
and only eigenmodes with  cross zero energy as time  evolves 
from  to .
 

file=spec-flow.ps,width=12cm,height=18cm,angle=-90  
Spectral flow of the left handed eigenmodes of 
the Dirac Hamiltonian for non orthogonally intersecting vortices
depending on . The vortices cross at ,
i.e. at . 
The probability densities of the eigenvectors of the Dirac Hamiltonian
again show an enhancement at the position of the vortices, see
fig. . 
 
cmzeromode1.eps  
cmzeromode2.eps  
Probability density of the eigenmode of the Dirac Hamiltonian whose
energy eigenvalue crosses zero for the respectively parameters in 
eq. () have been chosen as , 
 at  and 
. 
 

Concluding remarks 

We have studied the quark spectrum in the background of intersecting
flat vortex sheets. Choosing the four-torus  as space-time 
manifold we have calculated the spectral flow of the Dirac Hamiltonian as
function of time for intersecting vortex fields. 
The spectral flow as function of time  has the
largest gradient in the neighborhood of the vortex intersection point,
i.e. where the topological charge is localized. For the infinitely
thick intersecting "vortices" considered in section 
 this gradient is constant 
(see eq. () reflecting the fact that in this case 
the topological charge is homogeneously distributed over space-time.
These results are consistent with the findings of 
ref.  that zero modes of the 4-dimensional Dirac
operator are localized at the intersection points  of vortices.
Also in the present case the probability density of the quark
eigenmodes shows a strong correlation to the position 
of the vortex sheets. Depending on the energy level considered the 
vortices seem to act attractive or repulsive on the quarks. 
For the lowest lying states the probability density
always shows an enhancement at the position of the vortices, i.e. the
vortices "act attractive" on these modes. 





Conventions 

We choose the generators of the gauge group to be anti-hermitian.
Therefore the components  of the gauge potential are
anti-hermitian, e.g. purely imaginary for the gauge group . The
magnetic flux  through a closed loop  is 
defined by 
 
and thus real valued.

We consider the Dirac equation in Euclidean space-time. 
In  we use the chiral representation for the Dirac matrices:
 
where  is the  unit matrix and  are the
(hermitian) Pauli matrices. 

The massless Dirac Hamiltonian  in three dimensions reads
 
where  is the covariant derivative. 

In this paper we use the theta function conventions introduced in
:
 
These functions are analytic in  and obey the periodicity properties
 
The only zeros of this function are at the points 







Zero mode of the Dirac operator in  

We consider the gauge potential 
 
on the four-torus with transition functions
 
The topological charge of this configuration is , i.e. there is one
(left handed) zero mode of the corresponding Dirac operator which can be
written down explicitly in terms of theta functions. 
To this end one introduces complex variables 
 and positive
real numbers . 
The problem of finding the zero mode becomes a problem of finding the
zero mode of the Dirac operator 
  on the two-torus and this problem
can be easily solved (compare). 
The zero mode of  is given by 
  
A short calculation shows that the zero mode in  dimensions has the 
form:
  
Obviously, the non-zero spinor component of  is the product of 
the two zero mode functions  from .

 10 

Gerard 't Hooft.
On the phase transition towards permanent quark confinement.
Nucl. Phys. , B138:1, 1978.

G. Mack and V. B. Petkova.
Comparison of lattice gauge theories with gauge groups z(2) and
  su(2).
Ann. Phys. , 123:442, 1979.

J. Greensite.
The confinement problem in lattice gauge theory.
hep-lat/0301023 .

M. Engelhardt, K. Langfeld, H. Reinhardt, and O. Tennert.
Deconfinement in su(2) yang-mills theory as a center vortex
  percolation transition.
Phys. Rev. , D61:054504, 2000.

Tamas G. Kovacs and E. T. Tomboulis.
Computation of the vortex free energy in su(2) gauge theory.
Phys. Rev. Lett. , 85:704-707, 2000.

L. Del Debbio, M. Faber, J. Greensite, and S. Olejnik.
Center dominance and z(2) vortices in su(2) lattice gauge theory.
Phys. Rev. , D55:2298-2306, 1997.

Philippe de Forcrand and Massimo D'Elia.
On the relevance of center vortices to qcd.
Phys. Rev. Lett. , 82:4582-4585, 1999.

H. Reinhardt.
Topology of center vortices.
Nucl. Phys. , B628:133-166, 2002.

M. Engelhardt and H. Reinhardt.
Center projection vortices in continuum yang-mills theory.
Nucl. Phys. , B567:249, 2000.

John M. Cornwall.
Center vortices, nexuses, and fractional topological charge.
Phys. Rev. , D61:085012, 2000.

M. F. Atiyah, V. K. Patodi, and I. M. Singer.
Spectral asymmetry and riemannian geometry 3.
Math. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. , 79:71, 1980.

H. Reinhardt, O. Schroeder, T. Tok, and V. C. Zhukovsky.
Quark zero modes in intersecting center vortex gauge fields.
Phys. Rev. , D66:085004, 2002.

S. Azakov.
The schwinger model on the torus.
Fortsch. Phys. , 45:589-626, 1997.

D. Mumford.
Tata-Lectures about Theta I .
Birkha user, Boston, 1993.





