





.35cm  
.25cm  
width1.3cm height.4pt 
.6cmwidth.4pt height1.2cm  
.25cm  .35cm   


.25cm  
.35cm  
width1.3cm height.4pt 
.6cmwidth.4pt height1.2cm  
.35cm  .25cm   

  










Integrable quantum field theories with supergroup symmetries: 
the 
 case.  

Hubert Saleur and Birgit Wehefritz-Kaufmann



 Department of Physics and Astronomy

University of Southern California

Los Angeles, CA 90089

USA



 Service de Physique Theorique

CEA Saclay

Gif Sur Yvette, 91191

France



 Physikalisches Institut der Universitat Bonn 

Nussallee 12

D-53115 Bonn

Germany 


 
As a step to understand general patterns of 
integrability in  quantum field theories 
with supergroup symmetry, we study in details the 
case of  . Our results include the solutions of natural
generalizations of models with ordinary group symmetry: the
 WZW model with a current current perturbation,  
 the  principal chiral model, and 
 the  coset models perturbed by
the adjoint. Graded parafermions are also discussed. A pattern peculiar 
to supergroups is the emergence of
another class of models, whose simplest representative is the
 sigma model, where the  (non unitary) 
orthosymplectic symmetry is realized non linearly
(and can be spontaneously broken). For most models, we provide an integrable
lattice realization. We show in particular that integrable 
spin chains with integer spin flow to  WZW models in the
continuum limit, hence providing what is to our knowledge the first
physical realization of a super WZW model. 



Introduction 

Two dimensional quantum field 
theories with supergroup symmetries have played an increasingly
important role in our attempts to understand phase transitions in 2D 
disordered systems - some recent works in this direction are

. 

These theories  however prove quite 
difficult to tackle. Attempts at non perturbative approaches using 
conformal invariance or exact S matrices have been popular recently, but so far, very few complete results are 
available. This paper is the second of 
a series (started with) 
on models with orthosymplectic symmetry. Our goal is
to relate and 
identify the different pieces of the theoretical puzzle available -  
sigma models, Wess Zumino Witten (WZW) models 
and Gross Neveu (GN) models, integrable lattice models, and exactly 
factorized S matrices - and to find out which 
physical systems they describe, and which peculiarities arise from
the existence of supergroup symmetries. In our first
paper, we  studied among other things the   Gross Neveu model and the 
 supersphere sigma model. A physical realization for 
the latter was identified inin terms of a lattice loop model with self intersections, based on an
earlier work of. Other such realizations for
different models or supergroups have yet to be made. 
In the case of ordinary algebras, integrable lattice models do
provide such realizations, and 
are closely related 
with WZW and GN models 
based on the corresponding groups.   
This relation is also important, for technical reasons,  in the solution of
the Principal Chiral Models (PCM). 

The main result of this paper is an analysis of integrable lattice
models based on the  superalgebra, and the associated field
theories. While the general pattern is not unlike the case of
ordinary groups, important differences are also encountered. 

In section 2, we show that the continuum limit of the model based on 
the fundamental representation 
is not  the GN (or WZW model) but the supersphere sigma model, 
generalizing the observation of. 

In section 3 and 4 we show that 
that, for integer
spin, the continuum limit is the  WZW model at integer level - 
in particular, the spin  quantum spin chain flows to the 
 level one model. This
 provides, to our
knowledge, the 
first physical realization of a super WZW model. 
We also find  that for odd spin , the continuum limit, like for , is not
a WZW model. Attempts are made in section 6 to identify the
corresponding field theories, based on the expectation 
that in these  cases, the orthosymplectic symmetry is 
realized non linearly.

The  PCM model is discussed in section 5, and the 
models and associated parafermions in section 7. 


Integrable lattice models with  symmetry  

Our conventions for the  algebra  are summarized in the appendix . 
We start with the integrable model based on the fundamental representation . The highest weight 
vector is denoted by , and we shall treat it as  fermionic,
so the super dimension  of  this representation is equal to 
(Changing the grading - that is treating the highest weight as bosonic - does not make the model into a '' model, and does not change any of the physical results. The grading we chose is simply more convenient, as it is well adapted to the structure of the symmetry algebra.) . The product of two
spin  representations decomposes into a spin 0, a spin 1/2 and a
spin 1 representation. Their highest weights are respectively bosonic,
fermionic, and bosonic. The graded permutation operator reads 

 

and the Casimir 

 


The hamiltonian of the integrable model is defined on the space 
as
 

(where  denotes the projector onto spin  in the
tensor product of the representations at site ,  is a
normalization constant related with the sound velocity) 
is integrable, and corresponds to the anisotropic limit of the
integrable  vertex model one can deduce from the scattering matrix of
. The Bethe ansatz equations for this model read schematically

 

(where the 's are the roots) and the energy 

 

The sign  depends on the boundary conditions for the
hamiltonian, and has not, in our opinion, always been correctly interpreted
in the literature 
. The point is that a hamiltonian with 
symmetry will be obtained by having the last term in the sum involve
the projectors , and identifying the states in the
 space with the ones in the first space. In the case of superalgebras, this is not exactly
the same as having the projectors : the difference
involves 'passing generators' through the  first states in the tensor
product, and this can of course generate signs. 
The hamiltonian with  symmetry corresponds to the Bethe
equations with  in (). This agrees with the original results in.  Antiperiodic boundary conditions for the
fermions
would correspond to  instead.

 

According to Martins, when , 
the ground state of the  
coincides with the one of the  
sector ,
leading to a degeneracy of 4 for the state . The central 
charge read in that sector
is . The total partition function (that is, the 
trace of ,  the momentum, and 
for  again) reads from

 

This is  in agreement with the interpretation of the low energy limit  of
this lattice model with a  symplectic fermion theory, as was proposed
in. In the latter paper, this identification was made
by using the fact that the hamiltonian is the anisotropic limit of a
vertex model which can be reinterpreted as a loop model, and thus as a
model of classical  spins in two dimensions, similar to the
one used in the analysis of the usual  model. It was then argued
that the integrable hamiltonian lies in the broken symmetry Goldstone
phase,
and that the low energy limit is 
the weak coupling limit of the supersphere sigma model,
whose target space is  (the equivalent of
 for ). Recall one can easily parametrize this target space 
using  such that . The sigma model action (Boltzmann weight )
is 

 

with the beta function . At small coupling, the action reduces to the symplectic fermions 
theory, and the partition function () coincides with
the determinant of  the Laplacian with periodic boundary conditions 
in the space direction and antiperiodic boundary conditions in 
the "time" direction (along which the trace is taken). For  negative,
the model flows to weak coupling in the UV, and is massive in the IR, where symmetry is 
restored. The action reads then, in terms of the fermion variables,
and after trivial rescalings,

 

Notice that the relative normalization of the two terms can be
changed at will by changing the normalization of the fermions. The
relative sign can also be changed by switching the fermion labels
. However, the sign of the four fermion term cannot
be changed, and determines whether the model is massive or massless
in the IR. For 
 positive, the model flows (perturbatively) to weak coupling in the IR. This is the
case of the lattice model introduced in. 



It is possible to generalize the integrable model by introducing
heterogeneities in a way well understood for  ordinary
algebras. In doing so, the source term in the equations
()  is replaced 
by 

 

where  is a parameter measuring heterogeneities,
and the energy becomes 

 

We will not discuss complete calculations here, but simply  derive some essential
features of the associated thermodynamics Bethe ansatz (TBA). The ground state is made of real particles, and excitations are holes in the ground state. After introducing the Frourier transforms

 

the
physical equations read

 

and the energy, up to a constant

 

The interesting way to proceed then is to take the limit
,  ( the lattice spacing), such that 
finite. We then take the limit 
 with  finite. In that limit,
excitations at finite rapidity acquire a relativistic dispersion
relation, with rapidity . The scattering
of these excitations with themselves corresponds to the  matrix
element:

 

and the latter coincides with , the scattering
matrix element of particle 1 with itself in the sigma model (), as discussed in 
 (this matrix element is called  there)(
Misprints have unfortunately cropped up in the equation whose
denominator should read 
instead.) .

 In fact, one can check that
the thermodynamics of the spin chain, in this limit, coincides with
the thermodynamics of the field theory for the supersphere sigma model
discussed in: the introduction of heterogeneities
provides thus a regularization of this field theory. 

As always - and this can be related to  the 
Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem -  the massive degrees of freedom
near vanishing bare rapidity in the model with heterogenities are completed by massless degrees of freedom at large bare rapidities 
(edges of the Brillouin zone). These are the same massless modes that would be 
present in the homogeneous chain obtained by letting . The dynamics of these
massless modes decouples entirely from the dynamics of the massive ones, 
and one can identify the associated CFT with the weak coupling limit of the 
supersphere sigma model, that is, the symplectic fermion theory. 






It is tempting to carry out the same procedure for the case of higher
spin. Unfortunately, not much is known about the higher spin
integrable  spin chains in explicit form. It is fair to expect, based on analogies
with other cases - in particular the  case - that such chains do
exist, and are described by changing the source terms and energy terms
as  

 

where  is the higher spin. The thermodynamics of the massive  field
theory limit is described by the equations 

 

where  and 
. The boundary condition 
 must be imposed. The free energy reads then

 
    
 
The thermodynamics of the lattice model is described by similar equations, but different source terms. It allows one
 in particular to determine the entropy per site of the chain in the large  limit. One finds 
 that this entropy corresponds, for  half integer, to a mix of representations
 , and for  integer, a mix of 
 representations . The integrable models
 must therefore involve these mix of representations on every site, and 
 presumably  must be considered as having 
  super-Yangian symmetry, 
 in analogy with the  case. In particular, the
extension of  the adjoint by a scalar representation to form
an irreducible  representation of the Yangian is typical.  
Calculations with a
 twist angle giving antiperiodic boundary conditions to the kinks
(This is analogous to the study of excited states carried out
 in. )  shows that the representations with half-integer spin have
 superdimension , while those with integer spin have
 superdimension .  
Some of these results have been obtained independently and using a
different approach in.


 
It is easy to check that the central charge of these models is 
 
  
     

As in the usual  case, one can deform the models by considering 
 matrices with  symmetry, and one can truncate them in 
the case  a root of unity. The resulting TBA's have the form shown in
Figure 1 (with a total number of nodes equal to ), and central charge

 

 
 
file=fig0.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the general TBA obtained
after quantum group deformation and truncation of the spin  chain. 

Most of the following 
is devoted to understanding the field theories associated with
() and ().      



Coset models 

The basic field theory we have introduced so far is the  non linear sigma model (). Another type of sigma model plays a major role in the analysis: the 
 Wess Zumino Witten model. Details about  and  are furnished in the appendix:  
the
bosonic part of   is , and the group is compact. The
level  is quantized (for the
normalization of , we use the level of the sub , like for instance
in the works. The same model  would be  called 
the  model
following the conventions used in the literature on disordered systems
(see eg, as well
as in our previous paper).  The model is not expected to be a unitary
conformal field theory: this is clear at the level of the action,
where for instance the purely fermionic part is closely related to the
 system, a non unitary theory. This is also expected on
general grounds, since, for instance, there is no way to define a
metric without negative norm (square)  states in some representations.

It turns out however that the  WZW  theories are relatively simple, at
least at first sight. The best way to understand them is to 
use a remarkable  embedding discovered by Fan
and Yu.

The  coset models 

These authors made the crucial observation that 

 

where the branching functions of the latter part define a Virasoro
minimal model, with 

 


Only for  an integer does the action of the Wess Zumino model make 
sense,
and we will restrict ourselves to this case in the following.
 The
Virasoro models which appear there have ; they are non
unitary, 
and their effective central charge is 
. These models can thus be considered as 
coset models! 

The  perturbation of these models  by the
operator  (here, the labels refer to the description as a Virasoro minimal model) with dimension   is well
known to be integrable (the
 comes from the , the  from the ). The TBA has the form  shown in  
Figure 2. As observed in, it can be obtained 
after a q-deformation and a truncation of the basic supersphere sigma model TBA.
The 
corresponding S matrices can thus easily  be deduced, and follow 
RSOS restrictions of the q-deformed  S matrices, or,
equivalently,  q-deformed  S matrices. The
simplest and most interesting case corresponds to the model of
Virasoro minimal series . Its central charge is 
while . The TBA for a perturbation by the operator
 of weight  is described by the diagram in the
figure
in the particular case where the number of nodes is two. The S matrix 
has
been worked out in details in. 

 
 
file=fig11.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing 
 coset
  models perturbed by  the operator with . The
  total number of nodes is . 



An amusing  consequence of this observation  is that  the supersphere 
sigma model
appears as the limit  of a series of coset
models. This is quite similar to the way  the ordinary sphere sigma 
model appears as the limit of
a series of parafermion theories , this time of  type
. 

An important difference between the two cases 
 is that, since the three point function of  vanishes, the
perturbation of the coset models is independant of the sign of the coupling, and thus always massive. The situation was different
 in the case of parafermionic theories , where one
 sign was massive (and corresponded, in the limit
 , to the case ), but the other was
 massless (and corresponded in the limit , to the
 case ). For the supersphere, there is no theta term, so 
 it is natural that we get only one flow. 
(Recall that  for 
,  for .) 

An interesting consequence of the embedding  is that we can 
deduce the effective
central charge of the  WZW model at level . Using that 
for the Virasoro model, , one finds 

 

This result will be compatible with all the subsequent analysis, but it 
is in slight disagreement with. In the latter papers, 
conjectures are made that the spectrum closes on primary fields of spin 
 with dimension . If
this turned out to be true, the models we identify would not
exactly be the WZW models, but maybe some "extensions" of 
these - at the present time, this issue is not settled, but
it seems simpler to assume the value  () is indeed the 
effective central charge of the WZW model. 



The  coset models 

We consider now TBA's with a total number of nodes . If the massive node is the  one, the UV central charge is 

 

suggesting that the model can be understood as a coset model . Assuming the TBA corresponds to a theory perturbed by an operator whose odd point functions vanish, we find the dimension of the 
 perturbing operator to  be  . This is compatible with
taking  the spin  field in the denominator of the coset.

 
 
file=fig1111.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing 
 coset
  models perturbed by  the operator with . The
  total number of nodes is . 

If the massive node is the  one meanwhile, the central charge is

 

suggesting similarly that the model can be understood as a coset  perturbed by the operator of dimension . Of course the two cases are actually equivalent by taking mirror images, but it is convenient to keep them separate to study the large  limit later. 

 
 
file=fig111111.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing 
 coset
  models perturbed by  the operator with . The
  total number of nodes is . 

The  models. 

We now consider instead TBA's with a total number of nodes . If the massive node is the  one, the UV central charge is found to be

 

suggesting that the models can be interpreted as coset 
. Assuming 
the TBA corresponds to a theory perturbed by an operator whose 
odd point functions do not vanish, we find the dimension of the perturbing operator to be 
. This is compatible with taking 
the spin  field in the denominator of the coset. 

 
 
file=fig11111.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing 
 coset
  models perturbed by  the operator with . The
  total number of nodes is . 

Note that, since we have assumed the three point function of the
perturbing operator does not vanish, switching the sign of the
perturbation should lead to a different result. It is 
natural to expect that one has then a massless flow, whose TBA and S
matrices are readily built by analogy with the  case
: we leave
this to the reader as an exercise. 

Finally, we notice that the   coset model with    was first identified in the paper.


The other models 

The last possible case we can obtain out of this construction
corresponds to a TBA's with an odd number of nodes 
(say, ), and the mass on an odd node, too.

The  effective central charge is
. The models can be considered as
Virasoro models with  , and the TBA corresponds to
perturbation 
by the  field now, of dimension 
.  We have not found any convincing
way to interpret this in terms of  cosets; maybe it is not 
possible.  
Notice that the  is a weight for
, which, since it appears with a minus sign in , should
be in the denominator of the sought after coset. 
Notice also that, by using the remark at the end of the previous
paragraph, 
we expect flows between the  models we have interpreted in terms of
 and  cosets and these unidentified models. This
could be a useful hint.


Sigma models 

The  WZW models 

Taking  for the class of models where the massive node is an even one, we obtain theories with central charge . 
This value coincides with the result obtained in the first section for . We therefore suggest that 
the continuum limit of the
lattice models with integer spin   are the  models. Introducing heterogeneities 
then gives rise to the current-current perturbation of these models. 


 
 
file=fig2.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing the  WZW model with a current current perturbation. 


The S matrix is the tensor product of 
the RSOS S matrix for the
Virasoro model  perturbed by  (which we saw
can be reinterpreted as an  RSOS matrix) and 
the supersphere sigma model S matrix. 

  
These results
apply to the NS sector of the model, where the fermionic currents 
have integer modes,
and are periodic. The Ramond sector can be obtained by spectral flow; 
one has in particular
 

While the true central charge seems inaccessible from the TBA,
one can follow the spectral flow by giving a fugacity to the 
solitons, 
as was discussed in our first paper, ie calculating 
,
where  is the topological charge of the solitons, normalized as . 
Antiperiodic boundary conditions correspond to , and 
 are found to give, using the system of equations (38,39) of our previous paper

 

in agreement with  (). 

Finally, it is easy to check from the TBA that the dimension of the perturbing operator has to be . 
This gives strong support to our conjecture. 

We stress that, as far as we know,  none of the perturbed  
WZW  models can be interpreted as a
Gross-Neveu model. The  GN models correspond to models with,
formally, level , and have a different physics, and
different scattering matrices, as discussed in. We will 
get back to this issue in the conclusion.




The "" models. 

If we take the limit  for models which have 
the mass on an odd node, the central charge as well as 
the interpretation of the coset models are consistent 
with a theory of the form ,
of which the supersphere sigma model was just the simplest () version. 

 
 
file=fig22.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing the 
 sigma model. 

It would be most interesting to find out the
action describing these models, but we have not done so
for now - we will comment about the problem below. 


The  PCM model 

In the  case for instance, the limit  of the WZW model 
with a current current perturbation coincides with the 
scattering theory for the PCM (principal chiral model) model. It is natural to expect that the same thing will
hold for the  case. The TBA looks as in
Figure 8, and the  
   scattering matrix has obviously the form 
, 
where  is the S matrix for the supersphere sigma model, up to
CDD factors we will discuss below 

 
 
file=fig3.ps,scale=0.5   
 Incidence diagram of the TBA describing the 
 PCM model. 


Let us study  this PCM model more explicitely. 
It is convenient to write an element of  as 

 

with the constraint .
In a similar way, the conjugate of the matrix, , reads


 


The action of the PCM model reads, after a rescaling of the
fermions 

 


We note that the   group
manifold can be identified with the supersphere
, that is, the space 
 . The PCM model, however, cannot be expected to 
 coincide with the sigma model on :
 the symmetry groups are different, and so are the invariant actions.
For instance, in the PCM model, the group  
 acts by conjugation, leaving the identity invariant. In the vicinity
 of the identity, under the , the fermionic 
coordinates transform as a doublet, and the bosonic coordinates transform as a
 triplet. 
 In the sigma model, the coordinates near the origin transform as the
 fundamental of . Under the  of the , 
the bosonic coordinates transform as a triplet
but  the
 fermionic coordinates now transform as a singlet (they form a doublet
 under a different , which leaves the sphere  invariant). The groups acting differently, the invariant actions can be expected to be  different.  
 This is confirmed by explicit calculation.
 The supersphere  can be parametrized in terms of
coordinates ,  and . The 
constraint  
 gives rise to

 

The sigma model action 

 

becomes then

 

The two equations (,) are similar, but exhibit a
major difference in 
the sign of the four fermion term. 

The  physics of the two models  is 
considerably different. For the supersphere sigma model,
the  function is exactly zero to all orders, and the theory
 is exactly conformal invariant for any value of the coupling 
constant (like in the  case).  For the PCM, the  
function
follows from Wegner's calculations in the case  

 

to be compared eg with the  case

 

The conventions here are that the Boltzmann weight is 
, and 




In the  case, the massive theory corresponds to . By contrast, for the  case, the massive direction 
corresponds to . However, since one takes then a supertrace instead of a trace, the  part of the PCM 
action has  the same  sign as in the  pure case, with 
Boltzmann weight 


, and the functional integral is well defined. Note
  that the symplectic fermion part of the Boltzmann weight is of the 
  form 

, and also exhibits the same sign as the action of
  the supersphere sigma model in the massive phase (where the symmetry is
  restored).

The exact S matrix can be deduced from the TBA by noticing that, for the matrix , the 
presence of the self coupling for the first node in the sigma model TBA would lead to a 
double  self coupling. This has to be removed, and the
usual calculation
gives 

 

where the CDD factor 
,
 cancels the
 double poles and double zeroes in  (). Let us recall for completeness the sigma model S matrix. 


 

where  we have set


 

while  is the graded permutation operator 

 

The indices  take values in the fundamental representation
of the  algebra, . We set
, . The factors  in () read

 

for the value  characteristic of the  case. 



Realizations of the  symmetry. 

In section 4, we have found two families of models  whose  matrix 
has   symmetry
. The models 
based on the lattice TBA for  integer correspond to 
 WZW models peturbed by a current current 
interaction. The UV theory is a current algebra, in which the symmetry
is locally realized by two sets of currents,  and 
. 

What happens in the other family of models is less clear. 
An exception to this is the case , ie the
 
sigma model. In this case, the symemtry is realized non linearly, 
and it is worthwhile seeing more explicitely how this works. 

Symplectic fermions and non linearly realized symmetries 

Consider thus the supersphere sigma model. This model for positive
coupling 
describes the Goldstone phase for  
   symmetry  broken down spontaneously to 
 (possible since the group is not unitary compact). 
For negative coupling, it is massive,
and the  symmetry is restored at large distance.
In either case, the action is proportional to (we have
slightly changed the normalizations compared with the previous paper)

 

with . We can find the Noether currents with 
the usual procedure. An infinitesimal
 transformation reads

x&=&-_1 _1 +_2 _2 

_1 &=&-_2 x+a_1 +
c_2 

_2 &=&-_1 x+b_1 -a_2 

where  are 'small' fermionic deformation 
parameters,  small
bosonic parameters. By definition, this change leaves
 invariant. In terms 
 of the fermion variables, the symmetry is realized non linearly:

_1 =-_2 (1-_1 _2 )+
a_1 +c_2 

_2 =-_1 (1-_1 _2 )+
a_1 -a_2 



Performing the change in the action, and identifying 
the coefficients of linear derivatives 
 with the currents
gives five conserved currents. Three of them generate the sub
:


J^+ &=&-12 _1 _1 

J^- &=&12 _2 _2 

J^3&=&14 (_1 _2 -_1 _2 )







The two fermionic currents meanwhile are

j^+=_ x _1 -x _ _1 =
_ _1 (1-2_1 _2 )

j^-=_ x _2 -x _ _2 =_ _2 (1-2_1 _2 )

These five currents should be present in the UV limit of 
the sigma model, which coincides with 
symplectic fermions. The latter  theory has been studied a great
deal. Of particular interest is the operator content, which is
conveniently encoded in the generating function ().
Recall that
the "ground state" (that is, fields of weight ) is degenerate
four times, while there are eight fields of weight  (and eight
fields of weight ). It has sixteen fields of weight . 
We can understand these multiplicities
easily by using the sigma model interpretation. 
From the  symmetry, 
we expect to have, by taking the weak coupling limit of the foregoing 
currents, five fields  and five fields  
(these fields are not chiral currents, because of some logarithmic
festures:
more about this below). Meanwhile,
the broken  symmetry implies the existence of three non 
trivial fields with weight , whose derivatives are also 
necessarily 'currents'. We therefore 
expect eight  fields ( fundamental  adjoint)  and ,
in agreement with the known result. 

Note that fields with weights  and  can have some common
components
due to the presence of fields with vanishing weights. It follows that
many of their products do actually vanish, leading to a multiplicity
of sixteen for fields , and not , as one could have
naively assumed. 


An interesting question is now what remains of the  symmetry
right at the weak coupling fixed point , that is, in the
symplectic fermions theory itself. There, it turns out that only the
sub  can be observed, as the bosonic currents  are
still conserved in the symplectic fermion theory. This conservation 
boils down to the equations of motion 
. If one naively 
tries to check the conservation of the fermionic currents, it seems 
one needs 
, which is manifestly
wrong! So these currents, which are conserved in the sigma model at 
any
non zero coupling, are not strictly speaking conserved right at the
weak coupling fixed point.  

The explanation  of this apparent  paradox lies in the role of the 
coupling constant and how exactly one can obtain the conformal
limit. The best is to take the Boltzmann weight as  with  
as above,



and put the coupling constant in the radius of the supersphere 
,
which now leads to  . The equations of
motion are

_^ x&=&x

_^ _1&=&_1

_^ _2&=&_2

where 

 

leading, as usual, to the conservation of . 
The conformal symplectic fermion theory is then
obtained in the (singular) limit , where the field 
formally becomes a constant, and  a
triviality. 
Within this limit, the  symmetry is lost, but one gets as
its remnant the  two fermionic "currents",  and
. 

It is interesting finally to
 discuss the algebra satisfied by the  currents right at the
 conformal point (a related calculation has been presented in
, but we do not think its interpretation - based on
 rescaling the currents- is appropriate). 
 The OPE's are rather complicated:

J^+ (z)J^- (w)&=&14 1+2z-w+_2 _1 (z-w)^2  
-18  (_1 _2 )
+z -w z-w  (_1 _2 )z-w 
-12 z-w_1 _2 

&+&32 J^3+1
2 z-wz -z  J ^3z-w 

J^3(z)J^ (w)&=&34 J^ +1
4 z -w z-w J ^ 
z-w 

J^3(z)J^3(w)&=&18 1+2z-w+_2 _1 (z-w)^2  
-116  (_1 _2 )
+z -w z-w  (_1 _2 )z-w 
-14 z-w_1 _2 
and we see that the notation  is abusive: the field 
has weights  but the OPEs involve  terms. 
The commutators of charges are only affected by the  
term, and the  relations 
are recovered not through a rescaling but because of the presence of 
other non trivial OPEs between
the 'left' and 'right' components. For instance, writing only the 
relevant term, one has

J^+ (z)J ^- (w)&=&12(z-w) J ^3+1
2(z -w ) J^3

J ^+ (z)J ^- (w)&=&12(z-w) J ^3+1
2(z -w ) J

J ^+ (z)J ^- (w)&=&32 J ^3z -w  

ensuring , where .  

Amusingly, the  part of the OPEs corresponds to the
normalization , so the UV limit of the sigma model does
contain a "logarithmic "  current algebra. 


Speculations on the . 

It is tempting to speculate then 
that the models for  half integer correspond to "higher level" generalizations of the symplectic fermions, with
a non linear realization of the  symmetry, and  
a "logarithmic   current algebra". We do not know what the action of these models might
 be, except that in the UV they should reduce to the tensor product
 of a  WZW model and symplectic fermions. Notice of course  that 
 the PCM model - the limit , does obey this scenario.   
  Indeed, the PCM model also provides a  realization of the 
symmetry which is non linear once the constraints 
have been explicitely solved. Solving the constraints in terms of the
fermions gives 

 

The fermionic currents meanwhile read (It is useful to
recall that   factoring out the , ie taking as action , 
leads  (after some rescalings and relabellings) to the 
action of the supersphere sigma model  written
earlier in terms of  . ) 

 

One can as well solve for the bosonic constraint 
. If
one does so, and rescales the fields with the coupling constant as in
the supersphere case, the UV expression of the currents becomes simply
the sum of the currents for a system of 3 bosons (the small coupling
limit of the  PCM model) and the currents for the symplectic
fermion theory.


The evidence from the TBA is that the PCM model can give rise to two 
kinds of models (more on this in the conclusion): either the  WZW models like in the
usual case, but also the  model,
which presumably involves some sort of term changing the  part
of the action into the WZW one with a current current perturbation, 
but leaving the symplectic fermionic part essentially unaffected. We 
do not know how to concretely realize this though.






Another interesting aspect stems from the fact that the central charge obtained by giving antiperiodic  boundary conditions
to the kinks reads,
after elementary algebra, 

 

This is precisely the central charge of the models , of which the
first two have   and . We are thus led to speculate that 
the  models - or rather, their proper 'non minimal'
versions (studied in, although we do not necessarily
agree with the conclusions there), as the minimal models are entirely empty in this
case, are models with spontaneously broken  symmetry. It
would be very interesting to look further for signs of an 
structure in these models, and to study their 'logarithmic' 
algebra. 

Note that these models are 
obtained 
by hamiltonian reduction of the  model. In this reduction 
, an
auxiliary  system is introduced to play the role of
Fadeev-Popov ghosts, so these models are indeed naturally related to
the product of  and  as we observed earlier. 











The  sigma model(s) 

Instead of factoring out the , one can of course
also factor out the  and get an  sigma model. 
This is especially interesting since the standard argument to derive 
the continuum limit of the  spin chains would lead to a sigma 
model on the manifold parametrizing the coherent states, and this is
precisely . 

Note however that the manifold   is not a symmetric (super)
space (this can easily be seen since the (anti) commutator of two
fermionic generators does not always belong to the Lie algebra of
). As a consequence, sigma models on this manifold 
will have more than one coupling constant.

To proceed, a possible strategy is to follow 
 and consider for a while 
models , that is graded parafermionic theories. 

Graded parafermions  
theories are constructed in a way similar to the original construction of
 Fateev and Zamolodchikov, with the additional ingredient of a 
 grading. They obey the OPE rules

 

Their dimensions are , where
,  half an odd integer,  otherwise. 
Of particular interest is
the OPE 

 

Here, the operators  have dimension 2, and must obey
,  the stress energy tensor. The 
simplest parafermionic theory for  has , and
seems to coincide 
with the model  (Since  can be
represented in terms of a free boson, the cosets   
and 
 are equivalent there.) .  
For  an integer,  runs
over the set , 
. Parafermions with integer  are bosonic, the others are
fermionic. For , , and there is only a pair of
parafermionic fields, of weight . It can be shown that the
parafermionic theories just defined coincide with
 coset theories.


Like in the  case, the  model with 
a current-current pertubation can be written in terms of the graded
parafermions and a free boson . It is then easy to find an
integrable anisotropic deformation

 

(In the case , the perturbation reads

. )
The non local conserved currents  are 
 and 
 (where  denotes the right component of 
). 
The TBA and S matrices are rather 
obvious: we take the same left part of the
diagram as for the  case, but replace the infinite right
tail by the ubiquitous, finite and anisotropic part discussed 
in our first paper. In the isotropic limit, the RG generates the other terms necessary 
to make () into a whole current current perturbation. 


Taking the limit  would then lead to the TBA for
the parafermionic theory. This would require an understanding of the 
scattering in the attractive regime where bound states exist, but we 
have not performed the related analysis. It is possible however 
to make a simple conjecture based on numerology, and analogies with 
the  case. Consider indeed the  TBA in Figure 
 
 
file=fig4.ps,scale=0.5   
 Conjectured incidence diagram of the TBA describing the   
parafermions. 

where the box represents the set of couplings discussed in our first paper. 
In the UV, the diagram is identical to the one arising in the study of
the  Toda theory. The central charge is  as discussed in
. In the IR, the diagram is identical to the ones
arising in the  coset models, and 
. The final central charge is thus ,
and concides with the effective central charge for 
parafermions of level . We conjecture this TBA describes the
perturbation of these parafermionic theories by the combination of
graded parafermions

 

The
 effective dimension of the perturbation deduced from the TBA is
 , and this coincides with the combination
 . Note that we have not studied what kind of scattering theory would give rise to the TBA in Figure , and whether it is actually meaningful. Still,
taking the limit , we should obtain
the TBA for something that looks like an  sigma model.
Notice that the bosonic part of this model is identical with the
 sigma model,  and thus there is the possibility of a
topological term. It is not clear what the 
low energy limit of the model with topological angle 
would be. 











Conclusions 

The results presented here presumably  have rather simple generalization to the  case, even though 
details might not be absolutely straightforward to work out - for instance, we do not know
of embeddings generalizing the one discussed in the first sections. 

The supersphere sigma model for  positive in the conventions of
section 2, flows in the IR to weak coupling, at least 
perturbatively. It is expected that the phase diagram will
exhibit a critical point at some value  and that for larger coupling, 
the theory will be  massive. The
critical point presumably coincides with the dilute  theory 
first solved by Nienhuis. This theory is 
described by a free boson with a charge at infinity, and is 
 closely related with the minimal model  
. In fact  the partition function 
of the  dilute  model provided one restricts to   even  numbers of non contractible loops can be
written in the Coulomb gas language of Di Francesco et al. as

 

and coincides with the partition function of the minimal model. Earlier in this paper, we have 
identified this model 
with the  parafermionic theory.  The full  theory,
however defined, has a considerably more complex 
operator content.

Note that antiperiodic boundary conditions for the fermions, which give an effective 
central charge equal to 
 in the supersphere sigma model give, in the critical theory, a highly 
irrational value . There are no indications 
that an integrable flow from the critical theory to the low temperature generic theory exists. 
An integrable flow is known to exist in the special case where the symmetry is
enhanced to . In that case,
the IR theory is the so called dense  model, which has , and is closely related
with the minimal model . Note that this model is the second model of 
the unidentified series in section 4, and bears some formal 
resemblance to the model . What this means remains
one of the many open questions in this still baffling area.  


Acknowledgments:  We thank G. Landi, N. Read   and M. Zirnbauer
for useful remarks and suggestions. We especially  thank P. Dorey for pointing out the discussion of  coset models in. The work of HS was supported in
part by the DOE. 
    
    
    
Some results on . 

We collect in this appendix some formulas about , the
associated current algebra and groups.

The supergroup   is the group of 'real' matrices  
obeying (basic references are)

 

where  (For  a bosonic matrix, 

, recall
that 
.) 

 

Elements of the group preserve the quadratic form, if 
,
. 
They can be parametrized by  with

 

Here no complex conjugation is ever needed:  are real numbers, 
and  are 'real'
Grassman numbers. 

The group  in contrast is  made of complex
supertransformations satisfying 

 

To define the adjoint , we first need to introduce 
a complex conjugation denoted by . It is, technically, a 
graded involution, which coincides with complex
conjugation for pure complex numbers, , ,
and obeys in general (Recall that it is not possible to 
define a unitary version of 
with
the usual conjugation.) 

 

One then sets 
(Recall that the  operation obeys the usual properties,
. It can be considered as the combination
of the  operation in the Lie algebra (see the appendix), and the  operation on 'scalars'.)  
, so  in
 preserves in addition the form 

. 

One has now 
  with

 

with  real, . The fermionic content of the supergroup is
essentially unchanged, with , 
. But the bosonic content is different: the non compact
bosonic subgroup  has been replaced by the compact one
. 

The  algebra  is generated  by operators 
which we denote  (bosonic) and  (fermionic). Their commutation relations can be obtained from the current algebra given below by restricting to the zero modes. The 
casimir reads

 

The representations of the super Lie algebra are labelled by an
integer or half integer , and are of dimension .  The
fundamental representation is three dimensional, and has spin . It does
contain a sub  fundamental representation, following the
pattern of . The generators

are bosonic. The fermionic generators 
are given by 

 




The only metric compatible with  requires the definition of
a generalized adjoint satisfying  (here  denotes the parity)

 

and thus 

 

It follows that , , while
there remains some freedom for the fermionic generators,
, . It is in 
the nature of the algebra that 
negative norm square  states will  appear whatever the choice. Indeed, let 
us choose for instance 

 

It then follows that the norm square of the state  is 

 

Here,  if the highest weight state  is bosonic,
 if it is fermionic. Even if we start with the fundamental
representation  with  bosonic, in the tensor 
product of
this representation with itself, representations where the highest
weight is fermionic will necessary appear. These do contain negative
norm square states. In this paper, we will always choose the
gradation for which  is fermionic, and thus the fundamental
representation
has superdimension equal to . 

The 
current algebra is defined by 

 

Normalizations are such that the algebra contains a sub 
current algebra at level .

The Wess Zumino Witten model on the supergroup  corresponds
to  positive  integer, and the sub  current algebra to the 
WZW
model  . 


As commented in the text, the supersphere  is the
supermanifold of the supergroup . It is also the total
space of a principal fibration with structure group  and the
quotient of this action is just the supersphere 
. The explicit realization is as follows. 
Setting

 

(these obey , and
) we obtain points in , since 
. 
Conversely, for a given point 
of 
one gets

 

Define finally . Since 
the
 parametrization of () is invariant under
 , this proves the statement. 
 
 Of course, the two spaces
  and 
 are not  topologically equivalent: the fibration just discussed 
 is in fact a 'superextension' of the Dirac monopole. 

















 99 

  D. Bernard, "Conformal field theory applied to 2D
 disordered
 systems: an introduction", hep-th/9509137.
 
  C. Mudry, C. de C. Chamon and X. G. Wen, Nucl. Phys. B466
 (1996) 383.
 
     S. Guruswamy, A. Leclair and A. W. W. Ludwig,
    Nucl. Phys. B583 (2000) 475. 


     P. Fendley, "Critical points in two dimensional
    replica sigma models", cond-mat/0006360

     M. Zirnbauer, "Conformal field theory
    of the integer quantum Hall plateau transition",
    hep-th/9905054.
    
     A. Altland, B. D. Zimons and M. R. Zirnbauer,
    Phys. Rep. 359 (2002) 283; M. Bocquet, D. Serban and M. R. Zirnbauer,
    Nucl. Phys. B578 (2000) 628.

     M. J. Bhaseen, J. S. Caux, I. I. Kogan and A. M.
    Tsvelik, Nucl. Phys. B618 (2001) 465. 
    
 D. Bernard and A. Leclair, Nucl. Phys. B628 
    (2002) 442.
    
     H. Saleur and B. Wehefritz-Kaufmann, Nucl. Phys.
    B628 (2002) 407.

     P. Fendley, "Taking  to  with S
    matrices", cond-mat/0111582.

     P. Fendley and N. Read, "Exact S matrices 
    for supersymmetric sigma models and the Potts model",
    hep-th/0207176.


     J. L. Jacobsen, N. Read and H. Saleur, 
    "Dense loops, supersymmetry and Goldstone phases in two
    dimensions", cond-mat/0205033.
     
     M. Martins, B. Nienhuis and
    R. Rietman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1988) 504. 

     I. Affleck, Nucl. Phys. B265 (1986) 409.
  
     S. Polyakov and P. Wiegmann, Phys. Lett. B131 (1983)
    121.

    M. Scheunert, W. Nahm and  V.
    Rittenberg, J. Math. Phys. 18 (1977) 146.
    
 P. P. Kulish, J. Sov. Math. 35 (1986) 2648.
    
     M. J. Martins, Nucl. Phys. B450 (1995) 768
   
  
   ;  Phys. Lett. B359 (1995) 334.
   
    
    K. Sakai and S. Tsuboi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn 70 (2001)
     367; Int. J. Mod. Phys. A15 (2000). 

 C. Destri and H. de Vega, J. Phys. A22 (1989)
  1329; N. Yu Reshetikhin and H. Saleur, Nucl. Phys. B419 (1994) 507.

 C. Destri and T. Segalini, hep-th/9506120.

 H. B. Nielsen, M. Ninomiya, Nucl. Phys. B185 (1981) 20.

 N. Mac Kay, Nucl. Phys. B356 (1991) 729.

 I.P.Ennes, A.V. Ramallo and J. M. Sanchez de Santos,
"osp(1/2) Conformal Field Theory", hep-th/9708094, in "Trends in
theoretical physics (La Plata, 1997)", Conf. Proc. 419,
Amer. Inst. Phys., Woodbury, NY, (1998);
Nucl. Phys. B491 (1997) 574;
Nucl. Phys. B502 (1997) 671;
Phys. Lett. B389 (1996) 485.

 A. W.W. Ludwig, "A Free Field Representation of 
the Osp(2/2) current algebra at level k=-2, and Dirac Fermions 
in a random SU(2) gauge potential", cond-mat/0012189.

 J. Fan and M. Yu, "Modules Over Affine Lie 
Superalgebras",
hep-th/9304122.

 F. Ravanini, M. Stanishkov and R. Tateo, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A11 (1996) 677. 

 G. Mussardo, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A7 (1992) 5027.

 V. Fateev and Al. Zamolodchikov, Phys. Lett. B271 (1991) 91.



 Al. Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B366 (1991) 122.

 P. Dorey, A. Pocklington and R. Tateo, "INtegrable aspects of the scaling q-state Potts models I: bound states and bootstrap closure", hep-th/0208111.
  
 C. Bartocci, U. Bruzzo and G. Landi, J. Math. Phys. 31 (1990) 45; G. Landi, math-ph/9907020.




 F. Wegner, Nucl. Phys. B316 (1989) 663.

 I.I. Kogan and A. Nichols, "Stress energy tensor in
   logarithmic conformal field theories", hep-th/0203207

  M. Flohr, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A11 (1996) 4147.

 
M. Bershadsky and H. Ooguri, Comm. Math. Phys. 126 
  (1989) 49.

 
   A. B. Balantekin, H. A. Schmitt and B. R. Barrett, J. Math. Phys. 29 (1988) 734. 

   A. Gradechi, J.Math.Phys. 34 (1993) 5951.
  
  
  
 J.M. Camino, A.V. Ramallo and J.M. Sanchez de Santos,
Nucl.Phys. B530 (1998) 715.


 D. Bernard and A. Leclair, Comm. Math. Phys. 142 (1991)
359.

 B. Nienhuis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 (1982) 1062.










 P. di Francesco, H. Saleur and J.B. Zuber, 
J. Stat. Phys. 49 (1987) 57.


 N. Read and H. Saleur, Nucl. Phys. B613 (2001) 409.





 F.A. Berezin and V. N. Tolstoy, Comm. Math. Phys. 78 (1981) 409.

 V. Rittenberg and M. Scheunert, J. Math. Phys. 19
(1978) 713.

 L. Frappat, A. Sciarrino and P. Sorba, "Dictionary on Lie
Superalgebras", hep-th/9607161.





















