equation section 












 



 
 [1]#1 
 [1]#1  
 [3]_#1=#2 ^#3  

 [4]W
  

 [3]K
  

 D_b   
 D_s   
 D_f   
 T_b   
 _s   
 _b   
 f_sing   
 ^L ,R   
 C_b   
 C_s   
 _s   
 f_b   
 f_s   

 _L   
 _R   
 a_L   
 a_R   
 ^L ,R   
 ^L   
 ^R   
 ^L ,R   

 _1 
 _4 

 m  
 n  
 e  
 I  
 A  
  
  
Re  
Im  
  



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 D  
 a  
 b  
 t  
 I  






 Re 
 Im 



 [1]#1  
 [1]#1  
 [2](0,0)[#1]  
 [3](#1,#2)(#3,0)   
 [2](#1,#2)    
 [3](#1,#2)(0,1)#3     

[ ] 0 #1 #2  _#3  
 
 
 
 
_R 
_L 
_1 
_2 
( 
) 
#1  
 

 [1] 
#1
  
 [1]#1
  
 [1]#1
  

  
#1 
 


 

Excited TBA Equations II:

Massless Flow from Tricritical to Critical Ising Model 



Paul A. Pearce,
(
P.Pearce@ms.unimelb.edu.au) 
Leung Chim
(Current address: DSTO, Adelaide; 
Leung.Chim@dsto.defence.gov.au) 
 
Department of Mathematics and Statistics

University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia 
Changrim Ahn
(ahn@dante.ewha.ac.kr)  
Department of Physics

Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea 



 
We consider the massless tricritical Ising model  perturbed by
the thermal operator  in a cylindrical geometry and apply
integrable boundary conditions, labelled by the Kac labels , 
that are natural off-critical perturbations of known conformal boundary conditions. 
We derive massless thermodynamic Bethe ansatz (TBA) equations for all excitations by 
solving, in the continuum scaling limit, the TBA functional equation satisfied by the double-row 
transfer matrices of the  lattice model of Andrews, Baxter and Forrester (ABF) in 
Regime IV. 
The resulting TBA equations describe the massless renormalization group flow from the
tricritical to critical Ising model. As in the massive case of Part I, the excitations are
completely classified in terms of  systems but the string content changes
by one of three mechanisms along the flow. Using generalized -Vandemonde identities, we show
that this leads to a flow from tricritical to critical Ising characters. The excited TBA
equations are solved numerically to follow the continuous flows from the UV to the IR
conformal fixed points.

Introduction 

In integrable Quantum Field Theory (QFT), the Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz (TBA)  continues to be an important method for the study of massive and massless Renormalization Group (RG) flows including the study of excited states . Moreover the Tricritical Ising Model (TIM), which is the simplest member  of the unitary minimal series  beyond the critical Ising model , remains a rich example for studying both thermal and boundary flows .

In Part I of this series (hereafter referred to as PCAI ) we considered the
massive tricritical Ising model  perturbed by the thermal operator 
in a cylindrical geometry and systematically derived the TBA equations for all excitations by
using a lattice approach. More specifically this was achieved by solving, in the continuum
scaling limit, the TBA functional equation satisfied by the double-row transfer matrices of the
 lattice model of Andrews, Baxter and Forrester (ABF) in  Regime III . 
In this paper we turn
our attention to the massless tricritical Ising model which is obtained as the continuum scaling
limit of the  lattice model in Regime IV. Our goal is to systematically derive and study
the massless TBA equations which describe the renormalization group (RG) flow from the
tricritical  to critical  Ising model. We apply the methods
developed in PCAI and use the concepts and notations introduced in that paper without further
elaboration.

The layout of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the classification of excitations using  systems including a description of the three mechanisms by which the string contents change along the flow. In Section 3 we derive in detail the massless TBA equations in the  vacuum sector. We do not discuss the very similar derivation of the TBA equations in the other 5 sectors. The numerical
solution of the TBA equations to yield continuous flows is discussed in Section 4. We finish in Section 5 with a brief discussion.

Classification of Excitations and Flows 

For small perturbations, the scaling limit of the excitations in Regime IV of the  lattice model are classified by precisely the same  systems  as at the conformal critical point  and throughout the massive Regime III . Unlike
the massive case, however, we find that in the massless regime the string content can change by one of three mechanisms along the flow. This was first observed empirically by  direct numerical diagonalization of a sequence of finite-size transfer matrices approaching the scaling limit
 
for modest values of the system size  and  and is confirmed by our numerical solutions of the TBA equations. 
Here  measures the perturbation strength and  is the departure-from-criticality variable. The mass  and continuum length scale  usually occur in the single combination .
Notice that in the finite-size scaling we use the Regime III correlation length exponent  even though the actual   correlation length exponent in Regime IV is .

Let us consider the vacuum sector with boundary condition
. The excitation energies are given by the scaling limit of the eigenvalues of the
double-row transfer matrix , or equivalently the normalized transfer matrix ,
where  is the spectral parameter. The two relevant analyticity strips in the complex -plane
are respectively 
 
where  is the crossing parameter. The excitations are classified by their string
contents 
 
At the conformal critical point () the string contents satisfy the  system
 
where  and  are even, , , , and
 is the  incidence matrix with entries
. For the leading excitations  are finite but 
 as . 

As explained in PCAI, an excitation with string content  is uniquely labelled by a set of quantum numbers
 
where the integers  with  give the number of
2-strings whose imaginary parts  are greater than that of the given 1-string .
The 1-strings  and 2-strings  labelled by  are
closest to  the real axis.
The quantum numbers  satisfy
 
For given string
content
, the lowest excitation occurs when all of the 1-strings 
are further out from
the real axis than all of the 2-strings. In this case  all of the 
quantum numbers vanish
. Bringing the location of a 1-string closer to the real axis by
interchanging the location of the 1-string with a 2-string increments 
its quantum number by
one unit and increases the energy.

Although we do not make use of it here, we mention in passing that,  for the tricritical Ising model, there exists a bijection  between the patterns of 1- and 2-strings classifying the eigenvalues of the double-row transfer eigenvalues and RSOS paths on . This has as a consequence that the finitized partition functions (Virasoro characters) satisfy the same recursions  as the one-dimensional configurational sums of the Corner Transfer Matrices (CTMs).

Three mechanisms for changing string content 

Let  be the normalized double row transfer matrix as in PCAI. 
In Regime IV the eigenvalues  of  are doubly periodic meromorphic functions
in the period rectangle
 
where  is related to the departure-from-criticality variable  by 
 
However, in Regime IV the  lattice model also admits the symmetry 
 
so we can restrict ourselves further to the rectangle
. In particular, this means that
for  the distinction between the two strips effectively disappears - the two are joined
along the scaling edge at  in the scaling limit (). This
allows zeros to move between the putative strips 1 and 2 by crossing the scaling edge. The
combination of strips 1 and 2 in the upper half plane into one extended strip is shown in
Figure 1. There is a complex conjugation symmetry between the upper and lower half planes. Note
that this is consistent with the picture at the conformal point since in the limit  the
zeros are infinitely far below (strip 1) or infinitely far above (strip 2) the scaling edge as
.



 

    Upper part of the period rectangle 
 in the complex -plane for the
 lattice model in Regime IV showing the putative strips 1 and 2. The schematic location of
zeros reflects the complex conjugation symmetry and the symmetry ().  In the scaling
limit the imaginary period  and it is the behaviour of the zeros near the indicated scaling edge at
 that is relevant.      

Let us consider the extended analyticity strip .
Empirically, we find that as  is increased from  the strip 1 zeros approach the scaling
edge at  from below while the strip 2 zeros approach the scaling edge from
above. Potentially, this allows zeros to collide or migrate from one strip to the other. In
fact we find that the zero patterns change by one of the following three mechanisms which
occur at the scaling edge:

 
If 1-strings are closest to the scaling edge in both strips 1 and 2 then these 1-strings
collide and move symmetrically in opposite directions parallel to the scaling edge until they reach . At this point the two zeros no longer contribute and they can be removed from the analyticity strip. This mechanism applies if .
If a 2-string is closest to the scaling edge in strip 2 and a 1-string is closest to the
scaling edge in strip 1 then the 2-string moves to the scaling edge and leaves the analyticity
strip. This mechanism applies if  and .
Otherwise, if a 2-string is closest to the scaling edge in strip 1, then this 2-string
moves to the scaling edge and leaves the analyticity strip. This mechanism applies if
.
Similar mechanisms are also observed  in the boundary flows of the tricritical Ising model. 
If  only Mechanisms B and C apply according to whether  or . If  then Mechanism C
applies. In each of the three mechanisms exactly two zeros are removed from the extended
analyticity strip. These three mechanisms are shown schematically in Figure 2. They are
confirmed by the numerics discussed in Section 4.




 

    Schematic representation of the three mechanisms A, B, C by which the string
contents change under the flow. In each case the two
circled zeros leave the analyticity strip as indicated by the arrows.
In mechanism A two 1-strings leave the strip whereas in mechanisms B
and C it is a 2-string that leaves the strip. Note that only the
location of the 1-strings enter the TBA equations.      



Operator flow 

Remarkably,  as we explain in this subsection, the empirical rules giving the three
mechanisms A,B,C for  changing string contents under the flow suffice to determine a
map in each sector  between finitized characters for the UV (, ) and IR
(, ) fixed points. Since two zeros
leave the analyticity strip under the flow, this map from the UV to IR
takes the form
 
We find that the primary operators  of the tricritical Ising model flow to the primary
operators  of the critical Ising model as shown in Table 1. This pattern of flows is
consistent with the flow of operators observed with periodic boundaries but, in the presence
of a boundary, the flow is always to the primary operator not to an associated 
descendant as can occur in the periodic case. 



 
 
 
 
Flow of primary operators  displayed in the  Kac table. 

RG flow from  to  

In the vacuum sector  the   system of the tricritical Ising model is
  
and these relations determine  and  in terms of  and . 
Similarly, let  and  be the number of 1- and 2-strings of the critical
Ising model in the vacuum  sector satisfying the   system 
 
Then  and  are given by the total number of 1-strings and 2-strings in the extended strip
in the IR limit
 


 
 
Mapping of the first 22 energy levels in the  sector under Mechanisms A, B or C.
The energies, string contents and quantum numbers are shown in both the UV and IR regimes.
The degeneracies of all the levels reconstruct the mapping between the tricritical and critical Ising
characters .  

The mechanisms A, B, C determine which energy level flows to which energy level under the RG
flow. As explained in and PCAI, the energies at a conformal point are 
determined by the string content  and the patterns of zeros in the complex -plane.
In terms of quantum numbers the precise mapping of energy levels under the flow is given by
 
where
 
Details of this mapping for the first 15 energy levels in the  sector are shown in Table 2.
For given string content , the base energy level  is
determined by the Cartan matrix

 
The base energy occurs when the location of all of the 1-strings are further from the real axis than the
locations of all of the 2-strings.  Additional excitation energy is generated by permuting the
order of 1-strings and 2-strings in each strip as dictated by the sum of quantum numbers  in
each strip and is given by the Gaussian polynomials or -binomials
 
with the -factorials  for  
and . 
The energy  is increased by one unit each time a 1-string is brought closer to the real axis
by interchanging its location with the location of an adjacent 2-string. The product of
two -binomials is the generating function for the conformal spectra with given string content
in each strip. The
-binomials satisfy the properties
 

The character  is the generating function for the tricritical Ising conformal
spectra in the  sector. Explicitly, using the recursion (), we decompose it
into three terms 
 
These three terms correspond precisely to the energy levels effected by
mechanisms A, B and C respectively. 
So simply reading off the conformal energies from the
respective zero patterns after applying each mechanism we find the following mapping
between finitized characters
 
Notice that, after the mapping, the -binomials of strip 2 are with respect to . This is 
because strip 2 is turned upside down when it is placed on top of strip 1 to form the extended
strip. These
-binomials are naturally replaced by -binomials in  using (). All
integers are then eliminated in favour of  and  using the appropriate relations  which
apply to the mechanism corresponding to each of the three terms. The final equality holds
because of the remarkable generalized -Vandermonde identity which is proved in the Appendix
 



The finitized Ising character  is not the usual finitized character. In the
limit  it gives the correct  counting
 
whereas the usual finitized Ising
character gives  counting
 
where  and  denote the adjacency matrices.


RG flow in other sectors 

The analysis of the flow using the three mechanisms A, B and C can be extended to each of the
sectors  with , . In this way we obtain six generalized 
-Vandermonde  identities as follows:
 
 
 
These identities are simplified and proved in the Appendix.

TBA Equations in Regime IV 

Recall from PCAI that the normalized double row transfer matrix is defined by
 
where
 
and
 
with
 
Moreover, the normalized transfer matrix 
satisfies  the
universal TBA functional equation
 
independent of the boundary condition . For Regime IV, the nome is pure imaginary
with .



UV Massless TBA:  

In this section we derive the TBA equations for the  boundary by
solving the TBA functional equations in the scaling limit for even 
. We follow
closely the derivations in and PCAI . 
The derivation for other boundary conditions is similar. 
We begin by
factorizing the eigenvalue  of  for large  as
 
where  accounts for the bulk order- behaviour,  the
order- boundary contributions and  is the order-
finite-size correction. We will solve for ,  and then 
sequentially. 

For the order- behaviour the second term on the RHS of the TBA
functional equation e:functional  can be neglected giving the inversion
relation
 
In the physical strip 1, the solution  with the required analyticity is
 
The solution in strip 2 satisfies the same inversion relation and is given  by the symmetry xsymm .

In the two analyticity strips labelled by  we define generically for the
functions  the notations
 
 
and we assume the relevant functions have the scaling form
 
For example, we see that
 

As in Regime III, we next have to solve by Fourier series the inversion relations for the
order-1 boundary terms
 
 
To find  we need to consider the zeros and poles
introduced by the prefactor in e:t .
We find the order-1 zeros of  cancel exactly the poles of .
Taking into account periodicity, the prefactor exhibits poles at ,
, , ,
, , 
,  and double zeros at
, , , 
 where
. The solution for  with this analyticity but restricted to
the strip  is
 


By comparing the expected pattern of zeros and poles of

with the analyticity of , we find that this functional
relation is satisfied inside the strip . We 
observe that  is free of zeros and poles
in this strip.
Similarly  is analytic and nonzero, but only inside
a narrower strip .
Hence in this smaller strip 
 
where the kernel in Regime IV is given by
 
Note that the signs of  are choosen to match the corresponding
expressions in the tricritical limit . They can be determined numerically from the eigenvalues of
the transfer matrix with real  in the physical range . 

The functional equations for the finite-size corrections
  
can be converted to Nonlinear Integral Equations (NLIE) by standard techniques  where the key input is the analyticity determined by the patterns of zeros. 
Suppose that 1-strings are located in the upper half plane in 
the extended strip 1 
at  below the scaling edge and 
at  above the scaling edge. Then the zeros in strip 2 are determined by the symmetry xsymm  and occur at 
 and 
.
To account for these zeros, we note that the functions
 
are free of zeros and poles inside their respective analyticity strips. The products of elliptic functions satisfy the inversion relations ,  and are doubly-periodic.

 It follows that
 
where  is the kernel kernel . 
As in, the integration constants  vanish.
So now taking the scaling limit yields
 
where the kernel is
 
In deriving this result we have assumed that the zeros scale as
 
or, more precisely, the scaled locations of the zeros are defined by
 
Close to the UV fixed point, when  is small, we must have  and . 


If we define the rapidity   and pseudo-energies  by
 
where  we obtain the TBA equations 
 

To find the locations ,  of the 1-strings  consider the functional equations
 
at ,  respectively.
Since the right-hand sides vanish,  in the scaling limit this implies
 
or
 
where ,  are odd integers. These integers are given by their values  in the UV limit as determined by winding numbers
 
where  are the quantum numbers (). 
These integers  can change during the flow due to winding of phases. 
For numerical purposes, a more useful form of these auxiliary equations is obtained by replacing  with  in the TBA equations (). 
Similar equations can obtained for the locations of the 2-strings.

Repeating the same calculation as in Regime III, we find
the finite-size corrections to the scaled energies in Regime IV are
 
with
 

In the UV limit  we recover the critical TBA equations of. 
Explicitly, setting , we find that as   the location of the 1-strings scale as
 
It follows that in the limit  the finite-size corrections to the scaled energies are given exactly by
 
with the finitized partition function
 
where the modular parameter is  for  double rows.

We have chosen to write the TBA equations in terms of both strips 1 and 2. However, in accord with the existence of a single extended strip, the set of TBA equations (), (), () and () can be written in terms of a single strip by using the symmetry . Explicitly, extending strip 1, we obtain the TBA equations
 
where  and
 
The auxiliary equations become
 
where 
 
and the quantum numbers  in the extended strip are given by
 
with .
This symmetry between strips 1 and 2 is manifestly broken in the UV limit  and the IR limit . Also these TBA equations need to be modified in the intermediate regime for Mechanism A levels after collision of the 1-strings.

IR Massless TBA:  

For large  we work with the extended strip 1. In this regime the total number of 1-strings is either  for Mechanism B, C or  for Mechanism A with quantum numbers  given by () to (). Setting
) 
we now obtain the single TBA equation
 
with scaling energies
 
The auxiliary equations are
 
where
 
The difference between this equation and (),  as reflected in (), arises because of the  winding between the previous position of the scaling edge at  (reference point for ) and the new position of the scaling edge at .


Setting  in the IR limit , the locations of the 1-strings scale as
 
and the above equations reduce to the TBA equations of the critical Ising model.
Indeed, the pseudo energies 
decouple giving the energy of the usual massless free fermions
 
so that the auxilliary equations IsingAux  become 
 
In this limit the finite size corrections for the scaled energies are
 
with the partition function
 


Massless Numerics 

The TBA equations of the previous section can be solved numerically by an iterative procedure. There are, however, some subtleties. The process starts with initial guesses for the pseudoenergies  and 1-string locations, close to the UV or IR fixed points. The
flow is followed by progressively incrementing or decrementing 
. At each value of , the TBA equations are used to update the
pseudoenergies  and then these are used in the 
auxiliary equations to update the locations of the 1-strings, and so on, until a stable solution is reached.  Typically, the UV form of the equations is stable for small values of , the IR form is stable for large values of  and there is an intermediate range of values of  for which both forms are stable and converge (with a precision of five decimals places) to the same values for the scaled energies and the locations of each of the 1-strings. 
In all cases these numerical flows confirm the three mechanisms A, B, C.

One numerical difficulty is related to the
determination of the location of the 1-strings in strip 2. This problem arises because in the UV form of the equations  cannot be
obtained by direct iteration of the auxiliary equation. This problem is solved
by inverting the phases 
 
A more serious problem relates to Mechanism A cases for which two 1-strings collide to form a (short) 2-string with complex coordinates 
 
For these cases there is an intermediate range of values of  which requires a modification of the TBA equations. Such short 2-strings were studied  in the context of the Yang-Lee scaling theory. Unfortunately, due to instabilities in our equations, we have been unable to numerically solve the Mechanism A equations throughout the intermediate region.



1.25truein
 
    Flow of groundstate energy  versus  for periodic and  boundary conditions. 
The difference arises from the boundary term in the TBA equations. 
The energy is a decreasing function of  for periodic boundary conditions by Zamolodchikov's -theorem but this theorem does not apply with fixed boundary conditions.      


1.25truein -1.75truein





 


    Flow  of scaling energies  versus  in the  sector. The degeneracies of the levels are shown in the margins. 
The intermediate region of the Mechanism A levels (shown dashed) are schematic and have not been obtained from numerical solution of the TBA equations.      





1.25truein
 
    The scaling energy  versus  for the Mechanism A level in the  sector with string contents  and UV quantum numbers .     
1.25truein
 
    Flow of six 1-strings versus  for the Mechanism A level in the  sector with string contents  and UV quantum numbers .      



1.25truein
 
    The scaling energy  versus  for the Mechanism B level in the  sector with string contents  and UV quantum numbers .    
1.25truein
 
    Flow of eight 1-strings versus  for the Mechanism B level in the  sector with string contents  and UV quantum numbers .     


1.25truein -0.75truein





 


    Flow  of scaling energies  versus  in the  sector. The degeneracies of the levels are shown in the margins. 
The intermediate region of the Mechanism A levels (shown dashed) are schematic and have not been obtained from numerical solution of the TBA equations.      


We present some typical numerical results in a series of figures. In Figure 3, we compare the groundstate scaling energy in the  sector with the scaling energy for periodic boundary conditions. In Figures 4 and 9 we show 
the flow of scaling energies in the sectors  and  respectively. A dashed curve is used to guide the eye in the intermediate regime of the Mechanism A level. 
In Figures 5 and 6, we show the flow of the scaling energy and 1-strings for the Mechanism A level in this sector with string contents  and  UV quantum numbers . The dashed curves in the intermediate regime are schematic and have not been calculated from the solution of the TBA equations. 
For comparison, we show  in Figures 7 and 8, the flow of the scaling energy and 1-strings for the Mechanism B level with string contents  and quantum numbers . The flow of the scaling energies and 1-strings for arbitrary Mechanism B and C levels can be calculated throughout the flow by numerical solution of the TBA equations. The mechanism A levels can be calculated right up to the point where the two 1-strings collide. 
Note the linear regimes in the UV and IR for the flows of 1-strings. This corresponds to the assumed limiting scaling of the locations of these 1-strings. 


Discussion 

In this paper we have used a lattice approach to derive TBA equations for all excitations in the massless renormalization group flow from the tricritical to critical Ising model. The excitations are classified according to string content which changes by one of three mechanisms A,B,C along the flow and leads to a mapping between finitized Virasoro characters. With the exception of the intermediate regime for Mechanism A flows, the TBA equations can be solved numerically by iteration. It would be of interest to compare our results with the results of the Truncated Conformal Space Approximation.

Although, the tricritical Ising model is superconformal, the boundary conditions applied in this paper break the superconformal symmetry. It would be of interest to investigate the pattern of the superconformal flows between fixed points corresponding to superconformal boundary conditions . It would also be of interest to extend the analysis of this paper to the complete flow for periodic boundary conditions.

Appendix 

In this Appendix we prove the generalized -Vandermonde identities of Section 2.4. We simplify
the identities to show they are special cases of general identities obtained by
Bender . We then give an elementary proof of these identities using induction. 

To simplify the identities of Section 2.4 we set  or 
depending on the parity of  and set  or  as appropriate. This
reduces the six identities to four identities
 
After some recasting, a surprising mod 3 property emerges in the terms of these identities
 
 
Setting  mod 3 reduces the four identities to just two identities
 
For  there is an additional identity
 
These are in fact special cases(We thank George Andrews for pointing this out to us.)  of
identities due to Bender .

Generalized -Vandermonde Identities: 
 
Proof:   For  we have  so  for . 
We now proceed by induction on . Suppose that  and , that is,
. Then
* 
Now suppose that . Then only the terms  and  survive on the RHS and
* 





Acknowledgements 

PAP is supported by the Australian Research Council and thanks the Asia Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics for support to visit Seoul.  CA is supported
in part by Korea Research Foundation 2002-070-C00025, KOSEF 1999-00018. We thank Giuseppe Mussardo for discussions.

 00 

 C.N. Yang and C.P. Yang, J. Math. Phys. 10 
(1969) 1115.

 Al.B. Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B342  (1990) 695; 
Al.B. Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B358  (1991) 497; 
Nucl. Phys. B358  (1991) 524; Nucl. Phys. B366  (1991) 122.

 M. J. Martins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67  (1991) 419.

 P. Fendley, Nucl. Phys. B374  (1992) 667.

 P. Dorey and R. Tateo, Nucl. Phys. B482  (1996) 639.

 A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov,
Nucl. Phys. B241  (1984) 333.

 F. Lesage, H. Saleur and P. Simonetti, Phys. Lett. B427  (1998) 85.

 G. Feverati, P.A. Pearce and F. Ravanini, 

Phys.Lett. B534  (2002) 216-223.

 R.I. Nepomechie, 

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A17  (2002) 3809.

 R.I. Nepomechie and C. Ahn, 

Nucl.Phys. B647  (2002) 433-470.

 P. A. Pearce, L. Chim and C. Ahn, 

Nucl.Phys. B601  (2001) 539-568.
 
 G. E. Andrews, R. J. Baxter and P. J. Forrester, J.
Stat. Phys. 35  (1984) 193.

 E. Melzer, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A9  (1994) 1115.

 A. Berkovich, Nucl. Phys. B431  (1994) 315.

D.L. O'Brien, P.A. Pearce and S.O. Warnaar,
Nucl. Phys. B501 , 773 (1997).

 R. J. Baxter and P. A. Pearce, J. Phys. 
A16  (1983) 2239.

 G. Feverati and P.A. Pearce, Critical RSOS and Minimal Models I: Paths, Fermionic Algebras and  Virasoro Modules , hep-th/0211185 (2002).





R.E. Behrend, P.A. Pearce and D.L. O'Brien,
J. Stat. Phys. 84 , 1 (1996).

 P.A. Pearce and B. Nienhuis, Nucl. Phys. B519  (1998) 579.

 R. J. Baxter, J. Stat. Phys. 28  (1982) 1.

 A. Klu mper and P. A. Pearce, J. Stat. Phys. 
64  (1991) 13.

 A. Klu mper and P. A. Pearce, Physica A183 
(1992) 304.

 V.V. Bazhanov, S.L. Lukyanov, A.B. Zamoldchikov,
Nucl. Phys. B489  (1997) 487.

 C. Richard and P.A. Pearce, 

Nucl.Phys. B631  (2002) 447-470.

 E. A. Bender, A generalized -binomial Vandermonde convolution , Discrete Math. 1  (1971) 115-119.










UV Quantum Number:










* 
* 
* 


IR Quantum Number:


 

 
 
 



Sector  

For this boundary conition, the prefactor in e:t 
introduces addtional order 1 zeros and poles. To account for those
which lie inside the analyticity strips, we have to modify 
to
   
where  is the surface term,
e:g11 , for boundary condition .
In the scaling limit these extra terms vanish, but they changed the
sign of .
Thus our TBA equations now becomes
 

At the tricritical point we have the usual  system for this boundary
condition:
 
where ,  and  are all odd. By considering
 
and using the limits
 
we can derive the same finite size corrections as in 

As we flow away from the tricritical point to the Ising critical point,
the three scenarios of zero movements mean that the completeness
relation is now
 
where  is even.
Now taking the  limit, we found e:TBA21 
becomes
 
with auxilliary equation
 
Subsituting these expressions into 
e:finite_IV 
we found
 
The last intergal can be done easily using Rogers dilogarithms
to give
 
Summing over even , and using e:complete21 , we obtained
 

Sector  

For this boundary condition, the computation is exactly the same as for
the  case. Again  will pick up some extra order 1
zeros and poles from the prefactor in e:t . Correspondingly we
have
  
However all the extra factors do not contribute in the scaling
limit.
Indeed we have the same TBA equation e:TBA11  as in the
 case. The calculation leading to the tricritical finite
size correction is exactly the same, except that the 
system is now
 
where  and  is even, while  is odd.
Thus we have
 

Away from the tricritical point, , we have the new
completeness relation
 
where  is now odd. 
The computation of the finite size correction in the Ising limit
is also the same as in the  case, the only difference
being the the parity of .
Thus we have in the limit ,
using e:complete31 ,
 

