


 

00(2003)000 

http://jhep.sissa.it/JOURNAL/JHEP3.tar.gz 





















           






Eugenio R. Bezerra de Mello

Departamento de Fisica-CCEN, Universidade Federal da 
Paraiba, 58.059-970, J. Pessoa, PB, C. Postal 5.008, Brazil

E-mail: emello@fisica.ufpb.br  
Yves BrihayeY.B. acknowledges discussions with B. Mercier. 

Faculte des Sciences, Universite de Mons-Hainaut,
 B-7000 Mons, Belgium

E-mail: Yves.Brihaye@umh.ac.be  
Betti HartmannB.H. was supported by an EPSRC grant 

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University
of Durham, Durham DH1 3LE, U.K.

E-mail: Betti.Hartmann@durham.ac.uk   

  	

 	


  	
	  	

We study both global as well as local (Nielsen-Olesen) strings
in de Sitter space. While these type of topological defects
have been studied in the background of a de Sitter metric previously, we study
here the full set of coupled equations.
We find only "closed" solutions. The behaviour of the metric tensor
of these solutions resembles that of "supermassive" strings with a curvature
singularity at the cosmological horizon.
For global strings (and the composite defect) we are able to construct 
solutions which are regular on the interval from the origin to
the cosmological horizon if the global string core lies completely inside the
horizon. 

Global strings, Nielsen-Olesen strings, de Sitter space, Exact solutions 






 




Introduction 
A number of different topological defects are thought to have been 
formed during the phase transitions in the early universe. Depending on the topology
of the vacuum manifold  these are domain walls, strings, monopoles and textures corresponding
to the homotopy groups , ,  and , respectively.
Cosmic strings have always gained a lot of interest since they are thought
to be important for the structure formation in the universe due to their huge
energy per unit length (roughly  for a string formed at
GUT scale ).

A classical field theory model which has string-like solutions is the Abelian Higgs model. These solutions, also sometimes called "vortices", correspond to 
infinitely long objects. They have a core radius inverse proportional
to the Higgs boson mass and magnetic flux tubes with radius proportional to the 
inverse of the gauge boson mass.  Coupling the Abelian Higgs model minimally to gravity, the influence of the vortex on the geometry of space-time was investigated analytically. It was shown that far away from the core
of the string the space-time is Minkowski minus a wedge. It was 
also realised that if the vacuum expectation value of
the Higgs field is sufficiently large (corresponding
to strings having formed at a phase transition with energy scale much higher
than the GUT scale), then a different type of solution
is possible. These so-called "supermassive strings" exist only on a
finite interval of the radial coordinate and have a curvature singularity at
the maximal value of the radial coordinate. 
The existence of further solutions was investigated in a detailed numerical
analysis. It was found that the parameter space
is indeed divided by the curve of maximal angular deficit . 
If the deficit is smaller than , so-called "open", 
i.e. infinitely extended solutions were found. One is the above mentioned
cosmic string solution which however has a "shadow" solution
of Melvin-type for all values of the coupling constants. 
For deficit large than , only the "supermassive",
"closed" solutions exist.

The static solutions of the model without gauge field, so-called global
strings, have also been studied. Like all global defects, the global string has a
long-range Goldstone field which leads to a divergent energy.
Moreover, the global string is characterised by a logarithmically
divergent deficit angle in contrast to the local
string which has a constant deficit angle. The coupling to gravity in the case
of the static global monopole leads to a singularity-free monopole solution
 in the sense that while the energy is still
linearly divergent, the solid deficit angle is now finite. For
the static global string the corresponding singularity can not be removed 
by coupling the system
to gravity and only the assumption that the metric be time-dependent
removes the singularity.

Since a number of astrophysical observations like e.g. the measurement of
redshifts of Type Ia supernovae has led scientists to believe that we live in a universe with positive cosmological constant, the study of topological
defects in de Sitter (dS) space seems interesting.
But it also is of interest from another point of view, namely the dS/CFT
correspondence. This correspondence 
suggests a holographic duality between gravity in a -dimensional
dS space and a conformal field theory (CFT) "living"
on the boundary of the dS spacetime and thus being -dimensional.

Recently,  Nielsen-Olesen strings in the background 
of a -dimensional de Sitter spacetime  have been studied. 
However, to our knowledge, the full  system of coupled matter and metric
field equations has not been studied yet. One of the aims of this
paper is the investigation of exactly this point.

Motivated by some recent work on
a composite system of a 
global and local monopole in curved space-time,
we investigate the composite system of a global and 
Nielsen-Olesen string in a curved space-time with cosmological constant
as well.

Our paper is organised as follows: we give the model and static, cylindrically
symmetric Ansatz in Section 2. We give the equations of motion in
Section 3. We discuss the pure Nielsen-Olesen solutions
in Section 4, the global string solutions
in Section 5 and the composite system of a global and Nielsen-Olesen
string in Section 6. We give our summary in Section 7.


The Model 

The model which describes a gravitating Nielsen-Olesen string interacting with
a global one in the presence of a non-vanishing cosmological constant is 
given by the following action:

 
where  is the Ricci scalar,  denotes Newton's constant and  is the 
cosmological constant. The Lagrangian of the  Abelian Higgs model is given by 
:
  
with the covariant derivative  and the
field strength   of the U(1) gauge potential  with coupling constant .
 is a complex scalar field (the Higgs field) with vacuum expectation value  and self-coupling constant .
The Lagrangian of the global string reads:
  
where  is a complex scalar field (the Goldstone field) with vacuum expectation value  and self-coupling .
Finally, following we introduce an extra potential which couples (with coupling constant )
the two sectors of the model directly to each other:
 
Without this term, the global and local string would be coupled only indirectly 
over gravity. In this paper we will use units which 



The Ansatz 

In the following we shall analyse the classical equations of motion associated
with the above system. In order to do that,
let us write down the matter and gravitational fields as shown below.
The most general, cylindrically symmetric line element invariant under boosts
along the direction is:
 
The non-vanishing components of the Einstein tensor  then read:
 
where  denotes the derivative with respect to . 

For the matter and gauge fields, we have:
 
 
 
 and  are integers indexing the vorticity of the Higgs and Goldstone fields, respectively,  around the axis.

Substituting the above configurations into the matter Lagrangian density 
, we obtain:
 

Equations of Motion 

We define the following dimensionless variable and function:
 
Then, the total Lagrangian only depends on the following dimensionless coupling constants
 

Varying () with respect to the matter fields and metric functions, we obtain a system of five non-linear differential equations. The Euler-Lagrange equations for the matter field functions read:
 
 
 
while the Einstein equations
 
read:
 
and
 
Moreover, defining  we get the following equation:
 
The prime now denotes the derivatives with respect to .

Boundary Conditions 

The requirement of regularity at the origin leads to the  following boundary 
conditions:
 
for the matter fields and 
 
for the metric fields. Since a cosmological horizon appears naturally in de Sitter 
space, we integrate the equations only up to this value of the coordinate ,
. We thus require:
 

Nielsen-Olesen strings in de Sitter space 

First, we are interested in the case of the pure Nielsen-Olesen string.
This corresponds to setting  and  in the previous equations.
Vacuum solution 

For the case of the pure gauge string, there is a vacuum solution of the equations.
Setting  and , we find from (), that:
 
Using the boundary conditions (), we find the following solution:
 
This then can be put into () and () and we find the solutions:
 
and
 
where the coefficients again result from the
boundary conditions (). The first zero of  lies at
. At the same time, 
. This is the cosmological horizon
of the vacuum solution. If we expand the metric functions around this horizon, we obtain:
 
and
 
This has the behaviour of a so-called Kasner solution:
 
with , , , .
These type of "closed" solutions have been found previously for the case 
and were called "supermassive" strings. When calculating
the Kretschmann scalar  one obtains that  and thus the solution has indeed a curvature singularity at . Remarkable is that in the case of  , these type of solutions only appear for
sufficiently high vacuum expectation values (vev) of the Higgs field corresponding
to strings having formed at energy scales much higher than the 
GUT scale. For smaller values of the vev no singularity appears
and the solutions exist on the full interval .  
Accordingly, the numerical study showed that these solutions
exist for a .


Numerical results 

Subject to the boundary conditions (), we have studied the coupled 
system of equations numerically.
file=bbh3.ps,width=10cm  
        The value of the dimensionless coordinate  at which a cosmological
horizon appears, , is given for the Nielsen-Olesen string as function 
of  for  (dashed) and  (solid) with  and .  
  
First, we fixed  and  to study the influence of
the gravitational coupling  on the solutions.
We determined the  value of  at which the metric function  vanishes, i.e. . Our results for ,  and ,  are shown in Fig. 1. As expected the value of  decreases with increasing gravitational coupling . Moreover, we observe a steep decrease in  for a relatively small range of . We have only plotted results for 's corresponding to  since for large 's the numerics
becomes increasingly difficult. The reason for this is indicated in Fig. 2, where we 
show the profiles of the metric functions ,  as well as those of the matter field functions  and  for , ,  
and two different
choices of . For , the value of  at which the matter field functions reach their asymptotic values  and , respectively, is much smaller than the value of . 
This means that the horizon clearly lies outside the core of the string. For , however, the situation is different. The value of  at which  reaches  is roughly equal to , while  seems to be still greater than  on the plot we present. This is due to the fact that the "real" solution would have a slightly higher  at which . However, since
, it is numerically impossible to reach the final solution. Nevertheless, the plot indicates that -like -  just reaches its asymptotic value  at . Thus the horizon lies very close to the core of the string.  

file=bbh4.ps,width=10cm  
        The profiles of the metric functions ,  and the profiles of
the matter field functions  and  are shown for ,
,  and  (dashed) and  (solid), respectively.  
 



Then, we fixed  and  and determined  in dependence on . Our results for  and ,  together with the location 
of the cosmological horizon of the vacuum solution, , are given in Fig. 3. 

file=bbh1.ps,width=10cm  
        The value of the dimensionless coordinate  at which a cosmological
horizon appears, , is given for the Nielsen-Olesen string
as function  of  for 
 and  with . For comparison, also the value 
 for the vacuum solution is given. 
 
We clearly observe that the value of the cosmological horizon
decreases with the increase of the cosmological constant, as expected.
Moreover, an increase in the vorticity  leads to a decrease of  for
the same . For small ,  of both the 
 and the  solution is very close to the corresponding .
This can again be explained by studying the behaviour of the
matter field functions for varying . 
As observed previously, we find that for fixed  and 
and increasing , the value of the coordinate 
at which the matter field functions reach their asymptotic values
also increases, e.g. for ,  we find
that for  the value of , where the gauge field function
reaches  is ,
while for , we find 
. This can be interpreted
as representing  a thicker string core due to an increased cosmological expansion.
Thus the cosmological horizon lies closer and closer to the core of the string
for increasing  and so only for small 
the solution close to the cosmological horizon can be described by the
vacuum solution. In Fig. 4, we show the profiles of  and 
for ,  and  both for the Nielsen-Olesen string and the vacuum solution. Clearly, the solutions differ quite strongly.  

file=bbh2.ps,width=10cm  
        The profiles of the metric functions  and  
 are shown for ,
 and vorticity . We compare the Nielsen-Olesen solution
(solid) with the corresponding vacuum solution (dashed).  
 
Global strings in de Sitter space   



This is the case of setting  and  (which implies ). The global string without a cosmological constant, i.e.  has been studied extensively. To have a good starting solution for the construction of dS global strings, we have reconstructed the global string  without cosmological constant. We find that the metric function  deviates very little from one, but that the quantity  is increasing
with . Moreover,  grows approximately linearly with .
This is the behaviour found in, namely that outside the core of the global string the metric functions behave like
,  with  being the core of the global string in our rescaled coordinates. Moreover, we recover the behaviour of the Goldstone field function .

Numerical results 



For non-vanishing cosmological constant we find that the behaviour of   and 
 resembles that of the metric functions in the case of the Nielsen-Olesen
string in de Sitter space (see previous section). Again, for all 
constants fixed and  varied, we find that
the value at which  decreases with increasing
, e.g. for , , , we find that
, while .
At the same time, the value of  at which the function  reaches its
vev increases with increasing  which is due to 
the increased cosmological expansion thus leading to an extended string core.
The behaviour of the function  depends crucially on the
cosmological constant which determines the cosmological horizon
and the parameters  and , which determine the radius of the string core.
We will discuss these features in more detail in the context of composite topological
defects in the next section.



Composite system of global and Nielsen-Olesen string 
Unlike in the case of the "pure" Nielsen-Olesen string, a complete analytical analysis 
of the composite system seems to be impossible.
However, some additional information can  be gained by analysing the energy density per unit 
length. Before discussing our numerical results, we make some remarks on this point in the
following section.



The energy density per unit length of the composite defect is given by:
 
where  is the determinant of the  dimensional metric
 and  is the 
-component of the energy-momentum tensor. In the cylindrical coordinates,
we get:
 
From this, we can observe that the composite defect 
has a finite energy density. There are two different scenarios now. If the product 
 is large enough the core of the global string is small and
the cores of both strings lie within the cosmological horizon . We can then 
assume that , , , .
From before, we know that  goes to infinity close to the horizon, while
 remains finite. Thus the integrand of () tends to zero like
. If the product  is small, the
core of the global string extends to outside the horizon . 
Then the integrand of () becomes 
. 
Since close to the horizon, the product  tends to
zero, this is finite. We have indeed confirmed numerically that this is the case. 


Numerical Results 

file=bbh5.ps,width=10cm  
        [The profile of the Goldstone field function   
is shown for the composite defect with , , , ,
vorticity  and different values of .]The profile of the Goldstone field function   
is shown for the composite defect with , , , ,
vorticity  and different values of .  
 

Assuming that the behaviour of the metric functions  and  persists in the presence 
of all (non-trivial) matter fields (which indeed our numerical analysis confirms),
we can insert () and () into (). We obtain that:
 

We have construct the composite model solution
by starting from the Nielsen-Olesen (NO) string and increasing the parameter
 gradually from zero.
Our numerical analysis confirms the assumption that the radius of the NO
string core is smaller than that of the global string. Moreover, we find
that the NO string always resides inside 
the horizon.
As for the global string, we find that when the coupling constant  is small
the function  
reaches the imposed expectation value   with a positive
concavity, in particular the derivative  is non zero
and our numerical solution clearly suggests that the behaviour
 is not fulfilled.
This is demonstrated in Fig. 5, where we show  of the composite 
defect for , , ,  and
. 
This suggests that for small values of the product , the argument demonstrated
above doesn't hold.

Increasing the value of  we were able to 
produce solutions which seem to have the expected behaviour, i.e. 
,  and . This is shown in Fig. 5
for , , ,
 and , , , , respectively.
Of course, the occurrence
of the singularity at  renders the interpretation of the numerical results 
not hundred percent certain but we are rather confident that
regular composite string defects exist for large enough .

All these results are obtained for the case of , i.e. the two defects
interact with each other only indirectly over gravity.
We have also attempted to construct solutions with .
We find that only for large enough values of the quotient ,
the solutions seem well behaved. If  is roughly of the order
of  (for ,  and ),
the behaviour of the functions is 
very similar to that in the case of . For 
smaller than that, however, the functions  and  start to develop
oscillations close to the cosmological horizon. The number of oscillations
increases with the decrease of the quotient .
Thus, we conclude that "well-behaved", directly interacting 
composite defects only exist if the self-interaction of the global string
is much larger than the interaction between the two defects.
 
 

Conclusion 

In this paper we have analysed both Nielsen-Olesen and global strings as
well as the composite system of both defects in de Sitter space. 
When the matter fields are set equal to their vacuum expectation
values (vev) in the case of the "pure" Nielsen-Olesen string, 
we were able to construct analytic solutions of the Einstein equations
in terms of trigonometric functions. The metric tensor resembles that
of so-called "supermassive" strings which exist in asymptotically
flat space only for sufficiently high enough values of the
vev of the Higgs field. These were considered as being "unphysical"
since they should have formed at energy scales high above the GUT scale. Since recent
observations indicate that we live in a universe with positive cosmological constant,
and since we find that the existence of our solutions is not restricted to
values of the Higgs field's vev being large enough, these solutions might well
be of relevance.

Our numerical analysis suggests that the general behaviour of the vacuum metric
persists in the presence of the matter fields. E.g.  comparing the location of the
cosmological horizon  in dependence on the coupling constants for the "pure" Nielsen-Olesen
string  and that of the vacuum solution, , we find that for small  and/or ,
 and  are nearly equal. For increasing  and/or , the difference
between the two increases. The reason for this is that the radius of the string core
becomes comparable to the radius of the cosmological horizon and thus the assumption of a "vacuum"
at the cosmological horizon is not valid any longer.

Constructing the global string and the composite defect of Nielsen-Olesen and global string,
we find that the existence of "well-behaved" solutions depends crucially
on the product  which (in our rescaled coordinates) is inverse proportional to
the radius of the global string's core. If (for fixed )  is too small, the core
of the global string extends to outside the cosmological horizon and the
function  reaches its vev with positive concavity. For large enough valus of ,
the core of the global string lies inside the horizon and
our numerical results seem to indicate that a "well-behaved" global string/composite
defect exists.




 99 
 A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard,  Cosmic strings and other topological
defects , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1994.
 T. W. B. Kibble and M. Hindmarsh, Rep. Progr. Phys.  rpp 58 1995 477 . 
 H. B. Nielsen and P. Olesen, 61 1973 45 . 
 D. Garfinkle, 32 1975 1323 .
 P. Laguna and D. Garfinkle, 40 1989 1011 .
 M. Christensen, A. L. Larsen and Y. Verbin, 60 1999 125012 .
 Y. Brihaye and M. Lubo, 62 2000 085004 .
 A. G. Cohen and D. B. Kaplan, 215 1988 67 .
 D. Harari and P. Sikivie, 37 1988 3438 .
 G. W. Gibbons, M. E. Ortiz and F. Ruiz Ruiz, 39 1989 1546 .
 R. Gregory, 215 1988 663 .
 M. Barriola and A. Vilenkin, 63 1989 341 ;
D. Harari and C. Lousto, 42 1990 2626 .
 R. Gregory, 54 1996 4955 .
 S. Perlmutter et al., 517 1999 565 ;
A. G. Riess et al., 116 1998 1009 .
 A. Strominger, 0110 2001 034 ; 
0111 2001 049 .
 A. M. Gezelbash and R. B. Mann, 537 2002 329 .
 E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Y. Brihaye and B. Hartmann, Interaction 
of global and local monopoles , Phys. Rev.  D  (in press), 0210236 .
 Y. Brihaye and B. Hartmann, 66 2002 064018 . 
 J. Spinelly, U de Freitas and E. R. Bezerra de Mello, 66 2002 024018 . 
 D. Kramer, H. Stephani, E. Herlt and M. MacCallum,  Exact solutions of Einstein's field equations , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1980.
 





