










theorem Theorem 
acknowledgement [theorem]Acknowledgement 
algorithm [theorem]Algorithm 
axiom [theorem]Axiom 
case [theorem]Case 
claim [theorem]Claim 
conclusion [theorem]Conclusion 
condition [theorem]Condition 
conjecture [theorem]Conjecture 
corollary [theorem]Corollary 
criterion [theorem]Criterion 
definition [theorem]Definition 
example [theorem]Example 
exercise [theorem]Exercise 
lemma [theorem]Lemma 
notation [theorem]Notation 
problem [theorem]Problem 
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
remark [theorem]Remark 
solution [theorem]Solution 
summary [theorem]Summary 
 

  
ITFA-2003-05

CFP-2003-01

  
On the Classical Stability of Orientifold Cosmologies 
 

 
Lorenzo Cornalba (lcornalb@science.uva.nl)   
and  Miguel S. Costa (miguelc@fc.up.pt) 


 Instituut voor Theoretische Fysica,
Universiteit van Amsterdam
Valckenierstraat 65, 1018 XE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 


Centro de  Fisica do Porto, Departamento de Fisica
 
Faculdade de Ciencias, Universidade do Porto

Rua do Campo Alegre, 687 - 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
 



 

We analyze the classical stability of string cosmologies driven by the dynamics of
orientifold planes. These models are related to time-dependent orbifolds, and resolve
the orbifold singularities which are otherwise problematic by introducing orientifold planes.
In particular, we show that the instability discussed by Horowitz and Polchinski
for pure orbifold models is resolved by the presence of
the orientifolds. Moreover, we discuss the issue of stability of the
cosmological Cauchy horizon, and we show that it is stable to small perturbations
due to in-falling matter. 

Introduction 

Over the past year there has been a renewed interest in the study of time-dependent string
backgrounds [1-33]. The main objective of this programme is to learn about the origin of the
(possibly apparent) cosmological singularity using the powerful techniques of string theory. The logic
behind this investigation was to start with an exact conformal field theory, e.g.  strings in
flat space, and to consider an orbifold of the theory with a time-dependent quotient space. 
These simple orbifold constructions were, however, quite generally shown to be unstable by
Horowitz and Polchinski 
(The exception is the null-brane with extra non-compact directions, 
which is an exact and regular bounce in string theory free of singularities. Notice, however, 
that this space is not a cosmology since it is supersymmetric and depends on a null, 
not a time-like, direction.) . These instabilities are 
associated to the formation of large black holes whenever a particle is coupled to the geometry
and are non-perturbative in the string coupling. For this reason a perturbative string resolution of 
the time-dependent orbifold singularities seems inappropriate. 

In we investigated the orbifold of flat space-time by a boost and translation
transformation. This orbifold suffers from the Horowitz-Polchinski instability. However, 
an aditional essential  ingredient of the model was introduced in:
the time-like orbifold singularity is an orientifold, i.e. a brane with negative tension .
One of the results that we shall show is that the orientifold provides precisely the non-perturbative
string resolution of the singularity, modifying the gravitational interaction in its proximity.
In fact, after briefly revising the Horowitz-Polchinski argument and the orientifold cosmology 
construction, we shall show in Section 4, with a tractable example in dimension ,
that due to the presence of the orientifolds large black holes are not formed. 

In any pre big-bang scenario, there is generically a possible classic instability associated
with the propagation of matter through the bounce, which is analogous to the propagation of matter 
between the outer and inner horizons of charged black-holes.
Let us consider a perturbation at some finite time in the far past, when the universe is contracting.
In the case of orientifold cosmology 
there is a future cosmological horizon where the contracting phase ends 
(see also), therefore one needs to worry about such perturbations 
diverging at the horizon, thus creating a big crunch space-time.
We shall show in Section 5 that such perturbations remain finite (of course, they can grow and 
create small black holes, but this does not change the causal cosmological structure of the geometry). 
Furthermore, we shall see that the fluctuations that destabilize the geometry are precisely those 
that already destabilize the Minkowski vacuum.

The Horowitz-Polchinski Problem 

In, Horowitz and Polchinski argue that a large class of time
dependent orbifolds are unstable to small perturbations, due to large
backreactions of the geometry. Their results, which overlap with the string
theory scattering computations of, do not rely on string
theory arguments, and are obtained simply within the framework of classical
general relativity.

The argument of Horowitz and Polchinski is quite simple and runs as follows.
They analyze the orbifold of -dimensional Minkowski space 
 by the action of a discrete isometry  where  is a
Killing vector, and consider, in the quotient orbifold space 
, a small perturbation. This perturbation naturally
corresponds to an infinite sequence of perturbations in the covering space 
, related to each other by the action of . They
consider, quite generally, a light ray with world-line 
, together with all of its images 
* 
for any integer . The basic claim of is that, for a wide range
of time dependent orbifolds, the backreaction of gravity to the presence
of this infinite sequence of light rays  will inevitably
produce large black holes. As we already mentioned, this statement is a
claim in pure classical gravity theory and to prove it Horowitz and
Polchinski consider the scattering of two light rays  and 
. They compute, given , the impact parameter 
and the center of mass energy  of the scattering, and show
that, for generic time dependent orbifolds, one has that 
 for  sufficiently large. The two image particles
will be well within the Schwarzchild radius corresponding to the center of
mass energy, and will form a black hole.

It is quite clear that, if the above argument is correct, it must hold also
for a continuous distribution of light rays 
 
since the problematic interactions occur between rays separated by 
, and therefore should be completely insensitive to the distribution
of the essentially parallel light rays when the parameter  varies by 
. For continuous values of , equation ()
defines a surface  in , which we call the
Horowitz-Polchinski (HP) surface. Again, the backreaction of gravity to the
matter distribution on  should form black holes by the previous argument.
On the other hand, the continuous distribution is easier to treat
analytically since it is invariant under the action of . Therefore,
the full solution with the gravitational backreaction will also have 
 as a Killing vector. This fact simplifies explicit computations and
therefore, from now on, we will only consider the continuous case.

In the rest of the paper we will be interested exclusively in a specific
choice of orbifold, which describes, when correctly interpreted in 
-theory, the dynamics of an orientifold/anti-orientifold pair. We postpone
the discussion of the correct -theory embedding and the crucial distinction
between the orbifold and the orientifold interpretation to section 
, and we describe now the orbifold along the lines of
.

We write  and we
parametrize  with coordinates , , with line element
 
Points in  are identified along the orbits of the Killing
vector field  which corresponds to boost in the  plane
and translation in the orthogonal direction  
 
For this special choice of  one has  and 
 and the bound  is always
satisfied for  large. The directions along 
then play no role (except to determine the strength of the gravitational
interaction) and we will omit any reference to them, working effectively in
three dimensions.

To study the geometry of the HP surface , we parametrize the light ray 
 as 
* 
where  is a null vector and  is an affine parameter. If we
consider the generic case(
When  the images  correspond to parallel
light rays, and do not form black holes.)  when  then, for
some value of , the image ray  will be directed
along the null vector(
It could also be directed along . This case is just
the mirror under  and we do not discuss it.)  
. This specific light ray on the surface  will
intersect the plane  at a point with . By
shifting the variables  so that this point corresponds to 
we see that the surface  is given by the following parametrization 
 
 
 
The curves given by equation (),
which represent the surfaces  for the values of  
indicated in the figure. The surface  is clearly
singled out, and is the unique null surface. 
The only free parameter which labels different surfaces is the constant ,
and we will add a label  to distinguish them. A convenient way to
visualize  is to move to coordinates 
 
so that . Then, since the surface 
 is invariant under , it is given by a curve in the 
 plane (see Figure )
 
This curve can also be viewed as the intersection of the surface 
with the plane  in . 


Let us now describe some basic properties of the surfaces . The
induced metric is given by 
* 
so it is timelike for all values of  except for , when  is a
null surface. For  the surfaces are smooth for any value of the
parameters . For  the surface is, on the other hand, divided into
two smooth parts for  and  which are joined along the singular
line . Moreover, the forward directed light cones, which are tangent to
the null surface , lie on one side of  for  and jump
discontinuously, along the singular line , to the other side of 
for .

The Three-Dimensional Horowitz-Polchinski Problem 

As we described in the previous section, we want to understand, in general,
the gravitational backreaction to a distribution of light-rays in 
 distributed on the surface 
parametrized in  by () and fixed at a point
along the spectator directions . For  gravity is
non-trivial even in the absence of matter, and the problem is not soluble
exactly. In , on the other hand, space is curved only in the presence
of matter and the problem is tractable.

Recall that the basic question is whether black holes are formed as a
consequence of the strong gravitational interactions among the light rays.
On the other hand, black holes in three dimensional flat space do not exist
in the first place, and therefore it seems that the question is not well
posed for . This is not correct. In fact, the sign of the formation of
a black hole in three dimensions is not the presence of a singularity but
the existence, in the geometry, of closed timelike curves. To see this,
recall again that, in a two-particle scattering with center of mass energy 
 and impact parameter , a black hole forms when 
. For  the threshold is then 
 and is independent of the impact
parameter . To understand the meaning of this threshold, recall that the
geometry describing the propagation of a single light ray in 3D is flat
everywhere except along a null line, where curvature is concentrated. The
local geometry is completely characterized by the holonomy in 
 around the light ray, which is given by a specific null boost 
. In the presence of a second light ray, we have a second holonomy
null boost matrix , as shown in Figure . The combined holonomy 
, on the other hand, depends on the center of mass energy of the two
particles. For small center of mass energies  is a rotation. On the other hand, when
the center of mass energy exceeds the threshold value, 
becomes a boost and closed timelike curves are formed which circle both
particles, as shown in Figure . Finally, as shown in,
one may consider the same dynamics in  space, where black holes
exist. One then finds that, at exactly the same threshold, the
scattering process creates, in the future, a BTZ black hole.

 
 
Scattering of light rays in three dimensions. The holonomies  
and  are null boosts, whereas  is a boost for center of mass energies
greater then a specific threshold. In this case, the geometry has CTC's, as
indicated.  

We now see that the three dimensional problem consists in analyzing the
gravitational backreaction to light rays located on the surface (
), and investigating the existence, in the full geometry, of
closed timelike curves. As we already mentioned, since the surface 
preserves the Killing vector , the full geometry with backreaction
will also have the same Killing vector. We will show two things:

 
The geometry will have closed timelike curves. It is important to
stress that we are talking about the uncompactified  geometry, and
not of the one obtained after identifying by .

If we excise from the spacetime manifold the region where 
is timelike, then the resulting geometry is free from closed timelike
curves. As discussed in, the excision is necessary to correctly
embed these geometries in -theory. This procedure introduces a boundary
in the geometry which corresponds, in string/-theory, to the presence of
orientifold planes. We will recall these points more at length in the next
section.

Orientifold versus Orbifold Cosmology 

As we just mentioned, and as discussed in detail in, when we
embed the orbifold spaces in string/-theory we must excise the regions
with . The space  is naturally divided into
two regions,  and , where the vector  is
spacelike (or null) and timelike, respectively. Since , 
 and  correspond to the regions  and 
. We can now consider the quotient manifold 
* 
where  and 
. The action of  is free and therefore the
quotient manifolds are smooth. On the other hand, the full quotient space 
, although regular and without boundary, has closed
timelike curves which always pass in region . The space 
, on the other hand, does not have closed timelike curves,
but does have a boundary.

In the usual time dependent orbifold model, one considers the following
compactification of  and  theory 
* 
The top line is the -theory vacuum. Going to the left, we are
compactifying along a circle  of the -torus, and we obtain the
Type IIA orbifold with constant dilaton. Going to the right, we are
compactifying along the Killing vector .
The bottom right corner should be related, as usual,
by a  duality transformation to the Type IIA orbifold on the bottom
left. On the other hand, the IIA supergravity background on the right
is quite peculiar, since it has a complex dilaton field. This is 
because the vector  is timelike in .

In we have analyzed more carefully the bottom right corner of
the diagram and have proposed a related but different compactification of 
-theory, which uses crucially non-perturbative objects of the underlying
string theory. In fact, it was noted in that, if one excises
from the -theory vacuum the region  and dimensionally
reduces the space  along ,
one obtains a warped IIA supergravity solution with non-trivial dilaton and
RR -form of the form , where 
 is a two-dimensional space with boundary. The boundary of 
is singular and corresponds to the supergravity fields of an orientifold
plane, which acts as a boundary of spacetime, and has well defined boundary
conditions for the string fields. The geometry is best understood after 
-dualizing along the -torus and describes then the interaction of a 
- pair, a system which has also been studied in conformal
field theory in. We now have a consistent
compactification scheme given by 
* 
where we are adding tildes on the spaces to recall that one has to impose
specific boundary conditions on the string fields at the boundaries of these
spaces.

Reducing to Two Dimensions 

We now move back to the analysis of the three-dimensional
Horowitz-Polchinski problem. As we already mentioned, the full geometry
after backreaction will still have a Killing vector. Therefore, upon
dimensional reduction, the problem is effectively two-dimensional.

Let then the general form of the metric in three dimensions be 
 
where  is the Killing direction. The 
three-dimensional Hilbert action reduces to 
* 
The equation of motion for the field strength  is trivial and implies
that the scalar field  is constant. By rescaling the
variables ,  and  we can fix the constant to any
desired value (provided it does not vanish) so that 
 
Then, the equations of motion for the dilaton and the metric can be derived 
from the action
 
This action is a particular case of two-dimensional dilaton gravity (see 
 for a review and a complete list of references), and we
will find it most convenient to work in this framework from now on. Only at
the end we will connect back to the discussion in three dimensions.

We conclude this section by showing that () is also relevant in
the study of the interaction of --planes wrapped on a
-torus, which again is naturally a
two-dimensional problem. In general, the system is described
by the following massive IIA background 
 
Then the Type IIA action 
* 
becomes the simple two-dimensional dilaton-gravity action 
* 
which again reduces to () after rescaling of . Note that,
in conformal field theory, we can construct only a single -
 pair with specific tensions and charges. This then implies (seefor more details) that 
 

Two Dimensional Dilaton Gravity 

In this section we review some basic facts about 2D gravity which will be
useful in the analysis of the action ().

Two-dimensional dilaton gravity is a natural way to define, in two
dimensions, theories with a gravitational sector. The basic fields are the
matter fields, as well as the metric  and a dilaton field ,
which should be considered together as the gravitational fields.
The action has the general form 
* 
 is the matter part of the action, whereas 
is the generalization of the Einstein-Hilbert term and is given by 
* 
where  is a potential for the dilaton. The equations
of motion are easily derived to be 
 
where  and  are 
* 
Moreover, the conservation of the stress-energy tensor  is
modified by the dilaton current  to 
* 

The inherent simplicity of the dilaton gravity model lies in the following
observations. Define  by 
* 
and consider the function 
 
and the vector field 
* 
Then, whenever  - i.e.  for any vacuum 
solution to the equations of motion - the function  is constant and 
 is a Killing vector of the solution. The first fact follows
immediately from the equations of motion which imply
 
The second fact is proved most easily in conformal coordinates ,
with metric 
* 
Then we have that 
* 
and the non-trivial Killing equations become 
, which now follow from ()
whenever . Finally note that these equations are equivalent to 
* 

Using these facts it is trivial to find all classical vacuum solutions. In
fact, whenever , the metric can be put locally into the form 
 
where  is a constant. Then, one has the explicit solution of the
equations of motion 
 
which depends only on the constant . Similar equations hold in regions
where .

Let us now analyze the geometry in the presence of matter. For our purposes,
we are going to consider only matter lagrangians  which do not depend
on the dilaton, and which are conformal. This implies that 
* 
The simplest example is clearly a conformally coupled scalar  with action 
. The effect of this type of
matter is best described by considering a shock wave,
which is represented in conformal coordinates by a stress-energy tensor of
the form 
* 
 
 
Shock wave solution in two-dimensional dilaton gravity. 
The positivity of  can be understood by looking at the
conformally coupled scalar, for which 
. Recalling from () that 
 
we conclude that the shock front interpolates, as we move along ,
between the vacuum solution with  and the vacuum solution with 
 (see Figure ). As a
consistency check note that, since in the vacuum  and 
 are functions only of , equation () defines a jump
in the function  which is independent of the position  along the
shock wave.


The Case  

We now specialize to the action () by taking 
* 
First consider the vacuum solutions. These are easy to obtain by considering
the flat metric () written in the coordinates 
 and , where  is a constant with
units of energy, 
* 
is a Killing direction and  are the two-dimensional coordinates.
If one rewrites the metric in the form (), it is easy
to check the normalization () and to compute the two-dimensional
metric and dilaton field. The explicit computation is done in and
the result corresponds to the cosmological solution shown in Figure 
, where the timelike orientifold singularities
are at a distance of order . For future use, we divide the diagram
in various regions I, II and III, as shown in the
Figure.

 
 
The cosmological vacuum solution for . Regions I, 
I are the contracting and expanding cosmologies, whereas regions II
are the intermediate regions. Regions III are after the singularities, and 
correspond, when uplifted to three dimensions, to the regions where the
Killing vector  becomes timelike. 

Analytic results are simplest in Lorentzian polar coordinates. For example,
in the Rindler wedges II and II, where , one uses
coordinates  defined by  and obtains the static
solution 
 
It is easy to check that the above solution satisfies () and (
) with 
* 
As we already discussed in section , these  solutions
correspond to non BPS - geometries when uplifted to
string theory with equation (). Notice that, given 
(or equivalently  by equation (
)), one has no freedom in the solution, which is unique. Therefore, 
no fine tuning is required in the initial conditions for the metric and the
dilaton in order to obtain a solution with a bounce and with past and
future cosmological horizons.  Recall also that the conformal field theory description
of the  system has two distinct moduli, which are the string coupling and
the distance between the orientifolds in string units. We therefore see that
the backreaction of the geometry ties the two moduli with equation ()
and reduces them to a single free parameter. 

We also notice that the  solution is clearly singled out and corresponds to 
the supergravity solution of a single BPS -plane.
The  solutions do not have a clear interpretation in string
theory, and it would be nice to understand this point further. 

Before considering more general solutions in the presence of matter, let us
discuss the coordinate change from  to conformal coordinates 
. For the sake of simplicity, and since this is all we will need,
we write formulae for the case . We consider then the change of
coordinates 
 
where 
* 
Then, it is simple to show that the metric becomes conformal 
 

Finally let us add matter and consider shock wave solutions. Given the
discussion in section (), it is now almost trivial to find the
correct geometries, which are given pictorially in Figure . In Figure
a, before the shock wave, we have the vacuum solution with some given
value of . After the wave, one has again a vacuum solution, but with a
different value . Recall that 
* 
where   and 
must be computed along the wave. As we move in Figure a from point  to
points  and  along the shock wave, in the direction of increasing 
, the value of  decreases to  at  on the singularity.
Therefore  and one has that 
* 
Moreover, in any vacuum solution with , the value of the
dilaton on the horizons is , as can
be seen from equation () at .
Therefore, since the value of  is continuous across the shock wave,
we notice that the horizon to the left of the wave, where the dilaton has
value , must intersect the wave between the
points  and , as drawn.

 
 
Shock wave solutions in the cosmological geometry. 

A particular case of the shock wave geometry is attained when the wave moves
along one of the horizons, as shown in Figure b. Since  is constant
along the horizons, we have that  and therefore that 
* 
Let us breifly explain why the horizon at a constant value of  shifts 
as one passes the shock wave. It is easy to see that the horizon in question is given by
the curve . In the vacuum,  is a function of  alone,
but in the presence of matter one has that
* 
Then, since  is constant along the horizons (and therefore along the shock
wave) and since  has a delta singularity, the function 
just jumps by a finite constant across the wave, thus explaining the shift in
the position of the horizon.

Let us conclude by noticing that the instability of the null orbifold found inis again a shock wave which interpolates between two different vacuum solutions. 
The initial solution is a BPS vacuum (), which has a different spacetime structure
from the other solutions with  which are formed after the shock wave.
In our case this instability does not arise since we are interpolating between
two non-BPS vacua with the same global structure.

The Shock Wave Solution in Three Dimensions 

The geometry of Figure a corresponds, when uplifted to three dimensions,
to the gravitational backreaction to matter distributed along a specific
surface, which is the uplift of the shock wave curve. In order to better
understand the geometry of this surface, consider first the shock wave
without backreaction. From now on we take, for simplicity,  and 
 for some . The limiting geometry for 
 is given by Figure . The underlying 2D geometry is
the vacuum  solution, and we have singled out a specific curve, which
is given, in the conformal coordinates , by the two segments 
 

 
 
The shock wave before backreaction, both in conformal coordinates
 and in the coordinates  of equation (). 

We now uplift this configuration to three dimensions. The vacuum solution
becomes, as we emphasized before, nothing but flat space. The curve
becomes then a specific surface in , whose geometry is most
easily analyzed by passing to the coordinates  in (
). It is simple to see, using the explicit coordinate transformation (
), that the curve () becomes (see Figure ) 
 
for . The first part of the curve () corresponds
to () for , whereas the second part corresponds to .
Comparing with () we immediately see that this curve
corresponds, when uplifted to three dimensions, to the Horowitz-Polchinski
surface . Recall from section  that, among the various
surfaces , the surface  is special since it is the only null
surface, and it is therefore not surprising that we are obtaining exactly 
 from the two-dimensional shock wave.

We therefore conclude that the geometry of Figure a, when uplifted
to three dimensions, represents the gravitational backreaction to light rays
distributed on the HP surface  . 

Finding the Closed Timelike Curve 


We are now in a position to investigate the existence of closed timelike
curves in the geometry of Figure a. Recall that, without shock wave,
the quotient geometry has closed timelike curves that always pass
through region III, and that are removed by excising this region. These
curves are not closed in the covering space , which is flat. In the
geometry with the shock wave, we shall see that there are closed timelike
curves already in the covering space , which could signal an instability. However
these curves always pass through region III, and again should be excised.

In order to describe the closed timelike curves, we first need to prove a simple fact.
Consider, in , two points  and  which are connected by
a future-directed timelike curve from  to . Let  and 
 be the coordinates of these two points in the coordinate
system () and let us assume that both points are in Region II
, i.e.  the region with ,  and 
. We parametrize the path from  to  as 
, with . First of all, it is easy to show
that the full path must be entirely regions II or III
, because otherwise the horizons in the geometry prevent the curve from
returning to region II without becoming spacelike. Therefore, since we
are confined to the right Rindler wedge of the  plane, we may
adopt polar coordinates . We want to show that, 
if   (the point   is after the
point   in Rindler time), then any forward directed timelike
curve from   to   must go into region III  
(the region with  ).  To prove this fact, recall first
the metric on  in the coordinates 
* 
Consider then the function . It starts at 
 and it is increasing for small values of . This is
because surfaces of constant  are spacelike in region II (since 
 if ) and therefore future
directed timelike curves have always  in region II.
Now, since by assumption , the function  must
achieve a maximum for some value of . Then, using the same reasoning, the
curve must be in region III to be timelike, and this concludes the
proof. We can actually always construct a future directed timelike curve by
connecting the two points  and  with a straight line, provided that we
choose  large enough, as can be seen by direct computation.

We can now prove the existence of a closed timelike curve in the full geometry
(a). The regions to the left and to the right of the wave are vacuum 
solutions which correspond, when uplifted to three dimensions, to regions in 
flat Minkowski space. We can then think of the full geometry as follows. Let 
 and  be two copies of three-dimensional
space which are going to describe the geometry to the left and to the right
of the shock wave, and which we parametrize with coordinates
* 
respectively. The shock wave itself defines
surfaces  and  in the two spaces 
and . The full geometry is then obtained as follows. Denote
the region to the left of  in  
by . This corresponds to the part of the 
geometry to the left of the shock wave. Similarly, denote 
the region to the right of  in  by ,
which is the region to the right of the wave. The full geometry is then 
given by taking the two regions  and
 and gluing the two boundaries 
and  in a specific way. We do not need the details of the gluing, aside
from the simple fact that  when connecting 
and . 
 
 
A closed timelike curve in the geometry induced by the surface . 
Looking at Figure , which represents the shock wave solution 
in conformal coordinates, choose then the two points  and  as drawn.
They will correspond to points on the surface  with coordinates 
 and  and
on  with coordinates  and ,
where, as we already noticed, one has  and .
As in the discussion in the previous part of this section, we choose  and 
 large and positive.
Notice first that, with respect to the geometry  on the right of the
shock wave, both points  and  are in region II, whereas they are in 
regions I and I relative to the geometry  
on the left of the wave. In equations, we have that
* 
and
* 
This is the key feature which is required in order to have a closed timelike curve. 
Let us first concentrate on the right part of the wave. We may just consider the 
straight line from  to  in  which is
future directed for  large, and which goes, when projected onto the 
 plane as in Figure , in the region after the singularity. This
is because the point  is after point  in the Rindler time of region II
 (), and so we can apply the arguments of the first part of the section.
Now we consider the region to the left of the shock wave. It is easy to
check, by direct computation, that the straight segment from  to  in 
 is still timelike for large values of 
, and it is clearly future directed since  is in 
I and  is in I. This closes the
loop, as drawn in Figure , and we have found a closed timelike curve.

Note that, due to the simple lemma proved above, it must be that our closed
curve always goes into region III. Recall though that the boundary of
region III corresponds in string theory to the orientifold -plane, and
therefore region III should be excised, as described in section 
. The final  -theory geometry is free of
closed timelike curves, and we have then shown that the presence of the
orientifolds not only resolves the issues put forward in section 
, but also cures the instability due to the formation of large
black holes. 

Discussion 

Let us conclude this section with some comments.

First of all, we can try to consider the geometry induced by light rays on
surfaces  for  (so that the surface does not go into region
III). This corresponds, in 2D gravity, to matter which couples to the
dilaton and to the conformal factor of the metric, and is therefore
analytically more complex. Nonetheless, we can understand pictorially, in
Figure , that the physics is qualitatively unaltered. In particular
one can find, as before, closed timelike curves which necessarily have to
pass in region III.

 
 
A closed timelike curve in the geometry induced by the surface 
for . 

Secondly, it is clear that, in Figure a, it is crucial that 
. This fact, recall, comes from positivity requirements on the
stress-energy tensor . If  had been less then ,
the graph would have had a different structure. In particular, the horizon
of the left part of the geometry would have intersected the shock wave not
between the points  and , but between  and . The causal
structure of the space, when uplifted to three dimensions, is then quite
different and it is easy to show, using arguments similar to those in the
previous section, that the 3D geometry has no closed timelike curves.

Finally, let us comment on the general Horowitz-Polchinski problem for .
In this case, gravity is non-trivial even in the absence of matter, and therefore
an exact solution to the problem is probably out of reach. On the other
hand, it seems unlikely that a correct guess on the final qualitative features of the 
solution can be obtained by looking at the interaction between two (or, for that matter,
a finite number) of light-rays. This fact is already true if we just consider the 
linear reaction  of the gravitational field to the matter distributed
on the HP surfaces . Then, very much like in electromagnetism, it is incorrect 
to guess the qualitative features of fields by looking at just a finite subset
of the charges (matter in this case), whenever the charge distribution is infinite
(this infinity is really not an approximation in this case, since it comes
from the infinite extent of the surface  due to the unwrapping of the 
quotient space). Therefore, to decide if the problem exists in higher dimensions, 
much more work is required, already in the linear regime of gravity, but most
importantly in the full non-linear setting. Note that the only case
in which the HP argument is fully correct is exactly in dimension , where
the gravitational interaction is topological and when, therefore, the interaction
of an infinite number of charges can be consistently analyzed by breaking it down into 
finite subsets . This indeed is what we find in the previous sections, since 
closed timelike curves do appear.


Stability of the Cosmological Cauchy Horizon 

Another related classical instability which can arise in orbifold and orientifold
cosmologies is due to the backreaction of general matter fields as they
propagate through the bounce: as the universe contracts, particles will
accelerate and will create a large backreaction in the geometry. General
instabilities of this type can only be studied in the linearized regime, as
opposed to the shock wave geometries which could be analyzed fully,
including gravitational backreaction. In fact, in the previous section we concentrated on
conformally coupled non-dilatonic matter propagating in the
cosmological geometry, and this was possible due to the simple coupling to the
two-dimensional gravitational fields  and . We now want to
consider more general matter fields, either non-conformal or
coupled to the dilaton. In the following, we shall concentrate on a scalar
propagating in the quotient space , which
corresponds to a free massive scalar on the covering space .
Our results will apply to the orientifold cosmology after imposing
Dirichelet or Neumann boundary conditions on the surface 
. These wave functions were studied in, and we shall review
briefly those results before considering the issue of stability.

Particle States 

Let us start with a massive field  of mass  on the covering space 
, which satisfies the Klein-Gordon equation 
 
We demand that  be invariant under the orbifold action, so that 
 
where  and 
* 
The energy scale  of section  is given by .
Since the quotient space has the symmetry generated by the Killing vector 
, and since the operators ,  and  commute, it is
convenient to choose a basis of solutions to () and ()
where the operators  and 
are diagonal. We then choose our field  so that 
* 
by writing 
* 
The wave functions  are functions of Lorentzian spin  which also
satisfy the two-dimensional Klein-Gordon equation 
, where 
. They can then be solved in Lorentzian polar coordinates,
as we shall review below, in terms of Bessel functions, which naturally have
an integral representation as a sum of the standard plane waves in the
covering space. In terms of the quantum numbers , , the orbifold
boundary condition () becomes simply 
 
Generally, when , the spectrum of  is continuous
for each . On the other hand, for the pure boost orbifold (), the
spectrum is discrete since . This difference is crucial.  We
shall see more in detail in the next section that, in the general case, 
it is possible to define particle states that do not destabilize the
cosmological vacuum on the horizons by properly integrating over the various
spins  , whereas in the pure boost case there is an infinite blue shift
as particles approach the tip of the Minkowski cone. The situation
is analogous to particles propagating in the "null boost" and "null boost 
 translation" orbifolds studied in. From now on we consider
the general case , and we use as quantum numbers  and , thus
labeling the wave functions . 

To study the behaviour of the wave functions describing the collapse of
matter through the contracting region I we first move to light-cone coordinates 
 and then to polar
coordinates in the Milne wedge of the  plane . This means
that, using the quantization condition (), the wave function 
 is given by 
 
where the functions  have the form 
* 
and where  are the Bessel functions of imaginary order 
. In terms of the quantum numbers  and , the frequency 
satisfies the mass shell condition 
* 

Near Horizon Behaviour of the Wave Functions 

We are interested in the limit  near the cosmological
horizon, so it is convenient to recall the basic functional form of the
Bessel functions 
* 
where  is an entire function on the complex plane, which has
the expansion 
* 
Then, in terms of the two-dimensional light-cone coordinates ,
which are well defined throughout the whole geometry, we have 
* 
These wave functions are well behaved everywhere except at the horizons 
, where there is an infinite blue-shift of the frequency. To see
this, consider the leading behaviour of the wave function 
at both horizons ( or ) 
* 
Near the horizon  the wave function is well behaved and can be
trivially continued through the horizon. Near , on the other hand,
the wave function has a singularity which can be problematic. In fact, close
to the horizon, the derivative of the field 
 diverges as 
, and this signals an infinity energy density, since the
metric near the horizon has the regular form . This
fact was noted already in. 

A natural way to cure the problem is to consider wave
functions which are given by linear superpositions of the above basic
solutions with different values of . The problem is then to understand if
general perturbations in the far past  will evolve
into the future and create an infinite energy density on the horizon, thus
destabilizing the geometry. This problem is well known in the physics of
black holes where, generically, Cauchy horizons are unstable to small
perturbations of the geometry. We will show in the
next section that the problem does not arise in this cosmological geometry.
More precisely, we will show that perturbations which are localized in the 
 direction in the far past  (and which are therefore necessarily a
superposition of our basic solutions ()) do not induce
infinite energy densities on the horizons of the geometry, and can be
continued smoothly into the other regions II and I of the
geometry. 

This problem was also considered in, where a different conclusion
was reached. We will discuss, at the end of section , the argument of 
 and describe why it does not apply to physically relevant bounded
perturbations.

Analysis of Infalling Matter 

For simplicity we will set, from now on,  and  and we will focus
uniquely on the uncharged sector , which corresponds to pure
dimensional reduction. The three-dimensional action  
for the massless scalar  reduces, in two dimensions, to 
* 
The scalar field  is therefore conformally coupled, but has a non
trivial coupling to the dilaton, and satisfies the equation of motion 
 
As in the previous section, 
we analyze this equation in the background described by the vacuum
solution (), which is given in regions I by 
 
where . We have seen, in the previous section, that the
solutions to () are known exactly in terms of Bessel functions,
since () is equivalent to the equation 
,
where  is the boost operator in the 
 plane and  is the Laplacian with respect
to the flat metric  . A different and more
general approach to the solution of (), which is more in line with
the literature on the stability of Cauchy horizons in black hole geometries,
is to rewrite () in terms of the field 
* 
A simple computation shows that equation () becomes 
* 
We now use the fact that, in the vacuum solution (), 
equations () and () with  imply that
 and that 
. Therefore
the equation of motion becomes 
 

As customary, we write the above equation using conformal coordinates
defined in region I. In the sequel, we follow closely the 
beautiful work of Chandrasekar and Hartle.
We first define, in terms of the coordinates 
 in (), the coordinates ,  given by 
* 
The coordinates ,  are lightcone coordinates in the ,  plane 
* 
where  is the usual tortoise  time coordinate. Recalling (), 
is given in terms of  by the expression 
 
and has asymptotic behaviour for large values of  given by
(see Figure ) 
* 
) 
 
The tortoise)  time coordinate  versus , together with the 
asymptotic behaviours  and  for  and .
 
The various coordinate systems are recalled in Figure a. The metric in
region I is given, from equation (), by 
, and we conclude
that equation () reads 
* 
where 
 
 
 
The scattering potential . 
 
Finally, we Fourier transform the  coordinate 
* 
to obtain the Schro dinger-like equation 
 

Let us consider this differential equation in more detail. The potential 
, shown in Figure , has the following asymptotic
behaviour 
 
and is therefore significant only in the region around . 
The scattering potential connects the two regions with  and  (or 
 and ) where the field  behaves
essentially like a free scalar in two-dimensional flat space. The potential 
 then connects the past Minkowski region ( with metric 
) to the future Milne wedge ( with metric 
).
Since  decays at infinity faster then , one can follow the usual
theory of one-dimensional scattering. In particular, following, we
consider the solutions  and  of (
) which behave like pure exponentials  respectively in
the future  and in the past 
 
Therefore, when restoring the  dependence  of the full solution,
we have, for , the plane waves
* 
and, for ,
* 
As explained in the previous section, the problem is exactly soluble in terms of
Bessel functions(
Recall that 
. In this paper we choose 
unconventionally  to take the branch cut of the logarithm along the negative
imaginary axis, so that  and  also have
a cut on , . Moreover, the expressions like 
 and  will always be defined using the same prescription
for the logarithm.) , and one has the following explicit form of the
functions  and 
* 
where  is defined by (). The function
 
is the Hankel function of the first kind, which has the correct asymptotic behaviour 
to ensure that  has the desired properties.

It is useful,
again following closely, to consider the general analytic behaviour of 
and  as a function of the complex variable  , at fixed time 
. First it is clear that we must have 
* 
 
 
The analytic structure of  and  as functions of . 
Moreover, we recall from that, whenever the potential has asymptotic
behaviour 
* 
then  is everywhere analytic, except for poles at 
(with  being the natural numbers 
), and  has poles at 
. In our case  and, as expected, the function 
has poles at  due to the gamma function(
The function  is
an entire function of , as can be seen from the explicit power series
representation of the Bessel function .)  
. On the other hand, for the case of the specific
potential (), one has , with the
exponential behaviour replaced with a power law . This is a direct
consequence of the fact that the metric distance from a point in region I
 to the horizon at  is finite, whereas it is
infinite going to past infinity at . Therefore, the
poles at  become infinitely close and are
effectively replaced by a branch cut along the negative imaginary  axis,
as one can check from the analytic expression for . The features just
described, which are shown in Figure , 
are generic and do not depend on the details of the potential,
but only on the asymptotic behaviour (). 
In particular, one has the same behaviour for fluctuations
of any field .

Let us now consider a general solution  of (
). Since both  and 
are bases of the solutions of (), one must have that 
 
The coefficients  and  can be easily computed by recalling
that, given two solutions ,  of (), the Wronskian 
* 
is independent of , where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to 
.
 
 
Figure (a) shows the various coordinate systems in region I.
Figure (b) shows the various ways
to define a solution . One either gives the functions ,  or the
functions , , or, alternatively, the functions , 
 at some fixed time  along the dotted line. 
In particular, one can easily show that 
* 
Therefore we readily conclude that 
 
together with similar equations for  and .

Behaviour at the Horizons 

The meaning of the
coefficients  and  is quite clearly understood by considering
the value of the field  on the horizons. Since we are in the limit 
, we use the asymptotic form of 
to conclude that (see Figure b)
 
where 
* 
To compute the stress tensor due to the fluctuation in , whose
divergence usually signals the instability of the Cauchy horizon, we also
must consider the derivatives of the field with respect to the coordinates 
 (the coordinates ,  tend to  on the horizons).
Recalling that 
* 
we conclude that 
 
Note that both expressions () and () are valid only in
the limit   
 or  
, and are not approximate expressions for
large but finite  ,  .  This is because, although the
asymptotic form () is exactly valid in the limit 
, it becomes accurate for , where
the threshold value  depends explicitly on 
. Given the explicit form of , it is clear that 
 since only in this case is the argument of the Bessel
function . Therefore, given a function  which has
support at all momenta, one is not uniformly in the asymptotic region for
all momenta at any large but finite . Only in the limit 
 we can use uniform convergence to deduce the expressions ()
and (), in the sense just described.

Finally, going back to the computation of the derivatives ,
one recalls from that the problematic limits are given by 
 and 
. Concentrating on the first one for
simplicity, we see that we need to consider the expression 
 
The physical problem we need to address is the following. Let us
assume that, at some time  in the past, much before the
scattering potential  becomes relevant, our field 
 is in some specific configuration given by initial conditions on
the value of  and of its time derivative  
* 
We will assume that the functions above are localized  as a function
of . More precisely, we shall demand that 
and  are such that their evolution
would not lead to an inconsistent behaviour on the horizon in the Milne wedge
of flat space , where .
It is important to realize that those are the general physical perturbation, since
we are only demanding that they would be regular in flat space.
Let us be more explicit. In the absence of the potential , the solutions
of the massless Klein-Gordon equations are just ,
and the initial conditions  and  at
 are equivalent to giving the functions  and  of the light-cone
coordinates. Recall though that the coordinates which are regular across the horizon 
are , and therefore we must demand, in order to have a regular perturbation 
in flat space, that  and  be well-behaved as functions of 
. To see what this means in practice, consider a function of  which
has a nice power series expansion  around .
As a function of  this reads  , and this shows
that, aside from the constant part, the function  must decay, for ,
at least as fast as . This fact imposes constraints on the Fourier transforms
of  and  and, in turn, on the functions  and 
. In practice, it is sufficient to require that the Fourier transforms 
 and  do not have
poles in the strip . Then the problematic limit 
* 
can be computed by deforming the contour in the lower half of the complex
plane, and is determined by the poles of . In fact,
the leading behaviour of the integral is controlled by the first pole at 
, which gives an asymptotic behaviour for large  of 
. The limit in the above expression then tends to a finite result.

In order to better understand the above result, let us review the standard
argument for the instability of the Cauchy horizon, which was followed in.
The problem is usually posed by giving initial conditions at past null infinity 
(see also Figure b), by giving the functions 
* 
on which we impose a regularity constraint (say, for simplicity, a
localization condition like the one discussed above, now in the coordinates 
 and ). To determine ,  in terms of ,  one
uses the expression () for  in the equation (
) and obtains that 
* 
where(
The coefficients  and  satisfy,
generically, the conjugation relations 
and , 
and the unitarity relation 
.
Using (), we have the explicit
expression 
*) 
Moreover, in general, the function  will have zeros on the positive
imaginary -axis  whenever the potential  has a bound state. The explicit expressions
above show that, for our particular potential, there are no bound states.
  
* 
The above expression shows that both  and 
 have a cut along the negative imaginary  axis (the limit of
the poles at  for ). The 
full analytic structure of  and  is shown in Figure . Since 

 we conclude that the leading pole of 
at 
 determines the asymptotic behaviour of the integral in (
) to be . Therefore, the limit 
 diverges, thus
naively signaling an instability of the horizon.
 
 
The analytic structure of  and . 

The above reasoning depends crucially on the assumption that the
functions ,  have a nice Fourier transform (analytic at least
in the region ), so that the perturbation is
localized on the null directions at past null infinity. If this is the case,
though, expression () shows that the function 
 is already delocalized (the Fourier transform has a branch cut
due to ) at any finite time  
much before the scattering potential , and therefore will concentrate on the
horizons and create an infinite stress tensor. This is clearly not the type
of perturbation we want to focus on, which should be localized in space
before they hit the potential .
Note that, at any finite time , we cannot use, in equation (),
the asymptotic form of  for all values of . In fact, the 
explicit form of the the function  shows that one is in the 
asymptotic regime for . Therefore, the crucial low
momentum modes which determine the asymptotic behaviour of the wave
function are never in the asymptotic region for any
finite time  . We then consider the requirement of
localization of  at times  to be the
correct and physically relevant boundary condition to study issues of
stability of the geometry. The reasonings of this section then show that, in
this sense, the Cauchy horizon in perfectly stable to small perturbations.


Discussion 

Let us conclude this section with some comments on future research.

We have shown that, in the orientifold cosmology, one can define particle-like
perturbations which do not destabilize the Cauchy horizon, and therefore that
the solution is stable against small variations of the background fields.
All the work is done at the classical linearized level. The most pressing
question for issues of stability is the study of the quantum stress-energy
tensor for the field . This is a non-trivial problem due to the non-minimal
coupling to the metric and the dilaton, and only some results are known in 
the literature (see and references therein). On the other
hand, the problem might be tractable since the exact wave-functions are known
in this case.


Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank J. Barbon, C. Herdeiro, F. Quevedo and I. Zavala 
for useful discussions and correspondence. LC is supported by a Marie Curie 
Fellowship under the European Commission's Improving Human Potential programme 
(HPMF-CT-2002-02016). This work was partially supported by CERN under contract 
CERN/FIS/43737/2001. 

 99 

J. Khoury, B. A. Ovrut, N. Seiberg, P. J. Steinhardt and N. Turok,
From big crunch to big bang , 
hep-th/0108187 .


N. Seiberg, From big crunch to big bang - is it possible? ,
hep-th/0201039 .



V. Balasubramanian, S. F. Hassan, E. Keski-Vakkuri and A. Naqvi,
A space-time orbifold: A toy model for a cosmological singularity ,
hep-th/0202187 .


  L. Cornalba and M. S. Costa, 
A New Cosmological Scenario in String Theory , 
Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 066001, 
hep-th/0203031 . 


N. A. Nekrasov,
Milne universe, tachyons, and quantum group ,
hep-th/0203112 .


J. Simon,
The geometry of null rotation identifications ,
hep-th/0203201 .


A. J. Tolley and N. Turok,
Quantum fields in a big crunch / big bang spacetime ,
Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 106005,
hep-th/0204091 .


  
H. Liu, G. Moore and N. Seiberg,
Strings in a time-dependent orbifold ,
JHEP 0206  (2002) 045, 
hep-th/0204168 . 


S. Elitzur, A. Giveon, D. Kutasov and E. Rabinovici,
From big bang to big crunch and beyond ,
JHEP 0206  (2002) 017,
hep-th/0204189 .


  L. Cornalba, M. S. Costa and C. Kounnas, 
A resolution of the cosmological singularity with orientifolds , 
Nucl. Phys. B 637  (2002) 378, 
hep-th/0204261 . 


B. Craps, D. Kutasov and G. Rajesh,
String propagation in the presence of cosmological singularities ,
JHEP 0206  (2002) 053,
hep-th/0205101 .


  
A. Lawrence,
On the instability of 3D null singularities , 
JHEP 0211  (2002) 019, 
hep-th/0205288 . 


C. Gordon and N. Turok,
Cosmological perturbations through a general relativistic bounce ,
hep-th/0206138 .


E. J. Martinec and W. McElgin,
Exciting AdS orbifolds ,
JHEP 0210  (2002) 050,
hep-th/0206175 .


  
H. Liu, G. Moore and N. Seiberg, 
Strings in time-dependent orbifolds , 
JHEP 0210  (2002) 031, 
hep-th/0206182 . 


M. Fabinger and J. McGreevy,
On smooth time-dependent orbifolds and null singularities ,
hep-th/0206196 .


  
G. T. Horowitz and J. Polchinski, 
Instability of spacelike and null orbifold singularities ,
Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 103512, 
hep-th/0206228 . 


A. Buchel, P. Langfelder and J. Walcher,
On time-dependent backgrounds in supergravity and string theory ,
Phys. Rev. D 67  (2003) 024011,
hep-th/0207214 .


S. Hemming, E. Keski-Vakkuri and P. Kraus,
Strings in the extended BTZ spacetime ,
JHEP 0210  (2002) 006,
hep-th/0208003 .


J. Figueroa-O'Farrill and J. Simon,
Supersymmetric Kaluza-Klein reductions of M2 and M5 branes ,
hep-th/0208107 .


A. Hashimoto and S. Sethi,
Holography and string dynamics in time-dependent backgrounds ,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  89  (2002) 261601,
hep-th/0208126 .


J. Simon,
Null orbifolds in AdS, time dependence and holography ,
JHEP 0210  (2002) 036,
hep-th/0208165 .


M. Alishahiha and S. Parvizi,
Branes in time-dependent backgrounds and AdS/CFT correspondence ,
JHEP 0210  (2002) 047,
hep-th/0208187 .


E. Dudas, J. Mourad and C. Timirgaziu,
Time and space dependent backgrounds from nonsupersymmetric strings ,
hep-th/0209176 .


Y. Satoh and J. Troost,
Massless BTZ black holes in minisuperspace ,
JHEP 0211  (2002) 042,
hep-th/0209195 .


L. Dolan and C. R. Nappi,
Noncommutativity in a time-dependent background ,
Phys. Lett. B 551  (2003) 369,
hep-th/0210030 .


R. G. Cai, J. X. Lu and N. Ohta,
NCOS and D-branes in time-dependent backgrounds ,
Phys. Lett. B 551  (2003) 178,
hep-th/0210206 .


C. Bachas and C. Hull,
Null brane intersections ,
JHEP 0212  (2002) 035,
hep-th/0210269 .


R. C. Myers and D. J. Winters,
From D - anti-D pairs to branes in motion ,
JHEP 0212  (2002) 061,
hep-th/0211042 .


K. Okuyama,
D-branes on the null-brane ,
hep-th/0211218 .


T. Friedmann and H. Verlinde,
Schwinger meets Kaluza-Klein ,
hep-th/0212163 .


  
M. Berkooz, B. Craps, D. Kutasov and G. Rajesh,
Comments on cosmological singularities in string theory , 
hep-th/0212215 . 


M. Fabinger and S. Hellerman,
Stringy resolutions of null singularities ,
hep-th/0212223 .


S. Elitzur, A. Giveon and E. Rabinovici,
Removing singularities ,
JHEP 0301  (2003) 017,
hep-th/0212242 .


G. T. Horowitz and A. R. Steif,
Singular String Solutions With Nonsingular Initial Data ,
Phys. Lett. B 258  (1991) 91.


J. Figueroa-O'Farrill and J. Simon,
Generalized supersymmetric fluxbranes ,
JHEP 0112  (2001) 011,
hep-th/0110170 .


  
M. Simpson and R. Penrose,
Internal Instability in a Reissner-Nordstrom Black Hole ,
Int. Journ. Theor. Physics 7  (1973) 183.

 
S. Chandrasekhar and J.B. Hartle, 
On Crossing the Cauchy Horizon of a Reissner-Nordstrom Black-Hole ,
 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 384  (1982) 301-315.

  
C. Kounnas and D. Lust, 
Cosmological string backgrounds from gauged WZW models , 
Phys. Lett. B 289  (1992) 56, 
hep-th/9205046 . 


C. Grojean, F. Quevedo, G. Tasinato and I. Zavala,
Branes on charged dilatonic backgrounds: Self-tuning, Lorentz  violations and cosmology ,
JHEP 0108  (2001) 005,
hep-th/0106120 .


C. P. Burgess, F. Quevedo, S. J. Rey, G. Tasinato and I. Zavala,
Cosmological spacetimes from negative tension brane backgrounds ,
JHEP 0210  (2002) 028, 
hep-th/0207104 .


  
H. J. Matschull,
Black hole creation in 2+1-dimensions ,
Class. Quant. Grav. 16  (1999) 1069, 
gr-qc/9809087 . 


  
C. G. Callan, S. B. Giddings, J. A. Harvey and A. Strominger,
Evanescent Black Holes ,
Phys. Rev. D 45  (1992) 1005, 
hep-th/9111056 . 


  
J. R. Gott, 
Closed Timelike Curves Produced By Pairs Of Moving Cosmic Strings: Exact Solutions , 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 66  (1991) 1126. 


  
S. Deser, R. Jackiw and G. 't Hooft,
Physical cosmic strings do not generate closed timelike curves ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 68  (1992) 267. 


  
D. N. Kabat,
Conditions For The Existence Of Closed Timelike Curves In (2+1) Gravity ,
Phys. Rev. D 46  (1992) 2720. 


  
M. P. Headrick and J. R. Gott, 
(2+1)-Dimensional Space-Times Containing Closed Timelike Curves ,
Phys. Rev. D 50  (1994) 7244. 


  
M. Banados, C. Teitelboim and J. Zanelli, 
The Black Hole In Three-Dimensional Space-Time , 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69  (1992) 1849, 
hep-th/9204099 . 



  
I. Antoniadis, E. Dudas and A. Sagnotti,
Supersymmetry breaking, open strings and M-theory ,
Nucl. Phys. B  544  (1999) 469, 
hep-th/9807011 . 


  
S. Kachru, J. Kumar and E. Silverstein,
Orientifolds, RG flows, and closed string tachyons ,
Class. Quant. Grav. 17  (2000) 1139, 
hep-th/9907038 . 


  
D. Grumiller, W. Kummer and D. V. Vassilevich,
Dilaton gravity in two dimensions , 
Phys. Rept. 369  (2002) 327, 
hep-th/0204253 . 


  
D. Louis-Martinez and G. Kunstatter,
On Birckhoff's theorem in 2-D dilaton gravity , 
Phys. Rev. D 49  (1994) 5227. 


  
A. R. Steif,
The Quantum Stress Tensor In The Three-Dimensional Black Hole ,
Phys. Rev. D 49  (1994) 585, 
gr-qc/9308032 . 


C. P. Burgess, P. Martineau, F. Quevedo, G. Tasinato and I. Zavala C.,
Instabilities and particle production in S-brane geometries , 
hep-th/0301122 .






