Classical and Quantum Strings in plane waves, shock waves and space-time singularities : synthesis and new results  
Norma G. SANCHEZ 

Observatoire de Paris, LERMA
61, avenue de l'Observatoire
75014 Paris, 
FRANCE
Norma.Sanchez@obspm.fr 
  
 
Abstract :    
Key issues and essential features of classical and quantum strings in 
gravitational plane waves, shock waves and spacetime singularities are 
synthetically understood. This includes the string mass and mode number 
excitations, energy-momentum tensor, scattering amplitudes, vacuum 
polarization and wave-string polarization effect. The role of the real 
pole singularities characteristic of the tree level string spectrum 
(real mass resonances) and that of the spacetime singularities is clearly 
exhibited. This throws light on the issue of singularities in string 
theory which can be thus classified and fully physically characterized in two 
different sets : strong  singularities (poles of order , 
and black holes) where the string motion is collective  and non 
oscillating in time, outgoing states and scattering sector do not appear, 
the string does not  cross the singularities, and weak  singularities (poles of order  2, (Dirac  
belongs to this class) and conic/orbifold singularities) where the whole 
string 
motion is oscillatory in time, outgoing and scattering states exist, and 
the string crosses  the singularities. 

Common features of strings in singular wave backgrounds and in inflationary backgrounds are explicitely exhibited. 

The string dynamics and the scattering/excitation through the singularities 
(whatever their kind : strong or weak) is fully physically 
consistent and meaningful.
 

 
CONTENTS 
1  - Introduction 
 

2  - Understanding and Results 
 

3  - Sourceless shock waves 
 

4  - String Energy Momentum Tensor 
 

5  - String Mass and Mode Number in Singular Plane-Wave Backgrounds 
 

6  - Polarized plane waves and String Polarization 
 

7  - Generic features. Common features with strings in inflationary 
backgrounds 
 

8  - Generic wave profiles. The non-linear in-out unitary transformation   
 

9  - Clarification 
 

10  - Conclusions and Classification 
  
Introduction 
Classical and quantum strings propagating in gravitational plane waves, shock 
waves and space-time singularities and its classification, were investigated 
10 years ago by de Vega and Sanchez refs. - and by de Vega, Ramon Medrano and 
Sanchez refs. -, including the exact computation of the string mass spectrum, 
number operators, scattering amplitudes, string energy-momentum tensor,  
string vacuum polarization and string/wave polarization effects.
 These 
results are relevant 
to answer questions as "Singularities in String Theory", and the 
boson-fermion and fermion-boson transmutations induced by superstring 
backgrounds.
 The 
subject has subtle points and subtle physical interpretation which were 
overlocked in refs.,.
 A lot attention has been payed recently to the subject,.

In this paper we provide a synthetic understanding to the problem and throw 
light on the issue of string singularities and its classification. 
Understanding and Results 
We consider [1] strings propagating in gravitational plane-wave spacetimes 
described by the metric
 
where
 
 is an 
arbitrary function;  and  are light-cone variables. (These are 
sourceless solutions of the Einstein equations, i.e., vacuum spacetime). The 
only nonvanishing components of the Riemann tensor are 
 
i.e.
 
Thus, there will be spacetime singularities if  is singular. 
 

We are interested in functions  nonzero in a bounded interval 
 and which have a singular behavior for , 
such as 
 
 and  being positive contants. (A change of sign in 
 is just equivalent to exchanging  with .) 
 
 
The essential features in this problem depend on the function W(U) (and not 
on the (X,Y) dependence). Moreover, our results hold for any function 
F(U,X,Y) = W(U) F(X,Y) (see below). The form of F(X,Y) determines whether or 
not the problem is exactly solvable but it is enough to fix the asymptotic 
behaviour of F(X,Y) to solve (asymptotically) the dynamics, to determine the 
behaviour near the space time singularities, and to determine whether 
 
and  will be (or will be not) finite. 
 

The string equations in the class of backgrounds eqs (1), (2) are linear 
and exactly 
solvable. In the light-cone gauge  and after Fourier 
expansion in the world-sheet coordinate , the Fourier components 
 and  satisfy a one-dimensional 
Schrdinger-type equation but with  playing the 
role of the spatial coordinate and  as the potential 
[2]. (Here  stands for the  component of the string momentum). 
 

The propagation of the string when it approaches the singularity at 
 depends on the singularity exponent  . We 
find different behaviors depending 
on whether  or  : 
 

(i) For , the string coordinates  and  are regular 
everywhere; 
that is, the string propagates smoothly  through the gravitational 
singularity . 
 

(ii) For a strong enough singularity (), the string goes off to 
 grazing the singularity plane . This means that the 
string does not go across  the gravitational wave; that is, the 
string 
cannot reach the  region. For particular initial configurations, the 
string remains trapped at the point  in the gravitational-wave 
singularity . 
 

(iii) The case in which  and then 
 for all  is explicitly solved in terms of 
Bessel functions. 
 

The string propagation in these singular spacetimes has common features with 
the fall of a point particle into a singular attractive potential 
. In both cases, the falling takes place when 
. 
 The behavior in  of the string coordinates 
 is analogous to the behavior of the 
Schrdinger wave function  of a point particle. 
However, the physical content is different.  

The string coordinates  are dynamical variables and 
not wave functions. Moreover, our analysis also holds for the quantum 
propagation of the string : the behavior in  is the same as in the 
classical evolution with the coefficients being quantum operators. At the 
classical as well as at the quantum level, the string propagates or does 
not propagate through the gravitational wave depending on whether 
 or , respectively. In other words, the tunnel 
effect does not take place  in this string problem. 


 It must be noticed that for , i.e., 
, the behavior of the string solutions is 
non oscillatory  in 
, whereas for , the string oscillates. This 
new type of behavior in  is analogous to that found for strings in 
cosmological inflationary backgrounds. 
 

For , we express the coefficients () characterizing the 
solution for  in terms of the oscillator operators for 
. We label with the indices  and  the 
operators in the region  and , respectively (i.e., before 
and after the collision with the singularity plane ). 
 

For  we compute the total mass squared  and the total 
number of modes  after the string propagates through 
the singularity plane  and reaches the flat space-time region 
. This has a meaning only for  . 
 

For , the string does not reach  the  region 
and hence 
there are no outgoing operators (). In particular no mass squared  
and total number  operator can be defined for . 
 

For ,  and  are 
given by [1].
 
  
where
 
( stands for the ingoing ground state, so that 
 for all ). 
 

Therefore,  is finite  for  but 
diverges  for .  is finite 
for  and diverges for . 
 

We analyze below the origin and physical meaning of these infinities. 

Notice that the exponent  in Eq.(6) is just minus the 
scaling dimension of  for small . 
Sourceless shock waves 
The sourceless shock-wave case 
 
is particularly useful in order to understand the physical origin of the 
divergences in  when  (and in 
 when ). 
 

For a sourceless skock wave with a metric function 
 
In this -function case, the  coefficients are easy to compute 
exactly with the result 
 
Comparing the  cofficients Eqs.(6), (8), we see that the large- 
behavior of 
 for 
, is the same as that for  with . This is related to the fact that both functions  
have the same scaling dimension. 
 

In this case the string propagation is formally like a Schrdinger equation with a Dirac  potential : the string passes across the 
singularity at  and tunnel effect is present.

This is a weak singularity, the behaviour of the string is oscillatory in 
time, and in, out scattering states can be defined. 
 
The string 
scattering in this sourceless shock wave is very similar to the string 
scattering by a shock wave with a nonzero source density [2, 3, 6 ].
 
We also compute 
 and  for a metric function 
 
where  is the step function and  gives the transverse size 
of the shock wave front. This  belongs to the shock-wave class with a 
density source we have treated in refs.[2, 3, 6].
 We find that 
 
is finite as long as  is finite . This divergence in 
 is due to the infinite transverse extent of the 
wave front and not  to the short-distance singularity  at 
.
 
The gravitational forces in the transverse directions  
transfer to the string a finite amount of energy when the transverse size of 
the shock wave () is finite. When , the energy transferred by 
the shock wave to the string produce large elongation amplitudes in the  
and  directions which are responsible for the divergence of 
.
 
 More generally, for a string propagating in a 
shock-wave spacetime with the generic profile
 
we have found the exact  expression of  and 
 [6]. If  is nonzero at , 
then .The divergence of () is due to 
the nonvanishing of 
 at large distances and not  to the singularity at 
U = 0 of the gravitational wave. When  has an infinite range, the 
gravitational forces in the  directions have the possibility to 
transfer an infinite amount of energy to the string modes. 
String Energy Momentum Tensor 
We also compute the string energy-momentum tensor . It is convenient to define 
it in the present context as an integral over a spatial volume completely 
enclosing the string at a time , as we have proposed in Ref. 6. 
 

For , we find that the  components 
can be grouped according to their  behavior into four 
sets : 
 (i)  diverges for .
 (ii) 
 diverge for  and tend 
to a finite constant for .
 (iii) 
 and 
 are finite and nonzero.  vanishes for 
.
 (iv) The other components vanish. 
 

The explicit expressions were obtained in ref. [1]. The energy density 
, the energy flux in the propagation direction of the 
gravitational wave , as well as the stress in this 
direction (), strongly diverge for . 
 
For , they diverge as a negative power of . For , the divergence is exponential. 
 

We compute the ground-state expectation values in the illustrative case 
. The expectation values of all  the (operator) 
coefficients of 
the powers of  turn out to be finite . 
 

It can be noticed that the spatial proper length of the string grows 
indefinitely for  when the string approaches the 
singularity plane. This phenomenon is analogous to that found for strings 
in cosmological inflationary backgrounds. 
 

In conclusion, for  and  the propagation of classical 
and quantum strings through the singular spacetimes Eqs. (1)-(3) is 
physically meaningful  and has the physical features described 
above.
 
 
For , we find that the 
expectation value  diverges. However, this divergence 
is due to the infinite transverse extent of the wave front and not  to 
the 
short-distance singularity of  at . In support of this analysis, 
we found that the large-n  behavior of the transmission coefficients 
(determining whether  is finite or infinite), is 
the 
same  for  as for .
 Therefore,  the 
divergences of  in shock-wave spacetimes and in 
singular plane waves, have the same origin : the infinite transverse extension 
of the wave front.
String Mass and Mode Number in Singular Plane-Wave 
Backgrounds 
As we have shown in ref.[1], the string performs strong oscillations in  
and 
 when it enters into the gravitational wave. These oscillations are 
stronger as the singularity at  is stronger. 
 

For , the string does not cross  the  
singularity and it 
escapes to  grazing the singularity plane . 
 

For  , the string crosses  the gravitational wave and 
reaches the 
flat space-time region .
 The expectation value of the string 
mass-square operator after the propagation through the gravitational wave has 
been computed in ref.[1]. 
 

The convergence of the series depends on the behaviour of Bogoliubov 
coefficients B for large n. In this regime they can be computed in the 
Born approximation, with the result 
 
Therefore
 
Hence,
  

Recall that, when , the string does not reach the region 
 
and hence, there are no  operators in the  case. 
 

For the expectation value of the number operator  we 
have 
 

The divergence appearing in  for 
 is due to the infinite transverse extent of the wave front 
and not  to the short-distance singularity of  at . 
 

The gravitational forces in the transverse directions 
() transfer to the string a finite amount of energy when the size of 
the shock-wave front () is finite. The strong gravitational forces 
impart in the transverse directions () large elongation amplitudes 
which are responsible for the divergent  when 
the size of the wave front is infinite. 
 

The divergent  for  when 
 have the same explanation. (And similarly, those of 
 when ). 
 

More generally, for a string propagating in a wave type spacetime with 
generic profile
 
if  does not vanish at , then 
.
Polarized plane waves and String Polarization 
The above properties can be generalized to singular gravitationaal waves 
with two arbitrary singular profile functions , 
. 
 

The dynamics is exactly and explicitely solvable [7]. The string time 
evolution is fully determined by the background geometry, whereas the overall -dependence is fixed by the initial string state. 
 

The proper length stretches infinitely at the singularities when 
 and / or  (strong singularities)
 

When  and / or , the string does not cross 
the singularity (U = 0) but goes off to infinity in a given direction 
 which depends on the polarization of the gravitational wave. The 
string escape situation is the following : 

(i) for  (and ), then the angle 
 and the string goes off to infinity in the X-direction. In this 
case, the singularity of  dominates over that of  and we recover 
the previous situation of ref..
 

(ii) for  (and ), then 
 
and 
 

(iii) for , then 
 
that is 
 
If , the string escape directions are 
within the cone . 

In addition to escaping to infinity, the string oscillates in the (X, Y) 
plane, perpendicularly to the escape direction, and with vanishing 
amplitude for .

The string behaviour near the singularity expresses naturally in terms of the null variable . 
 
For instance, the oscillatory modes in the (X, Y) plane are not 
harmonic in  but in . The variable  is like the cosmic 
time of strings in cosmological backgrounds (in terms of which the string 
oscillates), whereas  is like the conformal time. Here, for simplicity, 
 but this case is actually generic. 
 

For  and  (weak singularities), the string 
passes smoothly through the space-time singularity and reaches the 
outgoing region, and, the string behaviour is oscillatory in time. In this 
case, outgoing operators make sense and can be explicitely related to the 
in-operators. 
 
For the particles described by the quantum string states, this implies two types of effects : 

(i) rotation of spin polarization in the (X, Y) plane, and 

(ii) transmutation between different particles.
 

The expectation values of the outgoing mass () operator and of the mode-number operator , in the 
ingoing ground state  are different from the ingoing 
expectation values  and . This difference is due to the 
excitation of the string modes after crossing the spacetime singularity. 
In other words, the string state is not an eigenstate of , but an 
infinity superposition of one-particle states with different masses. This 
is a consequence of the particle transmutation which allows particle masses 
different from the initial one (). 
Generic features. Common features with strings in inflationary 
backgrounds 
The string evolution near the spacetime singularity is a collective 
motion  governed by the nature of the gravitational field. The state of the 
string fixes the overall -dependent coefficients whereas the 
-dependence is fully determined by the spacetime geometry. In other 
words, the -dependence is the same for all modes . 
 
In some directions, the string collective propagation turns to be an 
infinite motion (the escape direction), whereas in other directions, the 
motion is oscillatory, but with a fixed (-independent) frequency. In fact, 
these features are not restricted to singular gravitational waves, but are 
generic  to strings in strong gravitational fields . 
 

Moreover, it is interesting to compare the string behaviour for 
 in the inflationary backgrounds for which we have ref.[12]
 
with 
 .
 
The  are arbitrary functions of   
  and  are fixed by the constraints. Here  is the cosmic time, while  
is the conformal time.
 For the singular plane waves we have 
 
The behaviour of the string time coordinates are regular  and 
non-oscillating  for  ('frozen'), while for 
singular 
plane waves, in addition, one of the transverse coordinates is non-oscillating and singular for . 
 

The above behaviours for  and  are characteristic of strings in strong gravitational fields. Notice that the inflationary backgrounds are non-
singular, whereas the plane waves (equations (1)-(2)) are singular 
spacetimes. This is connected to the fact the string coordinates ,  
exhibit divergences in these plane-wave spacetimes. 
Generic wave profiles. The non-linear in-out unitary transformation 
In the case of plane or shock waves with profile functions (), 
the string equations became exactly linear , and the transformation 
between ingoing () and outgoing operators () is 
linear , ie a Bogoliubov transformation. 
 

For generalized profile functions of plane waves and shock waves, the string 
equations are non linear and the ingoing-outgoing unitary transformation 
describing the scattering/excitation of the string is non-linear . 
The linear (Bogoliubov) approximation holds only for large impact parameters. 
One must use the exact  in-out transformation to include all  
impact parameters. In ref we succeeded in computing the 
exact  transformation. This throws light on both computations and 
interpretation, and in particular on the ro le played by the spacetime 
background. We do all the treatement for any function , i.e. for 
any wave profile. We express the nonlinear transformation between 
ingoing and outgoing zero modes and oscillators in terms of a hermitean 
operator
 
where : : stands for normal ordering with respect to the ingoing state 
 and (p ) is the Fourier transform of the 
wave profile. 
 

This operator acts on the Fock space operators and Fock space states and 
it is suitable to express the relevant expectation values after the 
collision of the string with the wave background.

The ingoing-outgoing ground-state transition amplitude 
 expresses as 
 
We interpret these terms as a -leg scalar amplitude with vertex operators 
inserted at  = 0 (a line of pinchs at the intersection of the world 
sheet with the wave), and find an integral representation for these 
quantities. 
 

The integrands possess equally spaced real pole singularities typical of 
string models in flat space-time. The presence and structure of these 
poles is not at all related to the structure of the space-time geometry 
(which may or may not be singular). We give a sense to these integrals by 
taking the principal value prescription, yielding for 
 a well defined finite  and real 
result. 
 

The exact expressions for the total outgoing mode operator 
 and mass square  operator in the ingoing 
ground state  can be thus computed. We find that the 
contribution from each -level, that is  for , decreases like 
 
The large  behaviour of  depends on the density 
matter  only through its total energy 
. 
 

All the shock wave geometries exhibit the same large  behaviour of 
, irrespective of the structure of the localized source. 

The sum over  in both , and 

 converges and the total values are exactly computed. 
 

The contribution of the excited states is suppressed by a factor 
 with respect to the direct 
(initial state) contribution ,  being a 
typical large box size. 
 
  
We find for  and  integral 
representations which exhibit a similar structure to , 
that is, the integrands factorizes into two pieces  :  
which characterizes the wave geometry and the function 
 
which depends only on the string. These integrands possess real singularities 
(poles) like the tree level string spectrum. 
This is exactly what happens in the tree amplitudes of string models. Like the tree level string spectrum, these poles correspond to equally spaced real resonances in the mass 
spectrum. As is usually expected, loop corrections provide a width to these 
resonances and will therefore shift the poles away from the integration path, leading to finite results. The physical interpretation of such poles is that 
they correspond to all higher string states which become excited after the collision through the wave singularities.

In conclusion, singularities in string theory are fully, mathematically  and 
physically consistent .  
Clarification  
Some aspects of strings in these gravitational-wave backgrounds have been 
studied by the authors of refs.,. 
However, this problem has subtle points which were overlooked in refs.
,.
 The 
analysis done in refs., by analogy with the Schrdinger 
equation is not careful enough. The mass and number operators are expressed 
in terms of the transmission coefficient . The cases in refs.,  in which  mean that there is no transmission to 
the region , 
and therefore that there is no outgoing mass nor outgoing number operator 
(since there is no string) in 
that region. This is the situation of string falling to  for , the string does not cross  the singularity, the string scapes 
to infinity grazing  the singularity plane U = 0.
 
Therefore,the outgoing () operators as  and  make sense only 
for  and any statement about  and  for 
 is meaningless , (since there is no string in the  region for 
). 
 

In the cases in which  is divergent, such infinity is 
not  related at all to the spacetime singularity at . This happens for 
 when the transverse size (i.e., perpendicular to the propagation 
direction) of the gravitational wave front is infinity. Then, the 
gravitational wave carries an infinite energy which transfers to the string 
according to the behavior of . This may lead to a finite or infinite 
value for  as we have seen above.
 

In conclusion, the propagation of classical and quantum strings through the 
singular space-times is physically meaningful  and follows the 
evolution, properties and classification summarized here.
Conclusions and Classification 
(i)  As is known, in the context of point particle QFT, vacuum polarization 
effects do not  arise in plane wave and shock wave backgrounds 
since ingoing  and outgoing  operators do not  get mixed in 
this context. Therefore no particle creation effects takes place for point 
particle field theories in these geometries. On the contrary, particle 
transmutations as well as vacuum polarization effects on the energy-
momentum tensor do appear  for strings in these wave space-times. 
These effects can be traced back to the mixing of creation and 
annihilation  and  string oscillators. 
 
 
(ii)  Pole-type  curvature singularities with ,  
singularities conical and orbifold singularities are weak  singularities : the string motion is oscillatory in time, string crosses smoothly the 
singularities, ingoing and outgoing states can be defined and so all the 
scattering sector. Mass, number and energy-momentum of the string are well 
defined and finite . The string oscillators get excited in the 
scattering and crossing the singularities. The string proper length is 
finite. The detailed classical and quantum string dynamics in conical space 
times with general deficit angles
 
 
was treated in refs,. In the simpler case of orbifolds, which is a particular case 
of the above for deficit angles , the scattering is trivial. 


 (iii)  Pole-type singularities with  and black holes (r = 0) are 
strong  singularities; string does not pass across the singularity 
(eventually it can gets trapped); outgoing operators can not be defined. 
Ingoing mass, number and energy momentum tensor of the string are well 
defined and finite . 

The proper string length stretches indefinitely. 
 

(iv)  The features of the strong singularity case are generic  to 
strings in strong gravitational fields : the string evolution near the strong 
spacetime singularity is a collective motion  governed by the nature of the gravitational field. The state of the string fixes the overall 
-dependence. The time dependence is fully determined by the 
spacetime geometry, that is, the same for all modes . In some directions, 
the string collective propagation is an infinite motion (the escape direction); in other directions, the motion is oscillatory, but with a fixed ()-
independent frequency. 

This happens too for strings in inflationary backgrounds (which are not 
singular). 
In the inflationary cases, all transverse spatial coordinates are 
non oscillating  in time, but they are regular  ("frozen") 
for , while for strong singular plane waves some of the 
transverse coordinates are singular. 

For the string time coordinate the plane wave case  is like 
super inflation, the case  is like de Sitter inflation, and 
the case  is like power type inflation. 
 

(v)  Tests strings do propagate consistently  in singular space-times : 
Klein-Gordon equation (for a point particle) is ill defined, whereas the 
string equations are well behaved. This includes strings in plane wave 
backgrounds, shock wave  backgrounds (sourceless shock waves and of Aichelburg-Sexl 
type, and with generic profiles), as well as in the black hole geometries, where the string behaviour is 
regular  at the horizon and near the r = 0 sigularity refs., 
,. That is, strings feel the space time singularities 
much less than point particles. 

Furthermore, we would not be surprised by the presence of space-time 
singularities in string theory as long as one sticks to a geometry 
description using a metric tensor  in spite of the fact it 
fulfills the exact or corrected string equations. We do not expect that a 
space-time description in terms of a Riemannian manifold with local 
coordinates  will be meaningful at the Planck scale.    
 10 
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Strings Falling 
into Space Time Singularities ", Phys. Rev. D45, 2783, (1992). 
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Spacetime 
Singularities in String Theory ", Phys. Rev. Lett. (C), 65, 1517, (1990). 
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, Phys. Lett. B244, 215, (1990). 
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Particle Scattering 
at the Planck Scale and the Aichelburg-Sexl geometry ", Nucl. Phys. 317B, 
731, (1989).
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Quantum String 
Scattering in the Aichelburg-Sexl Geometry ", Nucl. Phys. 317B, 706, (1989). 
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Mass and Energy-
momentum Tensor of Quantum Strings in Gravitational Shock-Waves ", Int. 
Jour. Mod. Phys. A7, n 13, 3043, (1992). 
 H.J. de Vega, M. Ramon Medrano and N. Sanchez, "
Classical and Quantum Strings near spacetime singularities : gravitational 
plane waves with arbitrary polarization ", Class. Quantum Grav. 19, 2007, 
(1993). 
 H.J. de Vega, M. Ramon Medrano and N. Sanchez, "
Superstring Propagation through Supergravitational Shock waves ", Nucl. 
Phys. B374, 425, (1992). 
 H.J. de Vega, M. Ramon Medrano and N. Sanchez, "
Boson-Fermion and Fermion-Boson Transmutations Induced by Supergravity 
Backgrounds in Superstring Theory ", Phys. Lett. B285, 206, (1992). 
 G.T. Horowitz and A.R. Steif, "Strings in Strong 
Gravitational Fields ", Phys. Rev. D42, 1950, (1990).  
 G.T. Horowitz and A.R. Steif, "Space Time Singularities in String Theory ", Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 260, (1990).
 "String  Theory in Curved Space Times " 
N. Sanchez Editor, WSPC (1998).
 H.J. de Vega and N. Sanchez, "Quantum string 
scattering in a cosmic string space-time ", Phys. Rev. D42, 3969 (1990).
 H.J. de Vega, M. Ramon Medrano, N. Sanchez, "Scattering 
of superstrings by cosmic strings ", Nucl. Phys. B374, 405 (1992). 
 H.J. de Vega, N. Sanchez, "Quantum String Dynamics 
in Black Hole Space Times "  Nucl. Phys. 309B, 552 (1998).
 H.J. de Vega, N. Sanchez, "The scattering of 
strings by a black hole ", Nucl. Phys. 309B, 577, (1988).
 A.L. Larsen, N. Sanchez, "Strings propagating in 
the 2+1 black hole-AdS spacetime ", Phys. Rev. D50, 7493 (1994). 
 C.O. Lousto, N. Sanchez, "String Dynamics in 
cosmological   and black hole backgrounds : the null string expansion ", 
Phys. Rev. D54, 6399, (1996).
 G. Papadopoulos, J.G. Russo, A.A. Tseytlin, "Solvable model of strings in a time-dependent plane wave background ", hep-th/02 11 289 and refreneces therein.   
 R.R. Metsaev, A.A. Tseytlin, "Exactly solvable model of superstring in Ramond-Ramond plane wave background , Phys. 
Rev. D65 (2002) 126004.
         

 




