P   ^2 

Doubly Special Relativity with light-cone deformation 
A. B aute-mail address ablaut@ift.uni.wroc.pl ,
M. Daszkiewicze-mail address marcin@ift.uni.wroc.pl ,
and J. Kowalski-Glikmane-mail address
jurekk@ift.uni.wroc.pl   Partially supported by the   KBN
grant 5PO3B05620 
  
 Institute for Theoretical
Physics 
 University of Wroc aw 
 Pl. Maxa Borna 9 

Pl-50-204 Wroc aw, Poland    
We propose a new Doubly Special Relativity theory based on the
generalization of the -deformation of the Poincare
algebra acting along one of the null directions. We recall the
full quantum algebra (Hopf) structure of such deformed Poincare
algebra and use it to derive the  (deformed) phase space algebra.
As in the DSR based on the standard quantum -Poincare
algebra we find that the space time is non-commutative. We
investigate the fate of the properties of Special Relativity in
the null basis: the split of the algebra of Lorentz and momentum
generators into kinematical and dynamical parts, the action of the
kinematical boost , and the emergence of the two
dimensional Galilean symmetry.
Introduction 
 The fate of Lorentz symmetry at high energies close to the
Planck scale is recently attracting growing interest. The reason
for this is at least twofold. First, since the classical Lorentz
symmetry group is non-compact we have only limited access to
experimental verification of this symmetry. Second, the observed
anomalies in the ultra-high energy cosmic rays and TeV photons
 might indicate that relativistic kinematics may
deviate from the standard Special Relativistic one when relevant
energies becomes close to the Planck scale.

There are two major approaches to the "Planck scale
phenomenology" (see and
 for reviews and extesive list of
references). In the first one assumes that Lorentz symmetry
becomes broken close to the Planck scale, so that effectively we
have to do with some preferred frame, usually associated with the
cosmic frame. In another approach, dubbed Doubly Special
Relativity,
, one assumes that Lorentz (and even
Poincare) symmetry is still present, but becomes deformed in the
high energy regime. This approach borrows a lot from previous
investigations on quantum (Hopf) deformation of Poincare
algebra, undertaken in 1990s (see e.g.,,
).

Presently two Doubly Special Relativity models have received most
attention(As shown in the series of papers
,,
 there are in fact infinitely many DSR
theories.) . In the first, called DSR1  formulated in
 and the
modified dispersion relation takes the form
 
while in the DSR2, proposed in it reads
 
Let us note that the deformation in the dispersion relations
(), () act in the "energy" direction. This is a
general feature of all DSR theories considered so far, and a
natural question arises as to whether it is possible to construct
DSR theories with different kind of deformations. For example is
it possible to construct a DSR theory with deformation along
"light cone" corresponding to the front form dynamics in the
famous classification of Dirac (see also e.g.
, for extensive up-to-date
discussion and list of references.) The answer to this question
happens to be affirmative,
, ,
 and we devote this note to investigate
most fundamental properties of such theories.

Our motivations to investigate light-cone DSR are manyfold. First,
such  DSR theories differ in many respects from the theories
analyzed so far and therefore are of interest on its own. Moreover
the standard light-cone dynamics has a number of distinctive
features which, in the deformed case may shed some light on
generic structure of Doubly Special Relativity. Among them one
should mention the rational relation between energy and momentum
on-shell  as compared to 
 of standard "instant" formulation of Special
relativity, special structure of boosts of which one is a
kinematical operator acting along the constant "light-cone time"
surface, and the emergence of Galilean symmetry  as a subgroup of
the whole Poincare algebra (and not the reduction of the latter,
as in the standard case.) Last but not least, it were intuitions
from the light cone dynamics that lead Susskind to
formulate his version of the holographic principle, so one may
hope that proper understanding of the deformed light-cone dynamics
may lead to better understanding of this principle.

DSR phase space in light-cone coordinates 

Our starting point of the construction of the light-cone DSR
theory will be the light-cone quantum -Poincare algebra.
This kind of algebras have been investigated first in
, whose construction has been incorporated
into the generalized -Poincare framework in
 and. As usual in the
light-cone formulation momenta has components ,  along
the light-cone and the transverse ones  (In what
follows we will use the following index convention: Greek indices
run through , small Latin indices denote transverse
directions , while capital ones run through .) . The
metric tensor in such parameterization has the form










The action of Lorentz generators  satisfies the
standard undeformed  algebra
 
and the momenta commute
 
As usual in DSR the action of Lorentz generators on momenta is
deformed with the scale of deformation given by the parameter
 of dimension of mass.
 
where we define . The Casimir  (dispersion
relation) for this algebra reads
 
which, of course, reduces (as well as the algebra above) to the
standard relation of the null-frame Special Relativity in the
 limit. Note that in the large 
limit the dispersion relation becomes in the leading order
 
independently of mass, as compared with the relation



of the undeformed case.

The fact that the algebra () can be extended to a quantum
(Hopf) algebra makes it possible to use the co-product of the
latter to construct the commutators algebra of the whole  the
phase space of the system. This procedure consists first of
defining pairing between Lorentz generators and momenta position
. To do that one takes the Hopf algebra co-products
 
and then defines the pairing as follows
 
In the final step one uses eqs. () to derive relevant
commutators according to the general formula
 
where we used a natural notation for co-product 
. The resulting
non-vanishing phase space commutators read
 
 
 
The transformation of positions under action of Lorentz generators
are given by
 
 


To conclude this technical section stressing that the phase space
algebra constructed above can be altered by redefinition of
momenta of the form
 
This redefinition is restricted only by the natural requirement
that in the  limit ,
which means that in this limit all the light-cone DSR theories
reduce to Special Relativity in the null frame.

Properties of the phase space algebra 

Let us now discuss the properties of the deformed phase space
derived in the previous section. We will focus our attention on
the fate of three distinguishing properties of Special Relativity
formulated in null frame: split of the Poincare generators into
seven kinematical and three dynamical ones, the simple action of
the boost in the third direction  and the emergence of the
Galilei algebra as a subalgebra of the Poincere light-cone
algebra. Before doing that, let us briefly describe these three
features.

In his seminal paper Dirac considered the
possible forms of initial surfaces for relativistic dynamics.
Given an initial surface it is important to know which Poincare
symmetry generators act along the surface (these are called
kinematical) and which in the orthogonal direction (since these
generators change the value of the coordinate orthogonal to the
surface - the time variable - they are called dynamical.) In the
case of constant time initial surface (instant form Special
Relativity), it is well known that there are six kinematical
(spacial momenta and rotations) generators and four dynamical ones
(boosts and energy generator). In the null frame  Special
Relativity, when the initial surface is null it turns out that
there are seven kinematical generators (it can be shown that this
is the maximal possible number of them) and three kinematical
ones.

The generator that is dynamical in the instant form, and becomes
kinematical in the null form is the boost along the third axis
. Moreover this generator acts as a mere rescaling of
positions and momenta, to wit





where  is the boost parameter. Clearly these transformation
leaves the surface  (or ) invariant, so indeed
 is kinematical.

The last feature of the null frame form is that the subalgebra of
the whole Poincare algebra of the longitudinal symmetry
generators is isomorphic to the Galilei algebra with
the following identification:  correspond to Galilei momenta,
 to rotations,  to Hamiltonian, while  is a
central charge of the subalgebra, corresponding to the Galilei
mass (see below.) This situation should be compared with the
instant form Special Relativity, where the Galilei algebra arises
only as an appropriate limit of the Poincare algebra.


To conclude these introductory remarks, let us note that contrary
to the Special Relativistic case there is no 
symmetry between coordinates  and  (and momenta 
and ), and we must therefore consider the cases of null
surfaces  and  separately. As it will turn out these
surfaces have very different properties.

Kinematical generators 

In the first case, in order to find out which generators are
kinematical and which dynamical we must consider generators of the
stability group of the surface . Consider first the algebra
(), (). We have
 
 
From  () we learn that   is kinematical, as in
the standard case. However  and  have
non-vanishing commutator () and therefore are not
kinematical. The inspection of the algebra (),
() shows that also the momenta ,  are not
kinematical.

Consider therefore  the null surface . The algebra
(), () reads in this case
 
 
We see that now the kinematical generators are , ,
. From (), () we see that also the
momenta ,  are kinematical. Therefore in this case we
have  as many kinematical  generators as in Special Relativity.

To conclude, for the initial surface  the number of
kinematical generators is small, but the coordinates on the
surface are commutative. It is light-cone time  that is
non-commutative, and the light-cone energy can be associated with
the  generator. For the initial surface  the number of
kinematical generators is exactly equal to the corresponding
number in Special Relativity, but, the coordinates on the surface
are not commutative. In this case  and  play a role of
time and energy, respectively.

The  boost 

 To see what is the behavior of
the  boost for deformed algebra, let us first consider the
commutators with momenta () and infer from them
 
where  is the rapidity parameter. The solution of these
equations with the initial condition  reads




  
where . This last equation can be
simplified if one uses the dispersion relation satisfied by the
initial values of momenta





One gets
 



Expanding to the lowest order in  we get the standard
relations
 
as it should be. The expansion for large boosts
 gives instead (in the massless case, for
simplicity)
 
This expansion is consistent with relation eq. (). Note
that while the behavior of  is similar to the standard
one,  grows with  much slower than in Special
Relativity.

Galilean symmetry 

As mentioned above, the last interesting feature of the Special
Relativity in the null frame is that there exist two subalgebras
of the full Poincare algebra that are isomorphic to the algebra
of the two-dimensional Galilei group. These subalgebras consist of
the rotation , Galilean boosts , and
 and  read
 
Note that in the '-' case  is a central charge of the algebra
and can be therefore identified with (twice) the Galilean mass,
while  is  the Hamiltonian (in the '+' case the mass is
identified with , and Hamiltonian with .)

Inspection of the algebra () shows that in the deformed
algebra this doubly structure is lost. Indeed, in this case only
 can be central charge, as it commutes with . In this
way we obtain the deformed Galilei algebra, being a subalgebra of
the deformed Poincare algebra (), to wit
 
where we used the notation . Since  is the
Hamiltonian, it corresponds to the initial null surface defined by
, because in this case  takes a role of time.

Conclusions 

In this paper we investigated basic properties of a new Doubly
Special Relativity in which the deformation acted along the light
cone. This theory differs in many aspects from the DSR theories
considered so far, and in our opinion deserves farther studies.

However it is our view that the final judgment of which theory is
correct is provided by its experimental verification. In the case
of the DSR theories one of the few experiments that can be
performed in a near future are "time of flight experiments",
i.e., measurements of dependence of the speed of light on momentum
carried by photons (see, e.g., and
references therein.) Therefore, it is important to investigate in
details the issue of velocity in DSR theories. We will address
this problem in a future publication.

Acknowledgement 

We would like to thank J. Lukierski for discussion and bringing
the paper to our attention.



 99 
 G. Amelino-Camelia and T. Piran,
"Planck-scale deformation of Lorentz symmetry as a solution to
the UHECR  and the TeV-gamma paradoxes," Phys. Rev. D 64 
(2001) 036005 [arXiv:astro-ph/0008107]; G. Amelino-Camelia,
J. Lukierski and A. Nowicki, "Absorption Of Tev Photons And
Kappa-Deformed Poincare Algebra," Czech. J. Phys.  51 
(2001) 1247 S. Sarkar, Mod. Phys. Lett.  A 17 , 1025 (2002),
[gr-qc/0204092 ],  R. Aloisio, P. Blasi, A. Galante,
P.L. Ghia, A.F. Grillo, [astro-ph/0205271 ].

G. Amelino-Camelia, "Quantum space-time: Deformed symmetries
versus broken symmetries," arXiv:gr-qc/0201012.


G. Amelino-Camelia, "On the fate of Lorentz symmetry in loop
quantum gravity and  noncommutative spacetimes,"
arXiv:gr-qc/0205125.

 J. Lukierski, H. Ruegg, A. Nowicki and V. N. Tolstoi,
"Q deformation of Poincare algebra," Phys. Lett. B 264 
(1991) 331.
 S. Majid and H. Ruegg,
"Bicrossproduct structure of kappa Poincare group and
noncommutative geometry," Phys. Lett. B 334  (1994) 348
[arXiv:hep-th/9405107].

G. Amelino-Camelia, "Testable scenario for relativity with
minimum-length," Phys. Lett. B 510 , 255 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012238].


G. Amelino-Camelia, "Relativity in space-times with
short-distance structure governed by an observer-independent
(Planckian) length scale," Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 11 , 35
(2002) [arXiv:gr-qc/0012051].


J. Kowalski-Glikman, "Observer independent quantum of mass,"
Phys. Lett. A 286 , 391 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0102098].


N. R. Bruno, G. Amelino-Camelia and J. Kowalski-Glikman,
"Deformed boost transformations that saturate at the Planck
scale," Phys. Lett. B 522 , 133 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0107039].


J. Magueijo and L. Smolin, "Lorentz invariance with an invariant
energy scale," Phys. Rev. Lett.  88  (2002) 190403
[arXiv:hep-th/0112090].


J. Kowalski-Glikman, "De Sitter space as an arena for doubly
special relativity," Phys. Lett. B 547 , 291 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207279].


J. Kowalski-Glikman and S. Nowak, "Non-commutative space-time of
doubly special relativity theories," arXiv:hep-th/0204245.


J. Kowalski-Glikman and S. Nowak, "Doubly special relativity
theories as different bases of kappa-Poincare  algebra," Phys.
Lett. B 539 , 126 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0203040].
 P.A.M. Dirac, "Forms of relativistic dynamics", Rev. Mod. Phys. 21 , 392 (1949).
 H. Leutwyler and J. Stern, "Relativistic dynamics on a null plane",
Ann. Phys. 112 , 94 (1978).
 T. Heinzl, "Light-cone
quantization: foundations and application", arXiv:hep-th/0008096.


A. Ballesteros, F. J. Herranz, M. A. del Olmo and M. Santander,
"A New 'Null Plane' Quantum Poincare Algebra," Phys. Lett. B
351  (1995) 137.

P. Kosinski and P. Maslanka, "The Weyl group and its
algebra", in From field theory to quantum groups , B.
Jancewicz and J. Sobczyk eds., World Scientific 1996
[arXiv:q-alg/9512018].
 K. Przanowski, "The Hopf algebra isomorphism between -Poincare algebra
in the case  and the "null plane" qunatum Poincare
algebra", Acta Phys. Polon. 28 , (1997) 1635
[arXiv:q-alg/9611025].

J. Lukierski, V. Lyakhovsky and M. Mozrzymas,
"-deformations of D = 4 Weyl and conformal symmetries,"
Phys. Lett. B 538  (2002) 375 [arXiv:hep-th/0203182].
 L. Susskind,
"The World as a hologram," J. Math. Phys.  36  (1995)
6377 [arXiv:hep-th/9409089].
 L. Susskind, "Model of self-induced strong interactions", Phys. Rev.   165  (1968) 1535;
K. Bardakci and M.B. Halpern, "Theories at infinite momentum",
Phys. Rev. 176  (1968) 1686.

G. Amelino-Camelia, "Are we at the dawn of quantum-gravity
phenomenology?," Lect. Notes Phys.  541 , 1 (2000)
[arXiv:gr-qc/9910089].












