


Nucl. Phys. B#1   (#2) #3 
Phys. Lett. B#1   (#2) #3 

[The NS five-brane partition sum]
The NS five-brane partition sum 


Marcel Vonk 

Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Amsterdam 
 and 

Spinoza Institute, PO Box 80195, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands     

m.l.vonk@phys.uu.nl 



 
We calculate the euclidean partition function of the type IIA NS five-brane
wrapped on an arbitrary Calabi-Yau space in a double-scaling decoupling limit
and in the presence of a flat RR 3-form background field. The result is the 
product of a theta function, coming from the classical fluxes of the self-dual 
tensor field, and a factor representing the quantum contributions. The 
quantum factor turns out to be related to topological B-model string amplitudes, 
and both factors satisfy a holomorphic anomaly equation. The result can
teach us more about little string theories and about instanton corrections to
four-dimensional effective quantities.



The work reported here was done in collaboration with R. Dijkgraaf and E.
Verlinde. This text is intended to give a brief overview of this
work. Only the main results are reported here; the calculations and many other
details can be found in the original paper.



Description of the system 
We consider euclidean type IIA string theory, compactified on an arbitrary
Calabi-Yau manifold . Around , we wrap one or more euclidean NS 
five-branes, so that these objects are pointlike in the remaining four 
directions. We turn on a background RR-field  which satisfies  along
the directions of . Finally, we take a double scaling limit where we send
both the distance between the five-branes and the string coupling constant to 
zero in such a way that their ratio becomes infinite.

The reason to study this system is twofold. First of all, the world-volume
theory on an NS-five-brane is the so-called little string theory, which is still
not completely understood. As shown by Giveon and Kutasov, in the
above double scaling limit this theory turns into a weakly coupled field theory.
Therefore, the calculation of the partition function of this system could teach 
us something about little string theory. Secondly, in Calabi-Yau
compactifications there are instanton corrections to several four-dimensional
quantities, coming from wrapped NS five-branes. Our computation could be helpful
in determining these instanton corrections.



The classical factor 
The bosonic part of the low-energy field theory on the NS five-brane contains a 
self-dual two-form field and five scalar fields. For clarity, we will not take
the fermions - which are completely determined by supersymmetry - into
consideration here. Also, the scalar fields do not contribute to the classical
partition function. Four of them, corresponding to the position of the NS
five-brane, are fixed while the fifth one cannot have any winding numbers since
the Calabi-Yau does not have any closed one-cycles. Therefore, we want to study
the classical partition sum of a self-dual two-form  coupled to a flat 
background three-form field . Ignoring the subtleties of the self-duality, 
this system can be described by the action
 
where  is the field strength of the two-form field.

The field  has quantized fluxes around the conjugate three-cycles ,
 of the Calabi-Yau:
 
Similarly, we denote the (fixed) periods of the -field around these cycles 
by , and the fluxes of the holomorphic -form on 
around the -cycles (defining its complex strcture) are denoted by . 
Note that the variables  and  are not quantized.

The partition sum is now a sum over the fluxes , which can be evaluated 
using a Poisson resummation. It is well-known how to incorporate self-duality 
in such a calculation: basically, one has to choose a spin 
structure  on the manifold and take a holomorphic root of 
the resulting expression. The result of this somewhat lengthy but 
straightforward calculation of the classical partition function is
 
i. e. a modified theta-function depending on the background field fluxes 
and on the periods . The sum over the fluxes  and  (only one sum is
left because of the holomorphic root) has turned into the usual sum inside the 
theta function. For the full expression for , the reader is referred to
.



T-duality 
It is known that after a transversal T-duality, the NS five-branes (which are
four-dimensional instantons for the  field), turn into 
gravitational instantons. More specifically, it has been shown in 
that the T-dual system in four dimensions is a Taub-NUT space (without 
five-branes) which in the limit where we let the compactification circle grow 
to infinite size becomes an ALE-space of type , where  is the 
number of five-branes in the original picture.

Comparing the limits on both sides of the T-duality, we find that the double
scaling limit corresponds to a weak coupling limit with small Planck length, i.
e. we can use an  supergravity approximation on the type IIA side. The three-form
field on the Calabi-Yau obtains a leg in the four remaining directions after the
T-duality, so for every three-cycle  on the Calabi-Yau, we obtain a vector
field with field strength  in the supergravity limit. (The cycles 
correspond to the Hodge duals of these forms.)



The quantum factor 
In the  supergravity theory, we can again calculate the classical
partition function of a single five-brane by summing over the fluxes of the
gauge fields , and one finds exactly the result ().
However, the interesting thing is that on this side one can also calculate the
quantum contributions to the partition function. In fact, it was shown in
 that the supergravity action obtains quantum corrections of the
form
 
where  is the anti-self-dual part of the curvature,  is the
anti-self-dual part of the graviphoton field strength (which is one of
the gauge field strengths in our description above), and the  are
topological string amplitudes at genus .

A straightforward calculation shows that the integral over the curvature gives a
factor of  - corresponding to the number of five-branes - and  and
 in our scaling limit combine into an effective coupling constant
, so the final result for the partition function of a single five-brane
is
 



Open problems 
Two important open questions arise from our calculations. First of all, since
 five-branes correspond to an -singularity, it is not clear what
happens in the case of a single five-brane. In fact, the result we get for 
five-branes in the Coulomb phase on the supergravity side seems to be the 
 power of the result (). In our paper
, we give some arguments for the fact that there is indeed a 
"missing five-brane" at infinity in the supergravity calculation. However, it
would be nice to see this explicitly, for example by doing the calculation on
the Taub-NUT space instead of the ALE space.

The second open problem stems from the fact that the classical and quantum parts
of  satisfy conjugate "holomorphic anomaly equations"
, i. e. they are not truly holomorphic quantities in , but 
they are holomorphic in a background independent sense as explained by Witten 
in. Integrating over the C-field fluxes  would give a truly
holomorphic result. It would be nice to understand these facts and the relation
to topological theories better.



 
The work reported here was done in collaboration with R. Dijkgraaf and E. 
Verlinde. I would like to thank the organizers of the Cargese 
summer school for the opportunity to present this work. 



 99 

R. Dijkgraaf, E. Verlinde and M. Vonk, On the partition sum of the NS
five-brane,  hep-th/0205281.

A. Giveon and D. Kutasov, Little string theory in a double scaling
limit,  JHEP 9910 (1999), hep-th/9909110.

E. Witten, Five-brane effective action in M-theory , J. Geom. Phys. 
22  (1997) 103, hep-th/9610234.

H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Two-dimensional black hole and singularities of CY
manifolds , 463 1996 55 , hep-th/9511164.

A. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, Topological
amplitudes in string theory , 413 1994 162 , hep-th/9307158.

M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Holomorphic anomalies
in topological field theories,  405 1993 279 , hep-th/9302103.

E. Witten, Quantum background independence in string theory , in Salamfest
1993, 257, hep-th/9306122.

