











NUP-A-02-13 




Abelian Projection of Massive SU(2) Gluodynamics 
 
-Towards Color Confinement 

Shinichi Deguchi
(Email address: deguchi@phys.cst.nihon-u.ac.jp) 
and Yousuke Kokubo 
(Email address: kokubo@phys.cst.nihon-u.ac.jp)  

Institute of Quantum Science, Nihon University 

Tokyo 101-8308, Japan  





 



Towards describing color confinement, we derive an effective Abelian 
gauge theory (EAGT) of a modified  gluodynamics.  
The modification is made by explicitly introducing 
mass terms of the off-diagonal gluon fields into pure  gluodynamics, 
or  Yang-Mills theory,  
in order that Abelian dominance at a long-distance scale is realized 
in  QCD. 
In deriving the EAGT, the off-diagonal gluon fields involving 
longitudinal modes are treated as 
fields that produce quantum effects on the diagonal gluon field and 
other fields relevant at a long-distance scale.  
Unlike earlier papers, a necessary gauge fixing is carried out 
without spoiling the global  gauge symmetry. 
We show that the EAGT allows a composite of the Yukawa and 
the linear potentials which also occurs in an extended dual Abelian 
Higgs model. This composite potential is understood to be 
a static potential between color-electric charges, whose  
origin may be assigned to the gluon fields. 
In addition, we point out that the EAGT involves the Skyrme-Faddeev 
model. 




PACS number(s): 11.15.Kc, 12.38.AW, 14.70.Dj  





Introduction 

Understanding the color-confinement mechanism based on quantum 
chromodynamics (QCD) is a long-standing subject in particle physics. 
It has been argued that the color-magnetic monopole 
condensation leads to color confinement through the dual Meissner effect 
which is described by the dual Abelian Higgs model or 
the dual Ginzburg-Landau theory. 
To confirm this picture within the framework of QCD, 
it is necessary to realize magnetic monopoles in QCD 
and to accept Abelian dominance  
 as a fact. 
Here Abelian dominance means that, 
at a long-distance scale, only diagonal gluons dominate, 
while effects of off-diagonal gluons are strongly suppressed. 
When the idea of Abelian dominance was first proposed by 
Ezawa and Iwazaki, it was only a hypothesis 
. They conjectured that Abelian 
dominance may be achieved if off-diagonal gluons possess effective 
non-zero mass at a long-distance scale and hence do not propagate at this 
scale. A recent Monte Carlo simulation performed by 
Amemiya and Suganuma shows that, in the maximal Abelian (MA) gauge, 
off-diagonal gluons indeed behave as massive vector fields with 
the effective mass  GeV.  
This result strongly supports Ezawa-Iwazaki's conjecture, so that  
the Abelian dominance must be realized at a long-distance scale. 


Mass generation of off-diagonal gluons would be a nonperturbative effect 
of QCD at a long-distance scale and should be understood 
within the analytic framework of QCD. In fact, an analytic approach based on 
condensation of the Faddeev-Popov ghosts has been made to explain 
the mass-generation mechanism of off-diagonal gluons 
. 
This attempt seems to be interesting. However the ghost condensation 
leads to breaking of the  Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) 
symmetry, which causes the problem of spoiling unitarity.  


Although the mass-generation mechanism of off-diagonal gluons is not well 
understood analytically at present, respecting the result of Monte Carlo  
simulation, we accept the mass generation as true in the beginning of 
our discussion without questioning its mechanism. 
Accordingly, in the present letter, 
we explicitly incorporate mass terms of the off-diagonal gluon 
fields into the Yang-Mills (YM) Lagrangian in QCD to describe dynamics of 
gluons at a long-distance scale. 
Among the massive Yang-Mills theories without residual Higgs bosons 
, 
we adopt the Stueckelberg-Kunimasa-Goto  (SKG) formalism, 
or the non-Abelian Stueckelberg formalism, 
to deal with massless and massive gluon fields in a gauge-invariant 
manner. In this context, the SKG formalism is nothing but an effective gauge 
theory of gluodynamics; we expect that the mass terms of off-diagonal 
gluon fields are dynamically induced by a nonperturbative effect of 
gluodynamics. For this reason, in the present letter, we may refer to the SKG  
formalism as massive gluodynamics . 


In the SKG formalism, Nambu-Goldstone (NG) scalar fields are introduced 
to identify the longitudinal modes of off-diagonal gluons. 
Since the Lagrangian of the SKG formalism is nonpolynomial in the NG scalar 
fields, there is no hope that the SKG formalism is perturbatively
renormalizable.   
However this is not a serious problem for our discussion, 
because the SKG formalism is now treated as an effective gauge theory of 
gluodynamics. 


Because of Abelian dominance due to the massive off-diagonal gluons, 
phenomena at a long-distance scale will be described in terms of 
the diagonal gluon fields together with other fields relevant to the 
corresponding scale. 
In accordance with this idea, the present letter attempts to derive 
an effective Abelian gauge theory (EAGT) constructed of these fields 
from the SKG formalism. 
(Some preliminary discussions in this attempt have been reported 
in Ref..) 
The procedure of deriving the EAGT is a kind of so-called Abelian projection. 
Recently a fashion of Abelian projection of QCD or gluodynamics has been 
studied by Kondo and by some other authors 
. 
In their procedure, the maximally Abelian (MA) gauge condition 
is imposed on QCD before performing the Abelian projection. 
Unfortunately, the global  color gauge symmetry of QCD is spoiled 
at this stage, so that the conservation of color Noether current is no 
longer guaranteed. 
In contrast, in our procedure, we do not put the MA gauge condition 
by hand. Instead, a corresponding condition is obtained as the  
Euler-Lagrange equation for the NG scalar fields. 
In connection with this fact the global color gauge symmetry 
is maintained in the EAGT in a nonlinear way, provided that 
an appropriate gauge fixing term is adopted. 
As a result, a conserved color charge is well defined in the EAGT. 
The presence of conserved color charge will be important for combining  
our discussion with other attempts to investigate color confinement.  



The Abelian projection of the SKG formalism is performed in the following 
manner: First, beginning with an effective action in the SKG formalism, 
we evaluate the path-integral over the NG scalar fields 
around their classical configuration by using a semi-classical method. 
After that, similar to earlier papers 
, 
we carry out the path-integration over the off-diagonal gluon 
fields with the aid of auxiliary fields introduced in this stage. 
The resulting effective action that defines the EAGT is written in terms 
of the diagonal gluon fields, the auxiliary fields and 
the classical configuration of NG scalar fields. 
This action includes terms analogous to those occurring in a dual form 
of the extended dual Abelian Higgs model (EDAHM) 
in the London limit. 
With such terms in hand, following a procedure discussed in 
Ref., 
we show that the EAGT allows a composite of the Yukawa potential and 
the linearly rising potential. 
We point out that the composite potential 
represents interaction between color-electric charges consisting of 
the classical NG scalar fields. 
We also show that the EAGT involves the Skyrme-Faddeev model. 


Stueckelberg-Kunimasa-Goto  formalism 

For simplicity, in the present letter, we restrict our discussion to 
the case of  color gauge symmetry. 
Let   be the Yang-Mills (YM) fields, 
or the gluon fields, and   be the (dimensionless) 
Nambu-Goldstone scalar fields that 
form a set of coordinates of the coset space .  
We begin with the Stueckelberg-Kunimasa-Goto  (SKG) formalism 
 characterized by the Lagrangian 
 with  

 


where 
 and  

.   
Here  is a (bare) coupling constant, 
 is a constant with dimension of mass, 
 is a metric on the coset space , and 
 are Killing vectors on . 
(The convention for the signature of space-time metric is .)
The Lagrangian  remains invariant under the gauge 
transformation 



 




with  gauge parameters . 
The metric  is written as 
  in terms of 
the zweibein  that is defined  by 

 with  
coset representatives ,  
where  
and  
( denote the Pauli matrices). 
Under the left action of , 
the coset representatives transform as 
  ; 
in a sense,  ^^ ^^ convert" 
 gauge transformations into corresponding  gauge 
transformations. 
If the infinitesimal form  is chosen as ,  
then  and  take the 
following forms: , 
. 
Here  is a  gauge parameter defined 
by   
with  being functions of  
called -compensators. 




From the transformation rule of , it follows that 
. 
Here  denotes a matrix in the adjoint representation of 
, defined by . 
In addition, the transformation rule of  leads to 
 with 
.  
It is easy to show that the inverse metric 
, 
with the inverse zweibein , 
can be written as   
and so the Lie derivatives of  along  vanish. 
The Maurer-Cartan formula for  
 
now reads 

 


where  is given by 

. 
This term remains non-vanishing owing to a Dirac string singularity  
characterized by the first homotopy group  
. 



The Lagrangian  can be expressed as 

 
in terms of the YM fields in the unitary gauge, 

. 
Thus, in the unitary gauge,  takes the form of a mass 
term for . 
The gauge transformation rules of   
are found from Eq. () to be 


 


with which we can easily check the gauge invariance of .   
We now see that the off-diagonal gluon fields 
 behave as massive charged matter fields with 
the mass , while the diagonal gluon field  
 behaves as a massless  gauge field. 
For this reason, it is quite natural to interpret the unitary gauge as 
the maximally Abelian (MA) gauge discussed in earlier papers (see, e.g., 
Refs.).  
Remarkably the Euler-Lagrange equation for  can be written 
in the form of the MA gauge condition for :  


 


This fact also ensures that  would be 
the YM fields in the MA gauge. 
In the earlier papers, a similar equation for , 
not for , has been put by hand as  
the MA gauge condition, 
whereas in the present letter the above equation has been derived as 
the Euler-Lagrange equation for . 


Carrying out the Wick rotation  
 in Eqs. () and (), 
let us consider the following effective action in Euclidean space-time: 


 


with 

. 
Here  and  are Faddeev-Popov ghost fields, 
 are Nakanishi-Lautrup fields, and  stands for 
a gauge fixing term (involving ghost terms) that is introduced to break 
the local  gauge invariance of . 
The Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) transformation 
 is defined, as usual, by 



 



to satisfy the nilpotency property 
. 
We suppose that  contains no  but may 
contain the ^^ ^^ classical" fields  introduced 
in the following. 



Path-integration over the Nambu-Goldstone scalar fields 

We first evaluate the path-integral over  in Eq. () 
in the one-loop approximation, which can be done covariantly by 
employing the geometrical method proposed by Honerkamp. 
In this method, the action  in the exponent of  
Eq. () is expanded about a solution 
 of Eq. () in powers of new integration variables 
. Here  are understood to form the tangent vector 
at  to the geodesic 
on  that runs from  to the original 
integration variables . 
Accordingly, the gauge-invariant measure 

 
is chosen as . 
After ignoring the third and higher order terms in , 
the integration over  in Eq. () can be performed to get 
the determinant of a certain Laplace-type operator containing 
 and . 
Applying the heat kernel method to the evaluation of the determinant, 
we obtain a one-loop effective action. Addition of this to 
the classical action at  leads to 


, 
where  is a normalization constant and  stands for 
the one-loop approximation.  
(The   that appear in the following denote 
normalization constants.) 
By using the Maurer-Cartan formula in Eq. () 
at , 
 is written in terms of  


 
as 


 


where 

, 
, 

,    
and 

, with  
the metric on Euclidean space-time. 
In deriving Eq. (), a mass scale  and an ultraviolet 
cutoff  have been introduced to make 
 a meaningful expression. 
In addition, a dimensionless constant  has been 
introduced to indicate an arbitrariness of expression due to the identity 

. 
At  the gauge transformation rules in Eq. ()  
read 




 



with . 
As can be seen from Eq. (), ,  and 
 are gauge invariant. 
In Eq. (), 

 is the only classical term. 





Auxiliary fields 

In terms of , 
the Lagrangian  can be written as  




 


where  is a constant similar to , and  
 is the field strength of 
, expressed as 


 with 

. 


In order to derive an EAGT involving ,  
we need to evaluate the path-integral over   
in the effective action

 


with 

. 
Here the gauge invariance of the path-integral measure 
, i.e., 
, has been used. 
In order to perform the integration over 
 exactly, we introduce the following 
auxiliary fields: 
an antisymmetric tensor field , a scalar field  
and a traceless symmetric tensor field  that are 
associated with ,  and , 
respectively.(In the case of pure  YM theory without 
the scalar fields , we can exactly carry out the integration 
over  with the aid of  
alone. 
In the present case involving , the introduction of 
 and/or  is essential for exactly carrying out 
the integration over .) 
With the aid of these new fields, 

 
can be expressed as 

 with 


 


Here  is an arbitrary dimensionless constant, 
and ,  and  are defined by 

 


Taking into account the gauge invariance of , 
,  and ,  
we impose the gauge transformation rules 
 on 
the auxiliary fields. Then  is obviously gauge invariant.  
The BRST invariance of  is guaranteed with 

. 
The effective action we are now concerned with is thus 

 


where 


. 



Gauge fixing term 

We next define the gauge fixing term  in such a way that 
it satisfies the following three conditions:  
(i)  breaks the ^^ ^^ local"  gauge 
invariance of .  
(ii)  remains invariant under the ^^ ^^ global" 
 gauge transformation, provided that ,  
and  transform homogeneously under it, i.e., 
, 
, 
, 
with  being ^^ ^^ constant" parameters.  
(iii) The quadratic part (or the asymptotic form in the limits  
) of  
has the same form as that of the Lorentz gauge-fixing term. 
The condition (i) is essential to quantize  
(or ).  
The condition (ii) is necessary for preserving the global  gauge 
invariance of  to guarantee conservation of the Noether current 
for the global  gauge symmetry. 
It should be noted here that both of the local and global  
gauge transformations are converted into the corresponding local 
 gauge transformations via the transformation rule 
. 
The local  gauge invariance of  is then realized 
as invariance of  under the local  gauge transformation 
characterized by  with  being dependent on 
space-time coordinates .  
The local  gauge transformation produced by the global  gauge 
transformation is characterized by  with 
 being independent of ; 
the locality of this  gauge transformation is due to the 
-dependence of . 
The condition (iii) will be necessary for the proof of unitarity based on  
the Kugo-Ojima quartet mechanism. 
A gauge fixing term that satisfies the above conditions and  
that is appropriate for our discussion 
is given in terms of , 
, 
 and 
 by 


 


where 
, 
and  is a (bare) gauge parameter. 
The global  gauge invariance of   
is realized as invariance of  under the local  gauge 
transformation characterized by . 
If  in Eq. () is replaced by 

,  
then  reduces to the ordinary Lorenz gauge-fixing term for 
, which preserves the global  gauge invariance of 
. Under the global  gauge transformation, 
 transform homogeneously in the same manner as 
, while  transforms  
inhomogeneously in the same manner as . 
(In ,  plays the role 
of a gauge field as  plays in 
.) 
From these facts we see that the condition (ii) is satisfied. 
Under the local  gauge transformation,  
transform inhomogeneously in different manners than  
, so that the condition (i) is satisfied. 
Since  approximates to  
 in the free limit, the condition 
(iii) is evidently satisfied.  (We can impose the condition  
without loss of generality.)


The BRST transformation rules of 
,  , 
,  and 
 are determined from Eq. () to be 




 




where . 
Carrying out the BRST transformation in the right hand side of 
Eq. (),  we obtain 

 


The first term of Eq. () vanishes owing to the equation 


 


Recall here that  is a solution of Eq. (). 
Consequently  does not depend on the off-diagonal 
gluon fields , so that the effective action 
 can be written as  

 


with 


 


Here the gauge invariance of the path-integral measures, i.e., 
, 
 and 
, has been used. 



Effective Abelian gauge theory 

We now evaluate the path-integral over  
in Eq. (), rewriting Eq. () in the form 

 
up to total derivatives. Here  consists of the terms 
that contain no , i.e., 



 



Recall the fact that  has been found at the one-loop 
level in evaluating the path-integral over . 
Then we see that the terms in 
 which contain  
contribute as two-loop effects to the one-loop effective action obtained 
by the integration over  in Eq. (), 
provided that the one-loop approximation is carried out around the classical 
solution . 
Because the two-loop effects are now irrelevant to our discussion, 
it is sufficient for evaluating the path-integral over 
 to consider 

 only. 
After the use of the commutation relation 

 and Eq. (), 
 becomes 
the Laplace-type operator 


  


Supposing  
, 
we carry out the Gaussian integration over  in  
Eq. () to get an expression written with the aid of 
a proper-time : 



 



(Later on we will point out that  is 
a reasonable condition, see Eq. ().) 
The ket vectors  are defined by 

 
with the basis vectors  that satisfy 

 
and that transform homogeneously under the  gauge 
transformations, 
i.e., 
. 
Then  transform in the same manner as 
 (see Eq. ()), 
so that the gauge invariance 
of the operator 

 


is guaranteed. In this way the gauge invariance of   
is confirmed.  
Using the heat kernel equation for the matrix elements 

, 
we can approximately calculate the effective 
action in Eq. (). In the process of calculation, 
we have to take account of the Dirac 
string singularity occurring in 

. 
The result of the calculation reads 



 



after making the replacement 
. 
Here  consists of terms of higher order 
in , , ,  and/or 
their derivatives, including such higher derivative terms as 
 and 
. 
It should be stressed that the kinetic terms of ,  
and  have been induced by virtue of quantum effect of 
. 
In this sense ,  and  are no longer 
auxiliary fields. 
(As for , such an induced kinetic term has been found 
in various contexts.)


Next we consider the path-integral over ,  
and  in Eq. (). 
In the case , the integration over  becomes 
a simple Gaussian integration and can readily be done to get 

. 
In order to perform the integration over 
 and , 
we rewrite  in the form 

  
up to total derivatives. Here  
 and  are given by 


 



with  , 

 
and 


 



Note that under the global  gauge  
transformation,  is invariant, while 
 
transforms inhomogeneously in the same manner as .  
In , 
  
plays the role of a gauge field. 
The Gaussian integration over  and 
 is carried out to get 


 



where the ket vectors  are defined by 

 
with the orthonormal basis vectors  
that transform homogeneously under the  gauge transformations. 
Then  obey the gauge transformation rule  
same as that of  and , so that the operator 



 
is gauge invariant. 
Consequently the gauge invariance of  is also 
confirmed.  
Applying the heat kernel method to calculating the -integral in  
Eq. (), we obtain 



 



with  

. 
By using the Maurer-Cartan formula in Eq. () 
at ,  can be written as 

 


with . 


The exponent in Eq. () is thus found to be 
  
with 


 



where  denotes a part of  
that consists of the terms containing  but no  
. 
In what follows, we are concerned with 
the effective Abelian gauge theory (EAGT) defined by 
the Lagrangian . 
As has been expected,  remains invariant 
under the  gauge transformation characterized by 
. 
Since this transformation is produced by the global  
gauge transformation due to the action of , 
we should consider that the global  gauge symmetry 
is maintained in the EAGT and 
is realized in  in a nonlinear way. 
In fact, it is possible to derive the non-Abelian Noether current 
for the global  gauge invariance of . 
This current is written with the use of the -compensators 
. 



Static potentials 

Considering  as a classical Lagrangian, let us 
investigate what kind of potential arises from propagation 
of  at the tree level of the EAGT. 
With  in hand, the bare propagator of  
follows from the kinetic term and  mass term of  together with 
a source term of . 


In addition to the linear terms in  explicitly written in  
Eq. () and Eq. (), further linear terms 
in  exist in . 
Fortunately, if  
is chosen to be the constant  in , 
these linear terms 
as well as the  term in Eq. () vanish 
in  and it becomes easier to make a discussion. 
On putting , the terms relevant to deriving 
the bare propagator of  are displayed, after being rescaled 
 as 
, 
as follows: 


 


where 
 and 

 


Since  consists only of the classical fields , 
we can treat  as a classical antisymmetric 
tensor current. 
Then we see that  is very analogous to a part of the 
covariantly gauge fixed version of the Lagrangian that defines a massive 
Abelian antisymmetric tensor gauge theory (MAATGT) with antisymmetric 
tensor current (ATC).(If the vorticity tensor 
current is chosen as the ATC, 
the MAATGT with ATC reduces to a dual theory of the extended dual 
Abelian Higgs model (EDAHM) in the London limit 
. ) 
Obviously  describes a massive rank-2 antisymmetric 
tensor field coupled with  and .  
For any mass scale characterized by ,  
positivity of  is guaranteed as long as appropriate constants are 
chosen to be  and . Let us denote by  
a part of  that consists of the terms 
containing . Noting the fact that the source term 
 in  exists 
in the exponent of Eq. (), 
we represent  in  as 
the functional derivative . 
Thereby the integration over  in Eq. () reduces to 
a Gaussian integration, which can be carried out to obtain 

 

where  is given by 


 



with 


 



The bare propagator of  has 
been found in the exponent of Eq. (). 
The remaining terms indicated by the dots may be calculated, 
at least formally, by a perturbative method. 


Together with deriving the potential due to propagation of , 
we also try to derive the potential due to propagation of , 
rather than , at the tree level. 
To this end, we pay attention to 
a part of  which consists of a relevant source term 
for  and of the terms that are quadratic in   
or its first order derivatives and contain no other fields. 
Here, as a relevant term to our discussion, we also take the local term 
 
that is given as a leading term of the series expansion 
 
in the non-local term explicitly written in the exponent of Eq. (). 
The part of  that we are 
concerned now with is thus found from Eqs. (), 
(), (), () and () to be 



 



with  

 


Here  has been approximated by using the approximate 
formula . 
The renormalized coupling constant, , is read from the first 
term of Eq. () to be . 
Since  decreases with , 
the EAGT enjoys the property of asymptotic freedom. 
(Because of the presence of the scalar fields , 
behavior of  is somewhat different 
from that of the running coupling constant of  YM theory 
.) 
The last term of Eq. () is certainly a source term of 
, as can be seen by rewriting it as 

 
up to total derivatives, where  is defined by 
. 
By virtue of the antisymmetric property of , i.e., 
, 
 satisfies the conservation law . 
In accordance with the treatment of , we treat    
as a classical vector current. 
Since  is a source of ,  will be 
a color-electric current. 
Let us denote by  a part of  that 
consists of the terms containing  and that 
includes no the terms already included in . 
( includes the higher derivative terms 

  
arising in the series expansion in the exponent of Eq. ().) 
Utilizing the source term  
that occurs in the exponent of Eq. () through Eq. (), 
we represent  in  as the functional derivative  
. 
Then, noticing the invariance of path-integral measure 
, we carry out 
the integration over  in Eq. () to obtain  


 

with  


 



In deriving Eq. (), the conservation law of  has 
been used, so that  turns out to be independent of the renormalized 
gauge parameter . 


At the present stage, the effective action  takes the following form: 

 


with 


 



Here  consists of the terms containing  alone, 
some of which terms depend on  
through  or , while 
 consists of the remaining terms containing 
 and/or . 
The functional  is nothing but a part of the term explicitly  
written in the exponent of Eq. (). 
It is now obvious that the effective action  is a functional of 
the classical fields  alone. 
Now, we would like to point out that the terms analogous to  and 
 have been found in a form of the generating functional 
characterizing the MAATGT with ATC. 
In this theory, a composite of the Yukawa and the linear potentials 
was obtained from the generating functional.  
It is hence expected that similar potential is derived 
from . 


To confirm this, we follow a simple procedure discussed 
in Ref.:  
Recalling , 
we rewrite it in the integral form 

 


with the aid of a constant vector , 
where . 
(The vector  may be understood to be a set of integration  
constants.) Substituting Eq. () into Eq. (), we have 


 


where . 
As a result,  is expressed as a functional of the vector 
current . 



In order to evaluate the static potential based on 
, we now replace  with the static 
current 
 satisfying 
the conservation law . 
Here  and  are point charges at 
 and , respectively. 
(For a particular configuration of the classical fields 
, the current  could reduce to 
. Conversely, in some specific cases,  might be 
expressed in a form of superposition of .) 
Substituting  into Eqs. () and ()  
and choosing a constant vector  with the condition 
 to be , we can calculate 
the effective potentials  and  defined by 
 and 
.  The result reads 


 


up to irrelevant infinite constants. 
Here , and  is another ultraviolet 
cutoff. Therefore the EAGT allows a composite of the 
Yukawa and the linear potentials, , even at the tree level. 
This result is quite desirable for describing color confinement 
. 
Comparing Eq. () with the linear potential obtained in 
the MAATGT with ATC,( 
The linear potential obtained in the MAATGT with ATC is    



. Here  is a constant with dimension of mass and 
 is a constant identified with the gauge 
coupling constant of the EDAHM. 
In ref.,  was put for convenience. ) 
we see that  corresponds to the gauge coupling constant of 
the extended dual Abelian Higgs model (EDAHM). 
The constants  and  could be determined 
via Eqs. () and () in such a way that  
reproduces the (running) coupling constant of the EDAHM. 



Now we should make a comment. In terms of the unite isovector 
 defined by  
, 
the antisymmetric tensor 
 
is written as 


. 
With this expression, we see that  in 
Eq. () is just the so-called 't Hooft tensor occurring 
in the theory of 't Hooft-Polyakov magnetic monopole, provided 
that  are identified with the Higgs fields normalized 
in isospace. As is known in this theory, the magnetic current 

 remains non-vanishing owing to  
non-triviality of the second homotopy group of , i.e., 
. 
(Here  indicates the Hodge star operation.) 
Comparing  with 
, we see that  is certainly 
a color-electric current, not a color-magnetic current. 
For this reason,  is interpreted as 
a generating functional that describes interaction between 
color-electric currents; accordingly  is understood to be 
a static potential between color-electric charges. 



Remarks 


One may ask here what is the origin of the color-electric current 
. We can give no satisfactory answer to this question now, 
and so we will only mention a tentative idea towards making a correct reply. 
Recall the fact that  is a solution of the Euler-Lagrange 
equation in Eq. (). Since this equation involves 
the gluon fields  in the form of external fields, 
 can be regarded as functionals of ,  
i.e., , or more physically, 
as (composite) fields that inherit degrees of freedom of the gluon 
fields.(

Scalar fields similar to , or more precisely 
to , have been introduced by Ichie and Suganuma in a somewhat 
different context. 
They called those scalar fields 
gluonic Higgs fields , insisting that the scalar fields are 
analogous to non-Abelian Higgs fields but are composite fields of gluons. 
Unlike Ichie-Suganuma's procedure of introducing the scalar fields, 
we have obtained  as a classical configuration of 
the ^^ ^^ dynamical" Nambu-Goldstone scalar fields  that are 
identified with the longitudinal modes of the massive off-diagonal gluons.)  
Regarded  as gluonic scalar fields in this sense, 
 and  are interpreted as currents consisting of  
gluonic degrees of freedom. Thus it seems natural to assign the origin of 
the color-electric current  to the gluon fields. If this idea is 
acceptable,  could be considered as 
a potential that makes a contribution to gluon confinement. 



We now focus attention to the leading terms of  in 
Eq. (), including the quartic terms in  
and the quadratic terms in 
. 
The sum of the leading terms can be seen from Eqs. (), (), 
() and () to be 


 


where 

 


In terms of ,  is written as 

 


This is certainly the Lagrangian that defines a generalized Skyrme-Faddeev 
model (GSFM). 
Therefore it is concluded that the EAGT involves a GSFM. 
As is seen from Eq. (),  vanishes with the choice of 
gauge parameter 
. 
In this case,  reduces to the Lagrangian  
presented by de Vega to investigate closed-vortex configurations. 
If the last two terms in Eq. () are removed, 
 becomes the Lagrangian of the Skyrme-Faddeev model 
.  Faddeev and Niemi have conjectured that 
the Skyrme-Faddeev model describes low-energy gluodynamics based on 
 YM theory. 
If their conjecture is true,  should be considered as 
the fields that realize gluonic degrees of freedom relevant to the low energy 
limit. This interpretation of  appears consistent 
with our statement on  made above. 


Until now the ultraviolet cutoff  remains a free parameter; 
we briefly discuss how to fix . 
First we recall that  in Eq. () was expanded 
about the classical fields  in powers of : 

 


Here the relation  

 has been used. 
From a viewpoint of the BRST formalism, it can be understood that 
because of the BRST symmetry, 
the quadratic divergences due to quantum effects of 
,  and  cancel out in calculating 
quantum correction for the classical term 
. 
(This fact can be seen by comparing Eq. () with Eq. ().) 
For this reason, the classical term is not affected by quantum effects 
and will remain in the EAGT without any change. 
We now notice that the Lagrangian  includes 
, 
see Eq. (). 
In the EAGT, this is the only term that takes the same form as 
the classical term. 
Thus it is natural to identify 
 
with the classical term by imposing the condition 
, which fixes 
 at 

 


Even if  is not so large value, 
the cutoff  will be regarded as large 
so long as  is sufficiently small.  
In such a case, the perturbative treatment of the 
higher order and/or higher derivative terms in  
makes good sense. 


Conclusions 

We have derived an EAGT of the SKG formalism 
by following a method of Abelian projection. 
There the off-diagonal gluon fields involving longitudinal modes were 
treated as fields that produce quantum effects on the diagonal gluon 
fields and other fields relevant at a long-distance scale.  
In deriving the EAGT, we have employed, 
instead of the MA gauge fixing term used in earlier papers, 
an appropriate gauge fixing term Eq. () 
which breaks the local   gauge symmetry, 
while preserves the global   gauge symmetry. 
(An equation corresponding to the MA gauge condition was obtained 
as the Euler-Lagrange equation for the NG scalar fields, 
see Eq. ().) 
This choice of gauge fixing term guarantees the conservation of color 
charge and has made evaluating the ghost sector simple. 


We have shown that the EAGT involves a gauge fixed version 
of the MAATGT with ATC, allowing a composite of the Yukawa and 
the linear potentials at the tree level of the EAGT. 
We can not immediately identify this linear potential with the confinement 
potential, because it was derived via a perturbative procedure 
together with the one-loop approximation. 
However, we would say that the ^^ ^^ germ" of confinement potential was 
actually found. 
The composite potential derived here is understood to be 
a static potential between color-electric charges.  
It was also pointed out that the origin of these charges may be assigned 
to the gluon fields. For this reason, the composite potential could make 
a contribution to confinement of gluons.  
We have seen that the EAGT involves the Skyrme-Faddeev 
model in addition to the MAATGT with ATC; thus the EAGT has a rich structure 
suitable for describing low-energy gluodynamics based on 
 YM theory. 



In the present letter we have dealt only with the three terms 
,  and  among the terms 
included in Eq. (). 
Some of the remaining terms will produce correction for the potential 
. Since this potential corresponds to the static 
potential found in the EDAHM in the London limit, such correction 
should be identified with variation from the London limit 
. 
We then expect that the scalar field  plays a role of the 
residual Higgs field in the EDAHM, with choosing suitable values for  
the constants  and . 
Anyway, investigation of the correction is important for comparing the EAGT 
with the EDAHM. 
Besides clarifying the mass-generation mechanism of off-diagonal gluons, 
we hope to address this issue in the future.  





 
We are grateful to members of the Theoretical 
Physics Group at Nihon University for their encouragements. 
We would like to thank Dr. B. P. Mandal for a careful reading of 
the manuscript.





 99 


Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. D 10 (1974) 4262; 
 
S. Mandelstam, Phys. Rep. 23 (1976) 245. 


 
T. Suzuki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 80 (1988) 929; 
 
T. Suzuki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 81 (1989) 752; 
  
S. Maedan, T. Suzuki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 81 (1989) 229. 


 
H. Suganuma, S. Sasaki, H. Toki, Nucl. Phys. B 435 (1995) 207;  
 
H. Suganuma, S. Sasaki, H. Toki, H. Ichie, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.  
120 (1995) 57. 


G. 't Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B190 [FS3] (1981) 455. 


Z. F. Ezawa, A. Iwazaki, Phys. Rev. D 25 (1982) 2681; 
 
Z. F. Ezawa, A. Iwazaki, Phys. Rev. D 26 (1982) 631; 
 
Z. F. Ezawa, in Confinement 2000, edited by H. Suganuma et al., 
World Scientific, Singapore, 2001, p. 20.


K. Amemiya, H. Suganuma, Phys. Rev. D 60 (1999) 114509; 
 
K. Amemiya, H. Suganuma, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 83-84 (2000) 419. 


M. Schaden, hep-th/9909011; 
 
M. Schaden, hep-th/0003030. 


K.-I. Kondo, T. Shinohara, Phys. Lett. B 491 (2000) 263.  


S. Deguchi, Phys. Lett. B 532 (2002) 329. 


T. Kunimasa, T. Goto , Prog. Theor. Phys. 37 (1967) 452. 


K. Shizuya, Nucl. Phys. B 87 (1975) 255; 
 
K. Shizuya, Nucl. Phys. B 94 (1975) 260; 
 
K. Shizuya, Nucl. Phys. B 121 (1977) 125.  


Y. Kokubo, S. Deguchi, Soryushiron Kenkyu (Kyoto) 103 (2001) E137; 
 
Y. Kokubo, S. Deguchi, Soryushiron Kenkyu (Kyoto) 105 (2002) D104 
(in Japanese). 


K.-I. Kondo, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 7467; 
 
K.-I. Kondo, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 131 (1998) 243. 


 
M. Quandt and H. Reinhardt, Int. J. Mod, Phys. A 13 (1998) 4049. 


 
K.-I. Kondo, T. Shinohara, Prog. Theor. Phys. 105 (2001) 649.


 
M. Baker, J. S. Ball, N. Brambilla, G. M. Prosperi, F. Zachariasen, 
Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 2829; 
 
M. Baker, N. Brambilla, H. G. Dosch, A. Vairo, 
Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 034010. 


 
D. Antonov, D. Ebert, Eur. Phys. J. C 8 (1999) 343; 
 
D. Antonov, Surveys High Energ. Phys. 14 (2000) 265. 


S. Deguchi, Y. Kokubo, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17 (2002) 503.


S. Deguchi, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 22 (1989) 227; 
 
S. Deguchi, Prog. Theor. Phys. 82 (1989) 433. 


P. van Nieuwenhuizen, in Supersymmetry and Supergravity '84, 
edited by B. de Wit et al., World Scientific, Singapore, 1984, p. 239.  


A. Kronfeld, G. Schierholz, U.-J. Wiese, Nucl. Phys. B 293  
(1987) 461. 


J. Honerkamp, Nucl. Phys. B 36 (1972) 130; 
  
D. Boulware and L. Brown, Ann. Phys. 138 (1982) 392; 
 
K. M. Costa and F. Liebrand, Phys. Rev. D 40 (1989) 2014. 


T. Kugo and I. Ojima, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 66 (1979) 1; 
 
N. Nakanishi and I. Ojima, Covariant operator formalism of 
gauge theories and quantum gravity, World Scientific, Singapore, 1990. 



 
U. Ellwanger, Nucl. Phys. B 531 (1998) 593; 
 
U. Ellwanger, Eur. Phys. J. C 7 (1999) 673; 
 
U. Ellwanger, Nucl. Phys. B 560 (1999) 587. 


K.-I. Kondo, hep-th/0009152. 


F. Freire, Phys. Lett. B 526 (2002) 405; 

F. Freire, hep-th/0205032. 


 
K.-I. Kondo, T. Imai, hep-th/0206173. 


G. 't Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B 79 (1974) 276, 

A. M. Polyakov, JETP Lett. 20 (1974) 194. 


S. Coleman, in New Phenomena in Subnuclear Physics, Part A, 
edited by A. Zichichi, Plenum Press, New York, 1977, p. 297.


 
H. Ichie, H. Suganuma, Nucl. Phys. B 548 (1999) 365; 
 
H. Ichie, H. Suganuma, Nucl. Phys. B 574 (2000) 70; 
 
H. Suganuma et al., Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 106 (2002) 679. 


E. Langmann and A. J. Niemi, Phys. Lett. B 463 (1999) 252; 
 
Y. M. Cho, H. W. Lee and D. G. Pak, hep-th/9905215; 
 
Y. M. Cho, H. W. Lee and D. G. Pak, Phys. Lett. B 525 (2002) 347. 


H. J. de Vega, Phys. Rev. D 18 (1978) 2945.


 
L. D. Faddeev and A. J. Niemi, Nature 387 (1997) 58; 
 
L. D. Faddeev, hep-th/9901037. 


L. D. Faddeev and A. J. Niemi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 1624; 
 
L. D. Faddeev and A. J. Niemi, Phys. Lett. B 464 (1999) 90. 








