































23.2cm 17.0cm
-1.0in
8pt 5pt
-42pt
12pt
30pt 12pt 24pt







 
 












 
 



  

C  
  
 
 
 
_x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( 
) 
1 2  
#1  
R  
Z  
RP  
S  





K ^    
g ^    
e ^    
 ^    
 ^6    
 ^    
 ^6    

 



  

KIAS-P03016 

TIT-HEP-493 

hep-th/0302150 



 Phases of    Supersymmetric  Gauge
Theories    via
Matrix Model 



Changhyun Ahn  and Yutaka Ookouchi  
 Department of Physics,
Kyungpook National University, Taegu 702-701, Korea 
 Department of Physics,
 Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Tokyo 152-8511, Japan   ahn@knu.ac.kr, ookouchi@th.phys.titech.ac.jp  Abstract   We extend the results of
Cachazo, Seiberg and Witten to  supersymmetric gauge
theories with gauge groups  and . By
taking the  superpotential which is an arbitrary polynomial of
adjoint matter  as a small perturbation of 
gauge theories, we examine the singular points preserving 
 supersymmetry in the moduli space where mutually local
monopoles become massless. We derive the matrix model complex
curve for the whole range of the degree of perturbed
superpotential. Then we determine a generalized Konishi anomaly
equation implying the orientifold contribution. We turn to the
multiplication map and the confinement index  and describe both
Coulomb branch and confining branch. In particular, we  construct
a multiplication map from  to  where  is
an even integer as well as a multiplication map from  to
 ( is a positive integer), a map from 
to  ( is an odd integer) and a map from 
to . Finally we analyze some examples which show
some duality: the same moduli space has two different
semiclassical limits corresponding to distinct gauge groups.









Introduction 

The  supersymmetric gauge theories in four dimensions
are of considerable interest and have a rich physical contents. By
studying the structure of quantum moduli space, one gets some of
very important nonperturbative phenomena such as confinement and
dynamical symmetry breaking because many nonperturbative features
are related to the vacua such as mass generation and fermion
condensates and so on. In particular, in these theories, there
exists a special class of observables that are constrained by
holomorphy, for example, holomorphic effective superpotential. The
holomorphy of the quantum superpotential makes it possible to
determine the light degree of freedom and hence the quantum moduli
space. Although the exact results for many different models have
been obtained, a general recipe for computing the effective
superpotential has remained to be understood fully.

Partially wrapping D-branes over nontrivial cycles of the
geometries yield large classes of interesting gauge theories,
depending on the choice of geometries. Vafa and his collaborators
shed some light on this problem in the viewpoint of gravity dual
. They considered four dimensional gauge
theories on the world volume of D5-brane wrapped on 
and claimed, as far as the computation of the effective
superpotential is concerned, that this geometry can be replaced by
a dual geometry where the  is replaced by the 
 and D5-branes by RR fluxes through these cycles. As
discussed in, these RR fluxes generate
the effective superpotential that is equivalent to the effective
superpotential of four dimensional gauge theories on the
worldvolme of D5-brane. The equivalence and validity of this
duality have been tested and proved for several models in many
papers. In
this context, the effective superpotential can be explicitly
expanded in terms of a period integral of the geometry that can be
interpreted as a glueball superfield in four dimensional gauge
theories.

Dijkgraaf and Vafa gave a new recipe to these calculations of the
effective superpotentials. They claimed
that perturbative analysis of effective superpotential was
captured by the matrix model perturbation. Thus what we have  to
do is to sum up Feynman diagram of the matrix model. If one wants
-th order instanton effect, one has only to compute Feynman
diagram up to  loop. In this context, they also claimed
that the loop equation of matrix model, that plays an important
role in the matrix model, is equivalent to the Riemann surface
that comes from the dual geometry discussed above. After all, this
Riemann surface leads to a fruitful system for studying the
holomorphic information of four dimensional  gauge
theories. After their works, the correspondence between the
several matrix models  and four dimensional gauge theories
attracted wide attention, and  many papers, which include the
extension to other gauge groups and an adding flavors and so on,
appeared in-. In particular, in
, Ferrari has discussed the quantum
parameter space of the   gauge theory with one
adjoint matter  and a cubic tree level superpotential. These
works are one of the motivations of our paper.

Recently in
they showed that these matrix model analysis could be interpreted
within purely field theoretic point of view. In particular for the
 gauge theory with adjoint matter  and a polynomial
superpotential , a generalized Konishi anomaly equation,
providing  both a connection between the quark condensation and
the gluino condensation in the supersymmetric gauge theories and
possible ways to explore the nonperturbative aspects of the
supersymmetric gauge theories, gives rise to the loop equation of
matrix model. In other words, within gauge theories there is some
aspect that can be interpreted as matrix models.

Later, Cachazo, Seiberg and Witten have discussed a new
kind of duality. By changing the parameters of , one can
transit several vacua with different broken gauge groups
continuously and holomorphically. There was no restrictions to the
degree of the superpotential  which can be an arbitrary.
They derived the matrix model curve and showed a generalized
Konishi anomaly equation from the strong gauge coupling approach
where the superpotential is considered as a small perturbation of
a strongly coupled  gauge theory with .

In this paper, we extend the analysis given by Cachazo, Seiberg
and Witten to   gauge theories with arbitrary
tree level superpotentials. We survey the phase structures of the
corresponding gauge theories: Which vacua allow us to smooth
transition? As in  case, are there Coulomb vacua in 
gauge theories? We answer these questions in this paper.




In section 2.1, we analyze  gauge theories in terms of
strong gauge coupling approach. Since we deal with 
theories deformed by tree level superpotential, we have to
constrain  Coulomb vacua to the special points where
monopoles or dyons become massless. By using  curve
together with this constraint that will be incorporated to the
effective superpotential and by applying the usual contour
integral formulas heavily, we will derive matrix model curve which
will be used to determine the number of vacua for fixed tree level
superpotential and a generalized Konishi anomaly equation where we
will see the orientifold contribution, peculiar to the gauge
group, which does not vanish even in the semiclassical limit,  for
arbitrary degree of superpotential. In order to produce these, we
are looking for the equations of motion about the Lagrange
multipliers, parameters of  moduli space and the locations of
massless monopoles for given effective superpotential which
depends on these fields, the couplings  and the scale
. Although the discussions of matrix model curve in different
context  have already been studied for special case in
, we extend to the analysis for general case.

In section 2.2, we repeat the analysis given in section 2.1 for
 gauge theories for completeness. We also derive matrix
model curve and a generalized Konishi anomaly equation for
arbitrary degree of superpotential. Remembering the power behavior
of  and  in  curve carefully, we also see the
orientifold contribution, with different strength, which does not
vanish even in the semiclassical limit.

In section 2.3, we discuss a confinement index  and
multiplication maps for  gauge theories. These ideas play
the central role for the study of phase structure. Since we can
construct a multiplication map from  to 
where  is even  integer, this implies that  gauge
theory where the number of colors is odd and  gauge
theory where the number of colors is even are closely related to
each other. There are also a multiplication map from  to
 where  is a positive integer and a
multiplication map from  to  where  is
odd  integer. In checking these multiplication maps, the
properties of first and second kinds of Chebyshev polynomials and
the monopole constraints we will describe are crucial. Moreover it
does not seem to allow one can construct the multiplication map
from  to . Therefore, for  and
 gauge theories, there exist only three  possible
ways to have multiplication maps. The criterion of a confining
phase and a Coulomb phase given in is extended to
 and  gauge theories. Since the special
combination  for  gauge theory, that is dual Coxeter
number, coming from the contribution of unoriented diagram giving
rise to  term in the effective superpotential provides the
number of vacua of  the gauge theories, we can use the criterion
of  case straightforwardly and equivalently.

In section 2.4, we analyze several explicit examples illustrating
what we have discussed in section 2.3. We study examples with
gauge group  for . In particular, 
gauge theory provides four confining vacua by analyzing the matrix
model curve by turning on a superpotential. According to the
scheme of a multiplication map from  to  we
have discussed in section 2.3 and by transforming the
characteristic polynomial with confinement index  and ,
we confirm these vacua are really confining phase. Moreover in
 gauge theory, we can see a smooth transition between
different classical gauge group and multiplication map from
 by looking at the confining phase, based on a map from
 to  described in section 2.3 where 
and .

In section 3.1, as in section 2.1, by restricting 
theories to the special points where monopoles become massless we
discuss   gauge theories with arbitrary tree
level superpotential. we will derive matrix model curve which will
be used to determine the number of vacua for fixed tree level
superpotential and a generalized Konishi anomaly equation where we
will see also the orientifold contribution, peculiar to the
 group, which does not vanish even in the semiclassical
limit,  for arbitrary degree of superpotential. Comparing with the
 gauge theory we have discussed in section 2.1, there
exists exactly same contribution with an extra minus sign. In
order to produce these, we are studying for the equations of
motion about the Lagrange multipliers, parameters of  moduli space
and the locations of massless monopoles for given effective
superpotential.

In section 3.2, we discuss a confinement index and multiplication
maps for  gauge theories similarly. Since we can construct
a multiplication map from  to  where  is
a positive integer, this implies that  gauge theory  and
 gauge theory  are  related to each other. That is
the number of vacua of  gauge theory is exactly the
confinement index  multiplied by those of  gauge theory
Coulomb phase. In doing this, we will use various properties of
Chebyshev polynomials and monopole constraints frequently.

In section 3.3, we analyze several explicit examples describing
what we have discussed in section 3.2. We study examples with
gauge group  for . In particular, the 
gauge theory provides a smooth transition between different
classical gauge groups, based on a map from  to
 described in section 3.2 where  and .


Although our work is based on  completely and there are
not too much originality,  we hope our work is illuminating and
the results we have found newly provide a better understanding of
the structures of vacua of the gauge theories.




 and  gauge theories  



Strong gauge coupling approach: case 







The strong gauge coupling approach was studied in by
using the method of. Now we review it and
extend it to the case where some of  (see ()
for the notation) vanish and to allow the more general
superpotential in which the degree of it can be arbitrary without
any restrictions. Let us consider the superpotential regarded as a
small perturbation of an   gauge theory
 
where  is an adjoint scalar chiral superfield and we denote
its eigenvalues by   that are purely
imaginary values. The degree of the superpotential  is
. Since  is an antisymmetric matrix we can transform
to the following simple form, ( 0 -1   1
0
   ) diag  ( i_1, ,  i_N ).
 



When we replace  with 
, the superpotential becomes the effective
superpotential. We introduce a classical  matrix
 such that 
 for
. Also 
 that are independent. However, for , both
 and 
 can be written as the  of 
. The classical vacua can be obtained by putting all the
eigenvalues of  and  equal to the roots of
. We will take the
degree of superpotential to be  first in which the
 are independent and 
. Then we will
take the degree of superpotential to be arbitrary.

At a generic point on the Coulomb branch of the 
theory, the low energy gauge group is . We study the
vacua in which the perturbation by  ()
remains only  gauge group at low energies, with 
. This happens if the remaining degrees of freedom
become massive for nonzero  due to the condensation of
 mutually local magnetic monopoles or dyons. This
occurs only at points where at  the monopoles are
massless on some particular submanifold . This can be
done by including the  monopole hypermultiplets in the
superpotential. Then
 the exact effective superpotential by adding
(), near a point with  massless monopoles,
is given by
W_eff =2  _l=1 ^N-n 
M_l (u_2r ) q_l q _l + _r=1 ^k+1  g_2r 
u_2r .
 Here  and 
 are the monopole fields and  is
the mass of -th monopole as a function of the . The
variation of  with respect to  and 
 vanishes. However, the variation of it with
respect to  does not lead to the vanishing of 
 and the mass of monopoles should vanish for
 in a supersymmetric vacuum. Therefore the
superpotential in this supersymmetric vacuum becomes
. The masses  are
equal to the periods of some meromorphic one-form over some cycles
of the  hyperelliptic curve.

It is useful and convenient to consider a singular point in the
moduli space where  mutually local monopoles are massless.
Then the  curve of genus  degenerates to a
curve of genus  (See also) 
and it is given by
 
The degeneracy of the above curve can be checked by computing both
 and  at the point  and
 obtaining a zero. The factorization condition ()
can be described and encoded by Lagrange multipliers.
When the degree  of  is equal to ,
the highest  coefficients of  are given in
terms of  as follows: F_2(2n+1) (x) = 1 g_2n+2 ^2  W^ _2n+1 (x)^2
+O (x^2n ), 2k=2n.
 The
superpotential  is known and one should know the 
 vacua or  through (). The relation
() determines  in terms of 
undetermined coefficients coming from . Then
these can be obtained by demanding the existence of a polynomial
 via (). In this case, there exists a
unique solution. We return to the explicit examples illustrating
the mechanism of this in section 2.4.

 Superpotential of degree  less than  

Now we study () when  by introducing the
constraints.


We follow the basic idea of and repeat
the derivations of () and generalize to the arbitrary
degree of superpotential. That is, in the range 
, let us consider the superpotential under these constraints
(),
 
where  and  are Lagrange multipliers imposing the
constraints and . The contour integration
encloses all 's and the factor  is absorbed in the
symbol of  for simplicity. The 's where 
 are the locations of the double roots of 
. The  depends on
. Note that massless monopole points appear in pair
 where . So we denote half of
the 's by .
Moreover we define . Since  is an even function,
if the following constraints are satisfied at  where 
,
 
then they also automatically are satisfied at . Then the
numbers of constraint that we should consider are . Thus
we denote the half of the Lagrange multipliers by
 and  where 
. Due to the fact that the second derivative of 
 with respect to  at 
does not vanish, there are no such higher order terms
 in the effective superpotential
().


The variation of  with respect to  leads to, by the
formula of contour integral,
 
where we used the equation of motion for 
when we replace  with  at .
The last equality
comes from the following relation, together with (),
 
where  is antisymmetric matrix, the odd power terms are
vanishing. Since  for  due to the relation
() and , we arrive at, from
(),
 (Tr 
1 x-_cl  -2 x  )_x=p_i =0,P_2N (x=p_0)=0.
Note the presence of  term which was not present in the
 case. This implies one can get and solve  in terms of
.

As we have used the calculation in (),
the derivative  with respect to  is given by
 
Taking into account (), we can rewrite this result
as,
 
Using (), we have
 
After an integration in , we obtain the following result,
 
where we choose an integration constant to zero. This enables us
to write  with  in terms of  with 
 by requiring the vanishing of negative powers of . The
derivative of  with respect to  is given by
 
where  means the polynomial part of a Laurent series of the
expression inside the bracket. Although  we get
 by minimizing
, we would like to
know the information about  at the minimum by
looking at the field equations.

Next we consider variations of  with respect to ,
 
In the last equation we have used the equation of motion for 
(). In general this integral does not vanish, then
we should have  because the curve does not have more than
cubic roots since  contains a polynomial .
We consider variations of  with respect to ,
 
where we used  at the level of equation of motion.
Multiplying this with  and summing over  where  is
inside the contour of integration we can obtain the following
relation,
 

Let us introduce a new polynomial  defined as
 
This determines the degree of  is equal to  which
is greater than and equal to . Using this new function we
can rewrite () as
 
Since  is a polynomial of degree , we found
the order of  as , so we denote it by
. Thus we have found the order of polynomial 
and therefore the order of integrand in () is like
as . Thus if  it does not
contribute to the integral because the power of  in this region
implies that the Laurent expansion around the origin vanishes. We
can replace the upper value of summation with the infinity.
 
From () we have the relation,
 
As we substitute this relation to (), the 
 terms do not contribute the integral because the
contribution of the Laurent expansion around the origin for the
power of  vanishes, so we can drop those terms. Therefore we
have
 
corresponding to the equation of motion for the matrix model and
the matrix model curve respectively.











Then we get an expected and generalized result,
 
where both  and  are functions of
, then   also a function of . We put the
subscript  in the  in order to emphasize the fact that
this corresponds to the matrix model curve. When , we
reproduce () with . The above relation
determines a polynomial  in terms of 
unknown parameters by assuming the leading coefficient to be
normalized by 1 by assuming that  is known. These parameters
can be obtained from both  and  through
the factorization condition (). Now we move on for the
case of large  next section.


 Superpotential of degree  where  is
arbitrary large 




So far we restricted to the case where the degree of
superpotential, , is less than . Let us extend the
study of previous discussion to general case by allowing a
superpotential of any degree. All the 's are independent
coordinates on a bigger space with appropriate constraints. For
this range of degree of polynomial, we have to consider different
constraints due to the instanton corrections. We denote
 by
capital letter. The quantum mechanical expression corresponding to
 is given by
 
 Quantum mechanically we do have
 










By integrating over  and exponentiating, we get
 
where  is an integration constant that can be determined by the
semiclassical limit :
 
Solving () with respect to ,
 
corresponding to (). Since  is a polynomial in
, () can be used to express  with
 in terms of  with  by imposing the
vanishing of the negative powers of . Let us introduce a new
polynomial whose coefficients are Lagrange multipliers. The
generalized superpotential with these constraints is described as
 
where  is a polynomial of degree  whose
coefficients are regarded as Lagrange multipliers which impose
constraints  with  in terms of  with 
. This expression is a generalization of ().

Now we follow the previous method.
The derivative of  with respect to  leads to
 
Using () we have the relation,
 
and
 
Using these relations we can rewrite () and
simplify as follows:
 
From the massless monopole constraint () the
characteristic function has the following form,
 
Substituting () and () into
(), the  terms do not
contribute to integral as we have done before, then one gets the
coupling  as follows:
 
As in previous analysis, by multiplying  and summing
over , we will get
 
Finally we obtain an expected relation of equations of motion for
the general order tree level superpotential case,
 
if the matrix model curve is given by
 

When  (no massless monopoles),
. When the degree of
superpotential is equal to , in other words, , then
.
In particular, for ,  is a constant
and .
The above  is known up to a polynomial   of
degree : .

 A generalized Konishi anomaly 





Now we are ready to study for a derivation of the generalized
Konishi anomaly equation based on the results of previous section.
As in, we restrict to the case with 

 and assume that the degree of
superpotential  is less than . By substituting
() into () we can write the derivative
of  superpotential 



 
where we varied  with respect to  rather than
 and used the result of . Note that 
. Using this equation, one obtains the
following relation,
 
where when we change the summation index from  to , the only
odd terms appear because effectively the product of 
and  does contribute only under  that
condition. The even terms do not contribute. Here  is outside
the contour of integration.



In order to compute the above expression we recognize that the
following factor can be written as, by simple manipulation between
the property of the trace we have seen before,
) 
Thus we can write () as
 
As in the case of, we can rewrite outside contour
integral in terms of two parts as follows:
 
where  and  are small contour around  and 
respectively. Thus the first term in () (corresponding to the
second term in  of) can be written as
 
where the first term was obtained by the method done previously
and in the last equality we used () and
 
The second term was calculated at the poles.






The crucial difference between  case and  case comes
from the second term of () (corresponding to the first
term in  of), which vanishes in  case. Let
us write it as, after an integration over ,
 
where once again we substituted () into
(). Therefore we obtain Tr 
W^ (_cl ) z-_cl  =Tr 1 z-_cl  
(W^ (z)- y_m(z)
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^4^4N-4   
)-2W^ (z) z . 








Remember that Tr 1 z-_cl  =
(P_2N (z) z^2 )^  P_2N (z) z^2  
+2 z . Then the above expression can be written
as Tr 1 z-_cl  
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^4^4N-4    & = &
((P_2N (z) z^2 )^  P_2N (z) z^2  
+2 z )
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^4^4N-4    

& = & Tr 1 z- 
2 z  +2 z 
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^4^4N-4   .

 Taking into account the relation,
 
we can write  as follows:
 
which is the generalized Konishi anomaly equation for 
case. The resolvent of the matrix model  is related to
.













Strong gauge coupling approach: case 



As in  case, the perturbed superpotential we are
considering  is given by () and the antisymmetric
matrix takes the form
( 0 -1   1 0
   ) diag  ( i_1, ,  i_N ,0).

Note that 0 element in the above. The corresponding
 curve is characterized by (See also)
 
All the arguments discussed before hold for  case and
the constraints become
 
Note the behavior of  term which is  linear in .

The variation of  with respect to  leads to
 
where we used the equation of motion for  when we replace
 with  at . Since
 due to the relation () and
, we arrive at, from (),
(Tr  1 x- -1 x 
)_x=p_i =0, P_2N (x=p_0)=0.
Note the
presence of  term which was not present in the  case
and also the coefficient 1 is different from 2 in the case of
 we have considered before. The properties of the
characteristic function  hold. The variation of
 with respect to  can be obtained and the expression
looks similar except the power of  and . That is,
 
together with the equation of motion for 
(). This implies the vanishing of  since
the integration over  does not vanish in general, according to
the same reason as the one in  case. The variation of
 with respect to  can be done and from the
expression for  we can construct . By
considering the correct change of the upper bound in the summation
we arrive at the same expression (). The contribution
of the terms  does not appear in the
evaluation of an integration and therefore one obtains
 
corresponding to the equation of motion for the matrix model and
the matrix model curve respectively. Then we get a generalized
result,
 
where both  and  are functions of
, then   also a function of .


 Superpotential of degree  where  is
arbitrary large 





Quantum mechanically we  have
 
Solving this with respect to , one gets, with different
power behavior in the second term below,
 
Let us introduce a new polynomial whose coefficients are Lagrange
multipliers as usual. The superpotential with these constraints is
described as
 
where  is a polynomial of degree  whose
coefficients are regarded as Lagrange multipliers which impose
constraints  with  in terms of  with 
.

The derivative of  with respect to  leads to
 
Therefore, we have the relation,
 
and
 
Using these relations we can rewrite () as
follows,
 
From the massless monopole constraint () we have the
relation,
 
Finally we obtain an expected relation of equations of motion for
the general order tree level superpotential case,
 
if the matrix model curve is given by
 
When  (no massless monopoles),
. When the degree of
superpotential is equal to , in other words, , then
.
In particular, for ,  is a constant
and .

 A generalized Konishi anomaly 





Now we are ready to study for a derivation of the generalized
Konishi anomaly equation. According to the same change of
integration done in previous discussion,  
 is given by &&Tr 1 z-_cl   ( _z_in  
zQ_2k-2n (x)P_2N (x) xH_2N-2n-2 (x)(x^2-z^2) dx-
_C_z +C_-z  
zQ_2k-2n (x)P_2N (x) xH_2N-2n-2 (x)(x^2-z^2) dx ) 

&& = Tr 1 z-_cl   (W^ (z)-
y_m(z) P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^2^4N-2   
), where in the last equality we used () and
 
Let us write it as, after an integration over ,
 
where once again we used () and ().
Note that the coefficient 1 appears in this case. Therefore we
obtain Tr 
W^ (_cl ) z-_cl  =Tr 1 z-_cl  
(W^ (z)- y_m(z)
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^2^4N-2   
)-W^ (z) z . Remember that Tr 1 z-_cl  =
(P_2N (z) z )^  P_2N (z) z  
+1 z .
Then the above expression can be written
as Tr 1 z-_cl  
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^2^4N-2    & = &
((P_2N (z) z )^  P_2N (z) z  
+1 z )
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^2^4N-2    

& = & Tr 1 z- 
1 z  +1 z 
P_2N (z) P_2N ^2(z)-4z^2^4N-2   .

 We can summarize as follows,
 
This is the generalized Konishi anomaly equation for 
case.




The multiplication map and the confinement index 


In this subsection, we discuss some important property of 
  gauge theories for surveying phase structure. As
already discussed, this theory is  theory deformed by
tree level superpotential () with symmetry breaking
pattern,
 

At first let us review some notations and ideas used in
. The matrix model curve , which have already
been derived from the strong gauge coupling approach, with
, is characterized by ()
 
and  plays an important role for understanding the various phase
structures or the effective superpotential of corresponding gauge
theories. At most, there are  branch cuts on the curve
. Let us define  as a cycle surrounding the -th
cut and  as a cycle connecting two infinities of the curve
 through -th cut. These cycles are simplectic pair that
intersect each other with the intersection number,
. Since the
polynomial   is an even function in , this Riemann
surface  has  identification, which is specific
to  cases. As in, let us introduce the two
operators,
  The
period integrals of these operators have a very nice
interpretation. At first, the period integrals of  lead to
 
where  are glueball superfields of the gauge groups 
and  in the above, and  is the prepotential of
the gauge theory. The others are period integrals of ,
 
where we defined  and
introduced  and the real number  is written
as the sum of a period of  around the other compact cycle
 which is related to the noncompact cycle , according to
the convention of.





Next let us review the effective superpotential by using these
quantities. In, the perturbative analysis of effective
superpotential for  gauge theory was discussed from purely
field theory viewpoint. The contribution comes from only 
 and  graphs. The explicit representation of the
effective superpotential is given by 
The first term comes from  contribution and the second
term comes from  contribution. Note that along the
line of, we introduced a real number  and by
including this the theta angle is shifted. For  gauge
theories, by using 't Hooft loop and Wilson loop, the effect of
 was discussed. For any given , there are two kinds of
vacua, namely the confining vacua and the Coulomb vacua. The
criterion of these vacua is quite simple. If both  and 
have a common divisor, then the vacua are confining vacua. The
most greatest common divisor is called a confinement index. If
there is no common divisor between them and the vacuum does not
have a confinement, then it is called Coulomb vacua: for example,
those vacua in which any of the  is 1.

Since the number of vacua of  gauge theories is 
that is the dual Coxeter number of the group, total number of
vacua is given by . If we
introduce a new notations  and
, we can discuss the counting of vacua in parallel
way as  case.



These low energy vacua are characterized by some integers
 with . We can
easily extend the criterion of  gauge theories to our
 gauge theories. If both  and 
 have a common divisor, the vacua are confining vacua.
If not, those are Coulomb vacua.

In to probe confinement, 
the center of , , was used. 
The transformation property of some representation 
under the center was important for studying Wilson loop . 
How about  gauge theories? Since the centers 
of  gauge theories are  rather than , 
it seems that the 
confinement index of the theories can be smaller. When 
we consider some representation 
 as a tensor product of  copies of 
the defining representation, for some , 
there exist two types of
transformation under the center. When the  is even, it is 
invariant under the  while  
it transforms by  when the  is odd. 
Thus Wilson loop  in  
is defined mod 2 and  has no area law (the theory is 
completely unconfining). 
Naively if one proceeds the discussion of, 
one regards the confinement index  
in the notation of as the 
greatest common divisor of three quantities 
2,  and . When , 
there exists  only confining phase, in other words, 
all phases are confining (For  which is trivial, 
the theory is
completely unconfining). This result seems to be unnatural because
as we will see later, we explicitly present  examples for
phase that can not be obtained by multiplication map. One can 
interpret this phase as Coulom phase from the 
 results. So the definition of 
confinement index  above is not appropriate and from another 
mechanism ( For  gauge theory, there exist 

 vacua which can be labeled by  with . 
It is natural that one can distinguish each vacuum 
by the type of confinement as in  case. In other 
words in each vacuum  the loop order parameter
 are 
unconfined where  is 'tHooft loop. 
Which values of  and  are valid for the -th 
vacuum? 


When we consider the Wilson loop we have only 
to consider the center because of electric screening explained 
in. Since the center is  
the Wilson loop  seems to have no area law. Thus to 
distinguish the vacua by the type of confinement, it is necessary 
to consider the case with . We conjecture 
that in the -th vacuum, the  are unconfined and 
from the effect of magnetic screening 
 is unconfined. )  it allows us to introduce the right definition 
of confinment index. 

Thus we claim that for  gauge group breaking into 
, the confinement index 
  
is nothing but the greatest common divisor of  and 
 which is exactly the same as multiplication map index . 
As we will see in the various examples of 
section 2.4, this definition is consistent with 
the results of explicit calculation for given gauge theories and all the 
examples we consider support our claim.









  case 


For any positive integer , the construction maps vacua of the
 theory with a given superpotential  to vacua of the
 theory with the same  superpotential. All the
vacua of  with confinement index  can be obtained
from the Coulomb vacua of  under the multiplication map.

Let us assume that  satisfies massless monopole
constraint with some renormalization scale , as we have
seen before () and (),
 
where we put  and have the symmetry breaking pattern
 in the
semiclassical limit. The numbers  and  should satisfy
. By using Chebyshev polynomials
(These Chebyshev polynomials  and 
 are slightly different from  and 
used in. These polynomials have the relation,
 and 
. )  of the first kind  of degree 
and the second kind  of degree 
, we can construct the solution for the massless monopole
constraint of  with the breaking pattern
, motivated by
 
where  is a -th root of unity, i.e. . One
can check that in the right hand side, the argument of the first
kind Chebyshev polynomial has a degree , by the
definition of the first kind Chebyshev polynomial and the right
hand side has a factor , therefore it leads to a polynomial
of degree   totally. It is right to write the left hand
side as  which agrees with the number of order in
 in the right hand side. The power of  for the argument of
Chebychev polynomial was fixed by the power of  which is equal to
. The power of   in front of the Chebyshev polynomial
can be fixed by the dimension consideration of both sides. The
right side should contain  which is equal to
 where the first term come from the power of  and
the second one should be the power of . Also note that the
same  term appears in the denominator of the argument of
Chebyshev polynomial.  Since Chebyshev polynomials have useful
relation, T ^2_K(x)-1=(x^2-1)U ^2_K-1 (x), we can confirm that () really satisfies the
massless monopole constraint of  gauge theories.

For the simplicity of equations, let us define 

x P_2N (x) 2x^2
^2N-2  . Then one can easily check that
 
In the fourth equality we used the identification
.
This implies that the following relations
P_2KN-2K+2 (x)& = &2^K  x^2 ^2KN-2K T _K (P_2N (x) 
2x^2 ^2N-2   ), 

F _2(2n+1) (x) & = & F_2(2n+1) (x),  

H_(2N-2)K-2n (x) & = &
H_2N-2n-2 (x)^-1 ^2(K-1)(N-1) U _K-1 (P_2N (x)  2x^2 ^2N-2   )
satisfy the solution of P_2KN-2K+2 ^2(x) -4x^4
^4NK-4K  = x^2
 H_(2N-2)K-2n ^2(x)  F _2(2n+1) (x).
Since , the
vacua constructed this way for the  theory have the
same  superpotential as the vacua of the  theory. For
a superpotential , the  theory has a finite number
of vacua with given . For  different values of the 
parameter , that is, _0^4N-4 =^2
^4N-4  there exists  vacua.







Next we consider the multiplication map of  we introduced,
 
Remember that the Seiberg-Witten differential has the form of d_SW = x d x  P_2N ^2(x)-4x^4^4N-4   
(P_2N ^ (x) - 2 x  P_2N (x) ). By using () we obtain the following relations,
 
In the last equality we used the fact that . That is,
. By using the property between the first
kind Chebyshev and the second kind of Chebyshev and changing the
derivative of the former with respect to the argument into the
confinement index  multiplied by the latter, the derivative of
 with respect to  is given by
 
From these two relations () and (),  we
compute the first term of (),
 
The second and third terms of () become
 

Thus combining () with (), we obtain the
multiplication map of , ,
  What does this
mean? For the physical meaning, we consider the integral of 
around origin,
 
This equation implies that under the multiplication map 
does not simply multiply by . The special combination
 have simple multiplication by . This combination is
natural for  gauge theory because in the effective
superpotential () unoriented diagram gives  factor.

If we define a new operator  that corresponds to flux one
form on Riemann surface  as
, we have
more simple relation,
  After all we can understand that
the multiplication map multiplies both  and  by a
common  . Since these quantities have common devisor  this
operation generates only confining vacua. Let us denote adjoint
chiral superfield as  in the  gauge theory. Then
through the multiplication map we constructed the following
quantum operator in the  gauge theory can be
obtained by multiplying the confinement index  by the
corresponding operator in the  gauge theory as follows:
 Tr  1 x- 
-2 x  = K (Tr 
1 x-_0  -2 x  ) As in  case, all the vacua in  with
confinement index  arise in this way from the  Coulomb
vacua. This can be shown by counting the number of vacua. The
multiplication map has  that is -th root of unity. So
confining vacua constructed by this map have  times as many
vacua as Coulomb vacua. Note that 
.

Since these vacua have a confinement index , the three
quantities  ,  and
 have
greatest common divisor . As in, we can represent
such  with  as
. Since there exist  choices of ,
the number of  vacua with confinement index  is
indeed  times the corresponding number of  Coulomb
vacua. Thus we constructed all confining vacua with confinement
index  from this map explicitly.












  case 


To begin with let us note some property of Chebyshev polynomial
,
  If the number  is odd, then 
 is a odd polynomial in . So the function 
 is an even polynomial in . With this in mind let us
consider the multiplication map of  gauge theory. By
assumption, we have the characteristic function  that
satisfies the massless monopole constraint (),
 
and have the breaking pattern 
, where . By using this
solution we can construct a new solution of  with
breaking pattern  in
the semiclassical limit,
 
where  is an odd number, so  is an even number. One
can check that in the right hand side, the argument of the first
kind Chebyshev polynomial has a degree  in , by the
definition of the first kind Chebyshev polynomial and the right
hand side has a factor , therefore it leads to a polynomial of
degree  totally. It is right to write the left hand
side as  which agrees with the number of order in
  in the right hand side. The power of  for the argument
of Chebychev polynomial was fixed by the power of  which is
equal to . The power of   in front of the Chebyshev
polynomial can be fixed by the dimension consideration of both
sides. The right hand side should contain  which is
equal to  where the first term comes from the power of
 and the second one should be the power of . Also note
that the same  term appears in the denominator of  the
argument of Chebyshev polynomial.

Let us confirm that this function () indeed
satisfies the massless monopole constraint of . Using
the properties we mentioned, one obtains
  One can easily write , from the
equation (), as follows:
 T_K (x) =
^K-1 ^(K-1)(2N-1)  U _K-1 (x )P_2N ^2(x)-4x^2^4N-2 _0 .
By using the properties of Chebyshev polynomials, the
derivative of  with respect to  can be
summarized by P^ _2KN-K+1 (x) & = & 2^K
^2KN-2K T _K (x )+^K-1 ^(K-1)(2N-1) 
P_2N ^ (x)KU _K-1 (x ) 

&-& 1 x ^K-1  ^(K-1)(2N-1) P_2N (x)KU _K-1 (x ). Now it is straightforward to
compute the various quantities in  and we arrive at and
obtain the multiplication map of ,
 
From this result we obtain
 
The following quantum operator in the  gauge theory
can be obtained by multiplying the confinement index  by the
corresponding operator in the  gauge theory
 Tr  1 x- 
-1 x  = K (Tr 
1 x-_0  -1 x  ). 
 From  to   



Are there any multiplication map from  to ?
Conversely from  to  ? We can construct the
multiplication map only from  to  where
. If the number  is even,  is an
even function. Let us consider
 
One can check that in the right hand side, the argument of the
first kind Chebyshev polynomial has a degree , by the
definition of the first kind Chebyshev polynomial and the right
hand side has a factor , therefore it leads to a polynomial
of degree   totally. It is right to write the left hand
side as  which agrees with the number of order in
 in the right hand side. The power of  for the argument of
Chebychev polynomial was fixed by the power of  which is equal
to . The power of   in front of the Chebyshev
polynomial can be fixed by the dimension consideration of both
sides. The right hand side should contain  which is
equal to  where the first term comes from the power of
 and the second one should be the power of . Also note
that the same  term appears in the denominator of  the
argument of Chebyshev polynomial. We can check that this
polynomial satisfies the massless monopole constraint of
 explicitly. As we did before
 
This implies the identification
 
which lead to the solution of
 
As in previous case since
 the vacua constructed
this way for the  theory have the same 
superpotential as the vacua of the  theory.











Examples  



In this subsection we will deal with and analyze the explicit
examples which describe the discussions we did, with rank ,
namely  gauge group is broken to .
After the explanation for general  and  gauge
theories we will analyze the examples with gauge group  for
. As discussed in multiplication map we can construct
a map from  to . So when we survey the confining
phase we should note that multiplication map. Then we will
consider  both  and  in this section. Through
these examples we will see that there exists a smooth
interpolation between different pairs .



 case 


At first we study moduli space for   gauge
theories that is  theories deformed by tree level
superpotential. For the simplicity we consider the special case
, then the superpotential is
   theory deformed this potential
only has unbroken supersymmetry on submanifolds of the Coulomb
branch, where there are additional massless monopoles or dyons.
Then we want to find a solution of massless monopole constraint
() with ,
 
The   gauge theory whose Coulomb branch was
described by this hyperelliptic curve and the -th order
polynomial  parametrizes the point in the moduli space.
This point is denoted by the  eigenvalues of the matrix .
To get , this  theory should have 
massless magnetic monopoles therefore the polynomial
() should have  double roots. Since
 depends on the  complex parameters, the subspace
on which  has  double
roots is two-dimensional. There exist  double roots in the
first factor and  double roots in the second factor.
Different values of  and  correspond to different
branches. The right hand side of () has the factor
. To have a factor  in the left hand side, the constant
term in  must be zero, that is,
 
Thus we obtain the relation . Taking
into account this relation, we can rewrite the massless monopole
constraint () as
 
where  and . Equivalently it
leads to the following factorization problem
  where the subscripts of the polynomials denote
their degrees, respectively. These equations are useful for the
later discussion of  the relation between  case with
 case.

From the first two equations () we obtain
 
This is the relation we will use below for finding the solutions.
Then we will study the semiclassical limit . We
would like to describe for each branch of the moduli space with
 and . Then we break the  supersymmetry to
 supersymmetry by turning on a tree level
superpotential. Since , the superpotential must have at least
three critical points and we consider the case of a quartic
superpotential.

As in we introduce the matrix model curve, which give
the same Riemann surface  that appeared in the matrix model
context,
 
and one writes this as
 
Since , the left hand side is a 6-th order
polynomial and this determines  and hence
determines  up to a constant. As already discussed in
 from the coefficient of  in  we can find
.



 case 


We can deal with  gauge theories in the same way as
 gauge theories. We consider the same tree level
superpotential () and massless monopole constraint
() with ,
 

The matrix model curve is
determined from
 the solution of this factorization problem as follows:
 
Now we are ready to deal with
the explicit examples.


  case 


The first example we consider is a  gauge theory.
We are considering the  case and . The
characteristic function  can be represented as
  This is a solution for
massless monopole constraint (). In this case
massless monopole constraint, the factorization problem, is
trivial since we do not need to have double roots at all and by
turning on the quartic superpotential it leads to matrix model
curve, according to ()
 
From this curve, we can determine the tree level superpotential
and a deformed function  as follow,
 
Then there is only one vacuum for a given  that
determines  through the above relation. In the semiclassical
limit , the characteristic function is independent
of  and becomes . So in this vacuum,
the gauge group  breaks into .


  case 


The next example is a  gauge theory. As in
previous example, the massless monopole constraint is trivial
since we do not need to consider double roots at all. The
characteristic function  is given by
  From this, we obtain the
matrix model curve, by turning on the quartic superpotential
 
There is only one vacuum for given  that
determines . The different point compared to   case is
the fact that the sum of glueball superfield is different. As we
can see in the above, the function  does not have 
dependence, therefore the expectation value of glueball superfield
is zero, . In the semiclassical limit, 
, which shows that the gauge group breaks as
.






  case 


The third example is a  gauge theory which is
more interesting. The massless monopole constraint for this case
is given by
 
If we parametrize , the
equation () becomes
 
From this equation, the subspace with a massless monopole can be
determined by searching for points where  has a double roots
and  we find the relation as follows, by looking at the inside of
the bracket in the left hand side and requiring it be a complete
square,
  where
 is -th root of unity. Thus we have a solution for
massless monopole constraint,
  In the classical limit 
, then the gauge group  break to
. The matrix model curve by turning on a
superpotential which makes a system to put at the point  in
the  moduli space  is given by
 
These four vacua are confining phase because we can construct
multiplication map from  by  where we denote as
. According to the analysis of
(),  becomes 6 when  and  and
the characteristic function  is given by, where 
,
 
Then if we choose , one gets
 
which we have found before  and we used the fact that both
 and  are -th roots of unity.

Until now we considered confining vacua only. Are there other
vacua in  gauge theory? We can easily see Coulomb vacua for
this case as in ,  gauge theories. If we put
 and , then the massless monopole
constraint becomes
  From this equation we can obtain the solution,
 where  is -th root of
unity. In the semiclassical limit, , which
shows that the gauge group breaks into 
. Thus the matrix model curve is given by
 
Then there are two vacua for given superpotential .





















































































  case 


Next example is a  gauge theory which is first
example for smooth transition between vacua with different unbroken
gauge groups. The massless monopole constraint for this case
is given by
 
If we appropriately parametrize ,  and ,
the equation () becomes
 
The solutions of this equation are given by
 
where  is -th root of unity. In this case we can take
two semiclassical limits with :

1. Fixed A: Since  and , the characteristic
function . Therefore  is broken to
. This phase is a Coulomb phase because the
numbers  and  that come from unbroken
gauge groups have no common divisor.

2.  with fixed 
: Since  and ,
. Therefore  is broken to
. As previous limit, we have no common divisor
of  and . Therefore this phase is a
Coulomb phase also. After all we have obtained smooth transition
within Coulomb phase.

From the solutions () we find the corresponding
matrix model curve as follows:
 
Next we count the number of vacua for fixed superpotential,
. How many vacua do we have for this
fixed superpotential? From the above result of 
we can represent  as
 
We evaluate this equation under the two semiclassical limit  and  discussed above.

1. In this limit since  we have two functions  for each .
 Therefore we have two vacua. On the other hand, since the unbroken gauge group
  is  under this limit, the number of vacua is 
.
  This number is equal to the one derived from potential.

2. In this limit since 
, we have three
functions . Thus there are three vacua. On the other hand,
 we can count the number of vacua from gauge group. In this limit since the
 unbroken gauge group is  the number of vacua is 
,
 which is the same number as the one from potential.









  case 


At last we study the most interesting example .
We are looking for the subspace of the  gauge theory
with  monopoles. In this gauge theory since
, we have four branches ,  and
, . The four double roots of the  curve
are distributed between the two factors in this region.

1. Coulomb branch with  or  

By introducing  we can deal with these two cases
in the same way, that is, simultaneously. Taking into account the
characteristic function of degree 8,  is an even function,
we can parametrize points where monopoles are massless as
 and . The solutions of
equations () or () are given by
 
Then we find the corresponding matrix model curve as follows:
 
from which we can see the tree level superpotential and the
deformation function 
 
From the coefficient of  in , we find 
. There are two semiclassical limits with 
,

1. Fixed : The characteristic function behaves 
. Therefore the gauge group  is broken to
.

2.  with fixed 
: The characteristic function becomes 
, Therefore  is broken to .

These results represent two distinct semiclassical
limits in the same moduli space corresponding to different gauge
groups. By changing parameter continuously one can freely transit
from  to . On the other hand,
the confining  vacua below can not make such a
transformation because there are no confining 
vacua.




At last we count the number of vacua for fixed tree level
superpotential, . From the previous
result of  we can represent  as
 
in this branch. We evaluate this equation under the
two semiclassical limit  and  discussed above.

1. In this limit since  we have two functions
 for each . Thus we have two vacua. As we will see
below, we have two vacua in confining phase that have the same
gauge group . Thus all the vacua with this gauge
group are four vacua. On the other hand since the gauge group is
 under this limit, the number of vacua is
. This number is equal to the
one derived from superpotential analysis.

2. In this limit since
, taking
into account for  we have four functions . In other
words we have four vacua for each potential. This number is equal
to the one derived from the gauge group , i.e.
.




2. Confining branch  or   

Next we study the remaining two cases 
and . As in previous examples we introduce . We
can easily obtain a solution for massless monopole constraint,
 
Then the matrix model curve is given by
 
Since the coefficient in front of  in  is zero, the
expectation value of the sum of glueball superfield is zero.

In the semiclassical limit , the characteristic
function becomes , which means that
 breaks to . This breaking pattern has
already appeared. However in this case, the phase is a confining
phase, which is different from the former.

This solution we have just described is a confining phase because
we can construct a multiplication map from  to  by
 where we denote as . According
to the analysis of (),  for
. Plugging these values into (), one
gets
 
where  is a 4-th root of unity. If we identify  with
 and taking the  here as the minus of  in
() this equation becomes exactly the solution of
(). Thus this vacuum is a confining phase.

So far we have seen the multiplication maps from  to
 and from  to  where the former is an example
of the vacua  of  gauge theory from  theory
while the latter is an example of the vacua  of 
gauge theory where  is even from  theory. Then it is
natural to consider whether there exists the multiplication map
from  to  where  is odd. For example,
when  and , then the vacua of  gauge theory has
the same superpotential as those of  theory. Therefore we
expect that there exists a solution that is a confining phase from
the explicit multiplication map from  to  by 
where we denote as . Although we
have considered a couple of examples, it would be interesting to
study the possible confining vacua for each general  and 
systematically.

One might ask whether one can construct the multiplication map
from  to . From the experience we have learned
from the section 2.3, one can think of 
 as our characteristic
function . The reason for linear behavior of  is
that as we remember the curve for  gauge theory contains
the  in  term so when we make  to be square,
we have to have  term. Moreover the  behavior of the
first kind Chebyshev polynomial is  necessary to require that
 gauge theory behave like  in the  term and from
the relation of first kind Chebyshev and second kind Chebyshev.
However, this candidate for the characteristic polynomial has a
degree of  which is odd, contrary to the fact that in
our  theory, the degree of polynomial should be even.
From this naive counting, it does not seem to allow one can
construct the multiplication map from  to .
Therefore, for  and  gauge theories, there exist
only three possible ways to have multiplication maps.





 gauge theory 



Strong gauge coupling approach  







Let us study the superpotential considered as a small perturbation
of an   gauge theory. The
superpotential is given by () and  is an
adjoint scalar chiral superfield and one can transform as follows:
( 1 0   0 -1
   ) diag  ( i_1, ,  i_N ).





Note that  the trace of odd power of  is zero. We study the
vacua in which the perturbation by  ()
remains only  gauge group at low energies with 
. If the remaining degrees of freedom become massive for 
 due to the condensation of  mutually local
magnetic monopoles, then the exact effective superpotential can be
written as W_eff =2  _l=1 ^N-n  M_l (u_2r )
q_l q _l + _r=1 ^k+1  g_2r  u_2r 
 similar to the one in  case.
The mass of monopoles
should vanish for  in a supersymmetric
vacuum.

We consider a singular point in the moduli space where 
mutually local monopoles are massless. We can represent massless
monopole constraint as,
 
where we define


and
H_2N-2n (x)=

^N-n _i=1 (x^2-p_i^2), F_2(2n+1) (x)
=^2n+1 _i=1 (x^2-q_i^2).

The reason for introducing a polynomial 
rather than  is that one can treat a curve
() in a symmetric way and one can factorize it.
The function  is a polynomial in  of degree
 giving  double roots and the function
 is a polynomial in  of degree . These
are even functions in  and depend on only . The
characteristic function  becomes
 
When the degree  of  is equal to ,
the highest  coefficients of  are given in
terms of  and the expression
() is the same.

 Superpotential of degree  less than  

We describe the superpotential when the degree of ,
 is greater than  with tree level superpotential
(), namely  case. Let us
consider the superpotential under these constraints,
  where  and  are Lagrange multipliers
and  as we have considered in  case.
The convention of an assignment of  is different from
the one in. The 's are the locations of the
double roots of . The massless
monopoles occur in pair  and also both the expression
 at  and its
derivative with respect to  at  are vanishing since
 is an even function of . The half of the Lagrange
multipliers  are not independent. Totally the number of constraint
is .

The variation of  with respect to  leads to
  where we exploited the equation of motion for
 and the last equality comes from the following relation,
 
Since  due to the relation
() and , we arrive at (Tr  1 x- +2 x  )_x=p_i =0.
Notice that the presence of  with positive sign is
different from the one  for  case and  for
 case.




























All the property of the characteristic function  for
the previous cases hold for  case also. We do not write
them explicitly here. Next we consider the variations of 
with respect to ,
 
where in the last equality we used the equation of motion for
 (). In general, this integral does not
vanish, then we have  based on the same reason about the
structure of the algebraic curve in previous cases. Let us
consider variations with respect to ,
 
where we used  at the level of equation of motion and we
express the explicit form for  in terms of
. Multiplying this with  and summing over
, we can obtain the following relation,
 

Let us introduce a new polynomial  defined as
 
Using this new function we can rewrite () as
 
Since  is a polynomial of degree ,  the
order of  is , so we denote it by . Thus
we have found the order of polynomial  and the order of
integrand in () behaves like as 
. Thus if  it does not contribute to the
integral since the Laurent expansion around the origin vanishes.
We can replace the upper value of summation to infinity.
 
From () one can write,
 
By substituting this relation to (), the 
 terms do not contribute the integral, so we can
drop those terms.

Therefore we have
 
corresponding to the equation of motion and the curve in the
matrix model context. Then we get the final result
 
where both  and  are functions of
, then  is also a function of . When ,
we reproduce () with . The above relation
determines a polynomial  in terms of 
unknown parameters by assuming the leading coefficient to be
normalized by 1 by assuming that  is known.




















 Superpotential of degree  where  is
arbitrary large 




Let us extend the study of previous discussion to the general case
without imposing the constraint on the degree of superpotential.
As before, we denote 
. The corresponding quantum expression can be
written as
 
and also  quantum mechanically this can be given by
 
Note in order to make the degree of the expression  inside of the
log as , we inserted the last term.









By integrating and exponentiating, one gets
 
where  is an integration constant determined by the
semiclassical limit :
 
Solving () with respect to , we get
 
This looks similar to the previous expression. The power behavior
of  and  in the second term  is different.
 Since  is a polynomial in , the relation
() can be used to express  with 
in terms of  with  by imposing the vanishing of
the negative powers of .

Let us introduce a new polynomial whose coefficients are Lagrange
multipliers. The superpotential with these constraints is
described as
 
Here  is a polynomial of degree  whose
coefficients are regarded as Lagrange multipliers which impose
constraints  with  in terms of  with 
. The derivative of  with respect to 
leads to
 
Using () we have the relation,
 
and
 
Using these relations we can rewrite () as
follows:
 
From the massless monopole constraint () we have
the relation,
 
Substituting () and ()
 into (), the
  terms do not contribute to integral then
we get an expression for the coupling 
 

As in previous analysis, we define a new polynomial  in
() and we see
 
if the matrix model curve is given by
 

When  (no massless monopoles),
. When the degree of
superpotential is equal to , in other words, , then
. In
particular, for , y^2_m(x)= F_4N+2 (x) = x^-2 
( B^2_2N+2 (x)-4^4N+4  ).
 









 A generalized Konishi anomaly 





Now we are ready to study the generalized Konishi anomaly
equation. As in, we restrict to the case with

 and assume that the degree of
superpotential is less than . One can write
 
Using this equation we have following relations,
 
where  is outside the contour of integration.


Using () we can write this factor as
 
Thus we can write () as
 
As in the case we can rewrite the contour of the
integral,
 
where  and  are small contour around  and 
respectively. Thus the first term in () can be
rewritten as
 
in the last equality we used () and
 
We now make an integration over 
 
where we put the positive sign explicitly in order to compare with
the ones in previous cases.









Remember that Tr 1 z-_cl  = (z^2
P_2N (z))^  z^2 P_2N (z)  -2 z . Then the above expression can be written as Tr 1 z-_cl    z^2
P_2N (z) B_2N+2 ^2(z)-4^4N+4    & = &
((z^2 P_2N (z))^  z^2 P_2N (z) 
-2 z )
z^2 P_2N (z) B_2N+2 ^2(z)-4^4N+4    

& = & Tr 1 z- 
+2 z  -2 z  z^2
P_2N (z) B^2_2N+2 (z)-4z^4^4N+4   .

Taking into account the relation,
 
one can summarize as follows,
 
This is the generalized Konishi anomaly equation for 
case.












The multiplication map and the confinement index 


Although in this subsection, we discuss  gauge theories,
the matrix model curve which derived in  is the same
as  case (). Thus we can use the same
notations and ideas introduced in  case. The symmetry
breaking pattern is given by
 
The  difference between  case and  case is the
contribution of unoriented diagram to the effective
superpotential,
 
Thus if we introduce  and ,
 we can study the phase structure in the same way as  case.
 The criterion of
 confinement is that if three objects
 ,  and  have common
 divisor,
 the vacua are confining vacua, if not, it is called Coulomb vacua.









For  case we can construct multiplication map in the same
way as  and  cases. By assumption we have the
characteristic function  that satisfies the following
massless monopole constraint,
 
By using Chebyshev polynomial, let us consider  a solution of
 gauge theory as
 
where we introduce
x  =
x^2P_2N (x) 2^2 ^2N+2  +1
 and
. One can check that in the right hand side of
(), the argument  of the first kind
Chebyshev polynomial has a degree , by the definition of
the first kind Chebyshev polynomial and the right hand side has a
factor , therefore it leads to a polynomial of degree
 totally. It is right to write the left hand side as
 which agrees with the number of order  in  in
the right hand side. The power of  for the  of
Chebychev polynomial was fixed by the power of  which is equal
to . The power of   in front of the Chebyshev
polynomial can be fixed by the dimension consideration of both
sides. The right hand side should contain  which is
equal to  where the first term comes from the power
of  and the second one should be the power of . Also note
that the same  term appears in the denominator of  the
argument of Chebyshev polynomial. Contrary to the previous
 or  cases, the curve contains  as
well as . In order to get the correct number of vacua
of  gauge theory, it is very important to know the
right behavior of  and  in . The last
term in () is included since the monopole constraint
for  case has an extra term in the left hand side,
contrary to the  or  cases. Let us check that
() is indeed a solution of the massless monopole
constraint  of  gauge theory. By introducing a new
function , we
can see the following relations from the solution ().
Then one can construct
 
In the fourth equality we used the identification
. In other words, the
relations
P_2KN+2K-2 (x) & = &
2^2K ^2KN+2K  x^2 T _K
(x^2P_2N (x) 2^2 ^2N+2  +1 )-
2^2KN+2K  x^2 , 

F _2(2n+1) (x) & = & F_2(2n+1) (x), 

H_K(2N-2)-2n (x) & = & ^-2 ^2(K-1)(N+1) 
H_2N-2n (x)U _K-1 (x^2P_2N (x) 2^2
^2N+2  +1)
satisfy
(
x^2P_2KN+2K-2 (x)+2^2NK+2K  )^2-4
^4NK+4K =x^2H_K(2N-2)-2n ^2(x)F _2(2n+2) (x).
As in  or  case, since
, the vacua constructed
this way for the  theory have the same 
superpotential as the vacua of the  theory.







Next we consider the multiplication map of  ,
 
The Seiberg-Witten differential is given by d
_SW =x d x B_2N+2 ^ (x) B^2_2N+2 (x)-
4^4N+4   .  By using the equation ()
we have a function  after the map, which denoted as
. Let us
consider
  The derivative of  with respect
to  leads to
 
Also we have the relation
  Combining these two relations we have
  Thus finally we obtain multiplication map of
,
  This means that under the
multiplication map the special combination  have simple
multiplication by . As in  case the number of
 vacua with confinement index  is  times the
one of  Coulomb vacua. All of these confining vacua can be
constructed by this map. Let us denote adjoint chiral superfield
as  in the  gauge theory. Then through the
multiplication map we constructed the following quantum operator
in the  gauge theory can be obtained by simply
multiplying the confinement index  by the corresponding
operator in the  gauge theory as follows
Tr  1 x-  +2 x  = K
(Tr  1 x-_0  +2 x  ). 
Examples  



In this subsection we will analyze some examples of  gauge
theory with rank , namely  gauge group is broken to
. We will deal with  gauge
theories that are  theories deformed by tree level
superpotential characterized by
 
For  simplicity we consider the special case , namely the
number of critical point of  equal to the one of gauge
groups after Higgs breaking.

As already discussed, massless monopole constraint with  is
given by
 
Equivalently we can factorize this equation as,
 
We want to point out the relation to  case. Comparing
()and () with () and
(), we find the similarities and correspondences in
. So massless monopole constraint
for  case is the same as the one for  case.
However the subtle difference comes from the function
. The left hand side in
() leads to
 

Thus we must have a factor  in the right hand side of
(). Thus we cannot describe two case
 and  in the same way by using 
. Taking into account this constraint, we can rewrite
massless monopole constraint () and ()
as
 
where  and  and .
From the first two equations ()  we have a constraint that
is useful for analysis below,
 
After solving this equation, we can find matrix model curve,
 
and
 
As in  or  case, from the coefficient of 
in  we can read off the expectation value of glueball
superfield, . Let us start with the explicit analysis
of ,  and .





  case 


The first example is  gauge theory. In this case
massless monopole constraint () is trivial since
. If we parameterize characteristic function as
, we can rewrite  as, from (),
 
Thus the matrix model curve is given by
  Then there is only one vacuum for given .
In the semiclassical limit  the characteristic
function becomes . So in this vacuum, the
gauge group  breaks into .



  case 


The second example is a   gauge theory where
. As already discussed, this case corresponds to
 case and is somewhat interesting example. The number of
massless monopoles is determined by . Thus we have
two branches  and . At first, we study the
case . We can parameterize the massless monopole constraint
as
 
These parameters must satisfy (). The solution for the
constraint is given by, from (),
 
We can find the matrix model curve from the
solution as,
 
and from this one gets
 
For these vacua we consider the semiclassical limit. In this case
there exist two limits.

1. Fix a: The characteristic function behaves 
 and the gauge group  breaks into .

2. Fix : The characteristic
function goes to  and  the  breaks into
.

Thus we can  transit continuously by changing the
parameters. At last, as in  case we count the number of
vacua for fixed tree level superpotential,
. From the previous result we can
represent  as
 
We evaluate this equation under the two semiclassical limit  and 
discussed above.

1. In this limit since  we have only one function
. Thus we have one vacua. As we will see below we have one
vacua that have the same gauge group. Thus all the vacua with this
gauge group are two vacua. On the other hand, gauge group becomes
 under this limit. So the number of vacua is two. This equal
to the one derived from above.

2. In this limit since
, we
have two functions . In other words we have two vacua for
each potential. This number is equal to the one derived from gauge
group , ,
because dual Coxeter number of  gauge theories are
.




Next let us consider . We can easily solve the
massless monopole constraint as follows:
 
From this
solution we can find matrix model curve
 
In the semiclassical limit it is easy to see 
, which shows that the gauge group  breaks into
. This branch is considerably different as the 
branch , though  is exactly same as the
 branch. This agrees with the comment under
().





  case 


The  next example is a  gauge theory, which is
the most interesting example. As already discussed, this case
corresponds to  case. In this case the number of massless
monopoles is given by  and 
. There are two branches  and  in this
theory.

1. Confining branch 

At first, let us study  branch, there exists a solution
 
From (),  the coefficients  can be
represented in terms of  and they are
 
where  is -th root of unity. Thus the characteristic function  becomes
 
From these
solutions we can find matrix model curve
 
and moreover we have
  Next we consider the semiclassical limit. There
are two limits:


1. Fixed a: As , the characteristic function has
the relation . This means
 the gauge group  is broken to .

2. Fixed : The characteristic
function goes to  . This means the gauge
group  is broken to . Thus we can see the
continuous transition between two semiclassical limits. But both
limits have the same gauge group. We want to survey whether these
phases are the confining phase or not. Multiplication map for
 gauge theories has already been discussed, i.e.
(). If we choose , we can construct the
multiplication map from  to  where we denote as
,
 
where  is -th root of unity. If we choose
 and identify 
with , we can reach the solution ().
 
Thus this vacua is a confining phase. After all we obtain
continuous transition within the Coulomb phase that does not
change the gauge group.

2. Coulomb branch 

Next we consider the other branch  and there are
 
As in previous examples, we must take into account the constraint
(). We get the equations,
 

Although the solutions of these equations are a little bit
complicated, those are reasonable solutions. We can continuously
transit between the phases that can be obtained in semiclassical
limit. So we concentrate on surveying the semiclassical limits of
the solutions and do not obtain matrix model curves. From the
first equation of () we can take three classical limits:

1.  with  and ,

2.  with fixed  and ,

3.  with fixed  and .

To begin with we consider the case 1. In this case the
equations () and () become
 
Thus in this classical limit, the characteristic function behaves
, which means that the gauge group breaks
into .

Next we consider the case 2. The equations () and
() become
 
This equations are satisfied by . Thus we have the
relation  , which means that 
. For the last case, the equations () and
() become
 
Then we have the solutions,
 
So we obtain  a relation , which means
that . After all, we can transit
continuously between the phases that have gauge groups
,  and .

So far we have studied the multiplication maps from  to
 which is an example describing the vacua of 
gauge theory from  theory. Then it is natural to consider
whether there exists other multiplication map from  to
 with different values of  and . For example,
when  and , then the vacua of  gauge theory has
the same superpotential as those of  theory. Therefore we
expect that there exists a solution that is a confining phase from
the explicit multiplication map from  to  by 
where we denote as . Although we
have considered a couple of examples, it would be interesting to
study the possible confining vacua for each general  and 
systematically.

We have seen that massless constraint for  is the same
as the one for . We ask whether there exists a
multiplication map from  to  or a map from
 to . From the experience we considered so far,
let us consider the following characteristic function
 
where  satisfies the usual massless monopole constraint
of  gauge theory.




From this relation one sees that a new function 
satisfies the massless monopole constraint of  gauge
theory.






For
 case, namely , if we choose  we would
expect to have a map from . By using the explicit
result for vacua of  gauge theory that can be done by
tedious calculations, we will see that 
 becomes the result for  which have already
been derived. Conversely we can construct maps from  to
 in the same way as previous one. Of course the map with
 gives the same as the one that we have already obtained in
terms of map from  to  by substituting .


Although within same gauge groups the map with
 is trivial, the maps between the different gauge groups are
somewhat interesting one, which maps the Coulomb vacua to the
Coulomb vacua. This is naively expected because  does not
give a common divisor.


So for the
case  to , we can expect to have the following
relations, . In other words, the effect of
unoriented diagram or geometrically the effect of orientifold
plane changes under these maps.

Finally, we would like to comment on the transition between different classical limit
gauge groups  and 
 or  and 
. As in these transition was interpreted as
a rearrangement of the compact one-cycles on the matrix model curve. Since the
matrix model curve for  gauge theories have  symmetry,
this rearrangement should occur in the way that keeps this  symmetry.
                                                       
















Acknowledgments 

This research of CA was supported by Korea Research Foundation
Grant(KRF-2002-015-CS0006). CA thanks Korea Institute for Advanced
Study (KIAS) and String Theory Journal Club where this work was
undertaken.

 [00] 




C. Vafa,

J. Math. Phys.  42 , 2798 (2001), hep-th/0008142 .



F. Cachazo, K. A. Intriligator and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 603 , 3 (2001), hep-th/0103067 .




F. Cachazo, S. Katz and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0108120 .



F. Cachazo, B. Fiol, K. A. Intriligator, S. Katz and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 628 , 3 (2002), hep-th/0110028 .



S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten,

Nucl. Phys. B 584 , 69 (2000) [Erratum-ibid. B 608 ,
477 (2001)], hep-th/9906070 .



S. Gukov,

Nucl. Phys. B 574 , 169 (2000), hep-th/9911011 .



T. R. Taylor and C. Vafa,

Phys. Lett. B 474 , 130 (2000), hep-th/9912152 .




J. D. Edelstein, K. Oh and R. Tatar,

JHEP 0105 , 009 (2001), hep-th/0104037 .





H. Fuji and Y. Ookouchi,

hep-th/0205301 .



F. Cachazo and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0206017 .




B. Feng,

hep-th/0212010 .



Y. Ookouchi,

hep-th/0211287 .






K. Dasgupta, K. Oh and R. Tatar,

Nucl. Phys. B 610 , 331 (2001), hep-th/0105066 .



K. Dasgupta, K. Oh and R. Tatar,

JHEP 0208 , 026 (2002), hep-th/0106040 .



K. Oh and R. Tatar,

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  6 , 141 (2003), hep-th/0112040 .



K. Dasgupta, K. Oh, J. Park and R. Tatar,

JHEP 0201 , 031 (2002), hep-th/0110050 .





R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 3 (2002), hep-th/0206255 .



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 21 (2002), hep-th/0207106 .



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0208048 .




R. Dijkgraaf, S. Gukov, V. A. Kazakov and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0210238 .






L. Chekhov and A. Mironov,

Phys. Lett. B 552 , 293 (2003), hep-th/0209085 .





H. Ita, H. Nieder and Y. Oz,

JHEP 0301 , 018 (2003), hep-th/0211261 .




M. Aganagic, A. Klemm, M. Marino and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0211098 .




R. Dijkgraaf, M. T. Grisaru, C. S. Lam, C. Vafa and D. Zanon,

hep-th/0211017 .



F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,

JHEP 0212 , 071 (2002), hep-th/0211170 .



F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,

hep-th/0301006 .



D. Berenstein,

Phys. Lett. B 552 , 255 (2003), hep-th/0210183 .



R. Argurio, V. L. Campos, G. Ferretti and R. Heise,

hep-th/0210291 .



J. McGreevy,

JHEP 0301 , 047 (2003), hep-th/0211009 .



H. Suzuki,

hep-th/0211052 .



H. Suzuki,

hep-th/0212121 .



Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik,

Phys. Lett. B 553 , 105 (2003), hep-th/0211082 .



I. Bena and R. Roiban,

Phys. Lett. B 555 , 117 (2003), hep-th/0211075 .



Y. Tachikawa,

hep-th/0211189 .



Y. Tachikawa,

hep-th/0211274 .



B. Feng,

hep-th/0211202 .



B. Feng and Y. H. He,

hep-th/0211234 .



R. Argurio, V. L. Campos, G. Ferretti and R. Heise,

Phys. Lett. B 553 , 332 (2003), hep-th/0211249 .



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,

Nucl. Phys. B 651 , 106 (2003),  hep-th/0211123 .



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,

 JHEP  0301 ,  015  (2003),  hep-th/0211254 .



I. Bena, R. Roiban and R. Tatar,

hep-th/0211271 .



K. Ohta,

hep-th/0212025 .



S. Seki,

hep-th/0212079 .



I. Bena, S. de Haro and R. Roiban,

hep-th/0212083 .



C. Hofman,

hep-th/0212095 .



Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik,

hep-th/0212212 .



N. Seiberg,

JHEP 0301 , 061 (2003), hep-th/0212225 .



C. Ahn and S. Nam,

hep-th/0212231 .



C. Ahn,

hep-th/0301011 .



B. Feng,

hep-th/0212274 .



F. Ferrari,

Nucl. Phys. B 648 , 161 (2003), hep-th/0210135 .



H. Fuji and Y. Ookouchi,

JHEP 0212 , 067 (2002), hep-th/0210148 .



A. Gorsky,

Phys. Lett. B 554 , 185 (2003), hep-th/0210281 .



F. Ferrari,

hep-th/0211069 .



R. Gopakumar,

hep-th/0211100 .



R. Dijkgraaf, A. Neitzke and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0211194 .



A. Klemm, M. Marino and S. Theisen,

hep-th/0211216 .



R. Dijkgraaf, A. Sinkovics and M. Temurhan,

hep-th/0211241 .



H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,

hep-th/0211245 .



S. K. Ashok, R. Corrado, N. Halmagyi, K. D. Kennaway and C. Romelsberger,

hep-th/0211291 .




H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,

hep-th/0212032 .



R. A. Janik and N. A. Obers,

Phys. Lett. B 553 , 309 (2003), hep-th/0212069 .



V. Balasubramanian, J. de Boer, B. Feng, Y. H. He, M. x. Huang, V. Jejjala and A. Naqvi,

hep-th/0212082 .



L. Chekhov, A. Marshakov, A. Mironov and D. Vasiliev,

hep-th/0301071 .





M. Matone,

hep-th/0212253 .



A. Dymarsky and V. Pestun,

hep-th/0301135 .



H. Itoyama and A. Morozov,

hep-th/0301136 .



L. Bergamin and P. Minkowski,

hep-th/0301155 .





F. Ferrari,

hep-th/0301157 .



W. Muck,

hep-th/0301171 .





R. Roiban, R. Tatar and J. Walcher,

hep-th/0301217 .



C. Ahn and S. Nam,

hep-th/0301203 .





Y. Ookouchi and Y. Watabiki,

hep-th/0301226 .




R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,

hep-th/0302011 .








S. Terashima and S. K. Yang,

Phys. Lett. B 391 , 107 (1997), hep-th/9607151 .



T. Kitao, S. Terashima and S. K. Yang,

Phys. Lett. B 399 , 75 (1997), hep-th/9701009 .



P. C. Argyres and A. D. Shapere,

Nucl. Phys. B 461 , 437 (1996), hep-th/9509175 .



P. C. Argyres, M. Ronen Plesser and A. D. Shapere,

Nucl. Phys. B 483 , 172 (1997), hep-th/9608129 .



A. Hanany,

Nucl. Phys. B 466 , 85 (1996), hep-th/9509176 .



T. Hirayama, N. Maekawa and S. Sugimoto,

Prog. Theor. Phys.  99 , 843 (1998), hep-th/9705069 .



E. D'Hoker, I. M. Krichever and D. H. Phong,

Nucl. Phys. B 489 , 211 (1997), hep-th/9609145 .




C. Ahn, K. Oh and R. Tatar,

J. Geom. Phys.  28 , 163 (1998), hep-th/9712005 .


 A.  Brandhuber and K.  Landsteiner,  Phys.  Lett.  B 
358 , 73 (1995), hep-th/9507008 . 

 U.H.  Danielsson and B.  Sundborg,  Phys.  Lett.  B
358 , 273 (1995), hep-th/9504102 .


C. Ahn,

Phys. Lett. B 426 , 306 (1998), hep-th/9712149 .



S. Terashima,

Nucl. Phys. B 526 , 163 (1998), hep-th/9712172 .




M. R. Douglas and S. H. Shenker, Nul.  Phys.  B 447 , 271
(1995), hep-th/9503163 .





