





color cmyk 0 1. 1. 0.5  
color cmyk 0 0 0 1.  
color cmyk 1. 1. 0 0  

Gluon-ghost condensate of mass dimension 2 in the
Curci-Ferrari gauge    
D. Dudal
Research Assistant of The Fund For Scientific Research-Flanders, Belgium.  
and H. Verschelde
david.dudal@rug.ac.be, henri.verschelde@rug.ac.be  


Ghent University    

Department of Mathematical Physics and Astronomy,
Krijgslaan 281-S9,    

B-9000 Gent, Belgium    V.E.R. Lemes, M.S. Sarandy and
S.P. Sorella
vitor@dft.if.uerj.br, sarandy@dft.if.uerj.br, sorella@uerj.br  


UERJ - Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro,    

 Rua Sa o Francisco Xavier 524, 20550-013 Maracana ,
    Rio de Janeiro, Brazil    M. Picariello
marco.picariello@mi.infn.it   


Universita  degli Studi di Milano, via Celoria 16,
I-20133, Milano, Italy    

and INFN Milano, Italy    
abstract  The effective potential for an on-shell
BRST invariant gluon-ghost condensate of mass dimension 2 in the
Curci-Ferrari gauge in  Yang-Mills is analysed by combining
the local composite operator technique with the algebraic
renormalization. We pay attention to the gauge parameter
independence of the vacuum energy obtained in the considered
framework and discuss the Landau gauge as an interesting special
case.
 

 
Introduction 

Nowadays an increasing evidence has been reported on the relevance
of the local composite operator  in the Landau gauge, both
from a phenomenological point of view
 as from lattice studies
. It is no
coincidence that the Landau gauge is used because then 
equals the non-local gauge invariant operator
 with 
the space time volume. The lattice also revealed that gluons
attain a dynamical mass, see e.g.
. Some older work already
discussed the pairing of gluons in connection with a mass
generation, as a result of the fact that the perturbative
Yang-Mills (YM) vacuum (trivially zero) is unstable
. More recently,
the connection between a condensate 
 and a gluon mass has been made within the OPE
framework. A technique to effectively
calculate  and the gluon mass was
presented in, also in the Landau gauge. The answer to the question how a mass is generated could be posed in a more
general context than the Landau gauge. The Landau gauge is a limiting case
of a class of renormalizable, generalized covariant gauges introduced in
. We are therefore led to search for a
local operator which could replace . A proposal has been made in
, where it was shown that  is a special case of a more
general mass dimension 2 operator, namely 
, also involving
ghosts and which is BRST invariant on-shell, however not gauge
invariant (see also). This should allow a
BRST invariant treatment of the mass generation in those gauges.
The proposed condensate is not that surprising, since it equals
the operator coupled to the mass term of a massive, renormalizable
 model, introduced in. The
specific form of the mass term is necessary to maintain the BRST
invariance and renormalizability
. Although the Curci-Ferrari
model (CF) is BRST invariant, the associated BRST operator is not
nilpotent and the model is not unitary
. Since the gauge fixing terms of
the CF model and the YM theories with the gauges discussed in
 are the same,
it seems natural to search in that direction for a suitable
operator that gets a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value and
invokes a dynamical mass.
The aim of this paper is to construct an effective potential for the mass
dimension 2 condensate in the CF gauge. It is organized as follows. In
section  we discuss the formalism to obtain a well-defined
effective potential for the local composite operator 
, a non-trivial
task due to the compositeness of this operator
. In section , we denote the Ward
identities of the action, ensuring the renormalizability. A
further construction of the effective action is discussed in
section , where we also outline a subtlety on the
minimization of the effective potential. In section , we
consider the gauge parameter independence of the vacuum energy and
spend some words on the BRST charge. Section  handles
the explicit evaluation of the effective potential. We also
discuss the interesting role of the Landau gauge as a limiting
case of the CF gauge. We pay attention to the similarities between
CF and the Maximal Abelian gauge (MAG). A mass generating
mechanism for the off-diagonal gluons in the MAG very much
resembles that of the CF gauge, and could be seen as some evidence
for Abelian dominance. As usual, conclusions are formulated in the
last section.

The LCO formalism 

 For a more detailed introduction to the local composite
operator (LCO) formalism and to the algebraic renormalization technique, the
reader is referred to, respectively.
Let us begin by giving the expression for the  Yang-Mills action in
the CF gauge
 
where
 
is the usual covariant derivative. In order to investigate if
 
gets a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value, we introduce a suitable set
of LCO sources. In this case this task is
nontrivial. It turns out that in order to introduce the local operator 
 in the starting action in a BRST invariant way, three external
sources   and  are needed, so that
 
where  is the LCO parameter and  denotes the BRST operator acting
as
 
The parameter  has to be introduced since the introduction of the
source term  gives rise to novel vacuum energy divergences
proportional to . These new divergences, related to those of the
connected Green's function 
 for , are cancelled by a counterterm 
. After introduction of the sources, we still have a BRST invariant action
 
but it should be observed that, due to the presence of the sources 
, the BRST operator is no more
nilpotent, namely
 
As a consequence, setting
 
we have
 
The operator is related to the  symmetry
 exhibited by the Curci-Ferrari
action. The generators of this  symmetry are, next to the
Faddeev-Popov ghost number , given by
 
and
 
The action of the  symmetry can be enlarged to the sources as 
,  and . Then it is
obvious from () that
 
Also, expression  shows that, in the massive case,
the -invariance is a consequence of the modified BRST
transformations. The lack of nilpotency of the BRST operator together with (
) are well known features of the CF gauge in the presence of a mass
term. Next to the  invariance, the action 
 is still invariant under the  algebra(
This algebra is generated by the  and (anti-)BRST transformations 
 and . It is a trivial task to check that the action is also
anti-BRST invariant, and relations similar to (), () and (
) arise for the anti-BRST transformation .) 
, meaning that irrespective of the fact that 
 gains a non-trivial value, the  (and thus the 
) symmetry is unaffected. Notice that in the present case the operator always contains the
source  which will be set to zero at the end of the computation.

Ward identities 


Let us now translate the previous invariances into Ward identities. To this
purpose, we introduce external sources and 
coupled to the BRST variation of and 

 
with




The complete action
 
turns out to obey the following identities:

 
The Slavnov-Taylor identity
 
with
 

The  Ward identity
 

with
 
Proceeding as in, these identities imply the
renormalizability of the model and, in particular, the multiplicative
renormalizability of the local operator .

Renormalizability of  and the effective action 


As established explicitly in, the operator 
 is indeed multiplicative renormalizable in the CF gauge.
Denoting the bare operator by , one has
 
with(
We use dimensional regularization in  dimensions and employ
the  renormalization scheme.)  
For the anomalous dimension  of , one
has 
Notice that  depends on the gauge parameter 
. This is due to the explicit dependence from  of the operator 
. Moreover, in the limit , expression 
 reduces to the anomalous dimension of the Landau
gauge. Let us also give, for further use, the -function of
the gauge parameter  in the CF gauge.
 
In order to obtain the effective potential for the operator ,
we set to zero the sources ,   and
, obtaining for the generating functional the following
expression
 
with
 
and  denoting the relevant fields.From the bare Lagrangian associated to (), one obtains that the
quantity  obeys the following renormalization group equation (RGE)
 
where
 
Now, following, it is possible to set the hitherto free 
parameter  such a function of  and , so that if 
runs according to  and  to 
,  will run according to its RGE ().
Specifying,  is the particular solution of
 
Furthermore(
The integration constant showing up when () is solved, has been put
to zero according to.) ,  is multiplicatively
renormalizable (). It is easy to see that 
 will be of the form
 
Performing the calculation at 1-loop, we find that
 
Consequently, solving () for  as a function of the gauge
parameter , one finds
 
with  an integration constant. Notice that , so that we
recover the result of in the case of the Landau gauge. In the next
section, we will show that the vacuum energy is gauge parameter independent.
Henceforth, we can forget about the integration constant and set .
Taking now the functional derivative of  with respect to 
, we obtain
 
The presence of the  term in  seems to spoil an
energy interpretation. However, this can be dealt with by introducing a
Hubbard-Stratonovich field  so that
 
Therefore
 
where
 
 now appears as a linear source. Hence, we have back an energy
interpretation and the  machinery applies. Differentiating the functional generator with respect to , one gets the
relationship
 
Recapitulating, we have constructed a multiplicatively renormalizable action
 incorporating the effects of a possible non-vanishing vacuum
expectation value for . The corresponding effective action 
 obeys a linear, homogeneous RGE. Notice that to get actual knowledge
of the -loop effective action, one needs the values of 
. This means, recalling (), that we need the -loop
values of the renormalization group functions. In, a
slightly different Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation was used, so that
 
resulting in
 
where
 
With this action, it seems that it suffices to know 
 to construct the -loop effective potential. However, some attention
should be paid here. It is indeed so that with (), we do not need
 for , but since the source 
is now coupled to the operator , we formally
have for the effective action , being the Legendre transform of 

 
Hence
 
Since
 
it becomes clear that, in order to have  up to the considered order in
a  expansion (i.e. to end up in the vacuum state), one must solve
(for constant configurations)
 
which will not (
Because  itself is a series in .)  produce the same (correct) 
 as by solving
 
as it was done in. The most efficient way to
solve () is by performing the transformation
 
and this exactly transforms the action () into the one
of (). Notice that the action () is not
incorrect, one should only be careful how the vacuum configuration
is constructed. The conclusion is that one cannot escape the job
of doing -loop calculations for -loop results. We draw attention to the fact that the action  is BRST invariant
(
It is obvious that .) , while this BRST
transformation is nilpotent for . This means that the action,
evaluated in its minimum, i.e. the vacuum energy, should be
independent of the gauge parameter  order by order. In the
next section, we pay some more attention to this 
independence.

Gauge parameter independence of the vacuum energy 

 We begin our argumentation from the generating
functional (). It will be useful to consider also the
'original' action  (i.e. before the
Hubbard-Stratonovich
transformation) defined in (). To avoid confusion with (
)-(), we added a  to the notation. The relation
between  and  is obtained via the
insertion of a unity
 
with  an appropriate normalization factor. Explicitly, we have
 
Since evidently
 
we find
 
The effective action  is related to  through a
Legendre transformation
 
The effective potential  is then defined as
 
Let  be the solution of
 
Hence, we have that(
To have () correct at any order in , the minima should be
computed correctly, as explained in the previous section.) 
 
Invoking (), we derive from ()-()
 
Finally, combining () and (), we conclude that
 
Some extra words concerning () and its consequences ()-(
) are in order. Obviously, this is based on the relation
 
An explicit evaluation of the effective potential results in a series for 
, and consequently in a gap equation via (). Said otherwise,  means in practice that  equals zero up to a certain order in 
 as a consequence of the solved gap equation, which is of the form
 
Returning to (), the terms proportional to  are themselves some
series in . This means that the product of such a term with  is
again a series, which has to be cut off at the considered order; thus some
terms are dropped. When ()-() are used, it turns out that
the product of such a term with  is also zero, but up to terms of higher
order. Henceforth, the gauge parameter independence is not exact , but
holds up to terms of higher order. The same holds true for the BRST charge 
, which will not be exactly nilpotent, but again up to higher order
terms. As it is well known,  is used to define physical states as
those annihilated by  and which are not exact (i.e. 
). The nilpotency of 
is needed to move freely in the space of gauge parameter choices. With all
this in mind, the  derivative of the action is reduced to an exact
BRST variation. This is the usual argument used to show that physical
operators, including the vacuum energy, are independent of the choice for
the gauge parameter . We underline again that here, all
this is not exact, but only valid up to terms of higher order. Concluding this section, we have shown that the effective potential,
evaluated at its minimum (i.e. the vacuum energy), is gauge parameter
independent at any order in a loop () expansion, at least up to terms
that are of higher order.

Evaluation of the 1-loop effective potential 

 In order to evaluate the 1-loop effective potential, it is
sufficient to consider only the quadratic terms of , namely
 
where
 
and
 
To calculate , we use the background formalism with the trivial
background . This means that we restrict ourselves to the pure
short-range contributions to . If we
would like to include long-range effects, we could for example use an
instanton background. An asset of considering only
short-range contributions is that one does not have to worry about Gribov
ambiguities, since these short-range contributions are calculated with a
purely perturbative expansion, and perturbation theory is not affected by
Gribov copies, since the considered distances are "too short" to make
different gauge copies aware of each other
.For the 1-loop effective potential we get
 
In  dimensions, it holds that
 
Working up to order  and order , we find
 
Subsequently, we obtain for the one-loop effective potential in the 
 scheme(
It is easily checked that using the renormalized version of the
Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation (), the counterterm
proportional to  removes the infinities coming from
() and ().) 
 
with  given by (). In principle, as soon one knows the
value of , one can set 
 and use the renormalization group equation for  to
sum leading logarithms and solve the gap equation. This leads to a value for
the vacuum energy , gluon mass , and through
the trace anomaly, one also finds an estimation for 
. Since the
aim of this paper is merely to describe the mass generation
mechanism  in the CF gauge, we do not perform the 2-loop
calculation leading to  and corresponding numerical
values. Moreover, since the vacuum energy is gauge parameter
independent, we may choose a specific . Therefore, we
restrict ourselves to the case , for which 
has already been determined.The Landau gauge is by far the most interesting choice. It is a
fixed point of the renormalization group for the gauge parameter
at any order. Due to the transversality condition 
, it is a quite physical gauge. It has some
interesting non-renormalization properties. Even more
interesting is the already mentioned fact that 
reduces to , which has a gauge-invariant meaning in the
Landau gauge, since it equals 
, a gauge-invariant (however in general non-local) operator
(
Although this correspondence is somewhat troubled by Gribov copies
, but this is of no relevance in the presented approach.) .
As a consequence, the gauge invariance(
Which is in fact a stronger statement than gauge parameter
independence.)  of the formalism is more obvious in the Landau
gauge. The relevance of the Landau gauge has also been
pointed out from a more topological point of view
. In case of compact 3-dimensional QED,
 was shown to be an order parameter for the monopole
condensation. If monopole
condensation has something to do with confinement, there might
exist a relation between  and confinement in case of QCD
too. All these things are less clear in the case of the
 operator in the CF gauge.Having said all this, it might look like that our efforts are not
that important for . This is however not the case.
We have given a consistent framework to calculate  the
dynamically generated gluon mass for the CF gauge. Notice that the
obtained Lagrangian in the condensed vacuum is however not the one
of the Curci-Ferrari model. The
question, also posed in, is if the dynamically massive
YM action () breaks unitarity? From a pragmatic point of
view, a possible lack of unitarity in the gluon sector should not
be considered very problematic. After all, since gluons are not
observables due to confinement, massive gluons are a fortiori
unphysical. In fact, a deep connection might exist between massive
gluons and confinement, as it was explored in. See
 for an attempt to construct a string theory
incorporating a  condensate.
We notice that the action () can be rewritten as
 
with(
We disregard  here.) 
 
Another very interesting renormalizable gauge is the modified
Maximal Abelian gauge (MAG), particularly
useful in the context of the dual superconductivity mechanism for
confinement. This gauge partially fixes the local  freedom,
i.e. up to the Abelian degrees of freedom. The MAG shares a close
similarity with the CF gauge, since its gauge fixing is given by
 
where the accent means that the color index runs strictly over the
non-Abelian degrees of freedom. In particular, in
 it has been shown that the remaining Abelian
degrees of freedom can be fixed so that the resulting theory
displays a global  symmetry, in complete analogy with the
CF gauge. Furthermore, due to the similarity
()-(), it is not difficult to show that a
quite analogous treatment with a source  coupled to the
 invariant operator
 
will provide us with a dynamical mass for the off-diagonal gluons
and ghosts 
, a hint
for some kind of Abelian dominance. This
strategy for the MAG was already put forward in
. Just as the operator  is
multiplicatively renormalizable in the CF gauge, the operator
 will be multiplicatively renormalizable in
the MAG. So far for the similarities
between CF and MAG. Although it would be nice to stretch the
similarity further and simply put  from the beginning,
in which case the MAG reads in differential form 
 with 
 the  Abelian covariant
derivative. As such, we have some kind of  invariant
version of the Landau gauge. Unfortunately, the limit 
 is now far from being trivial
. Moreover,  is not a fixed point
of the renormalization group
.  Also, although for 
the tree level action () does not contain a 4-ghost
interaction, radiative corrections will reintroduce this
interaction, unlike the Landau gauge. Making a
long story short, we are forced to let the gauge parameter 
 free and perform a similar analysis as done in the previous
sections. At the
end of such a more general analysis, one could investigate if the limit 
 can be taken. Before we formulate our conclusion, we quote the results obtained for the
Landau gauge in 
As the relevant expansion parameter, i.e. , is
relatively small and results do not change much if the second loop
correction to  is included, qualitatively
acceptable
results are achieved. The value for the 1-loop dynamical gluon mass 
 is also in qualitative agreement with lattice
values, reporting something like 
 MeV.

Conclusion 

 In this paper, we have constructed a renormalizable
effective potential for the on-shell BRST invariant local
composite operator of mass dimension 2 in the Curci-Ferrari gauge,
namely 
. This gauge reduces to the Landau gauge in
the limit . It is worth underlining that, in the Landau
gauge, the operator  equals the gauge invariant
operator . Much attention has been paid recently to the
condensate . The generalization
to  has also its importance due to the close
analogy with the Maximal Abelian gauge, where the 
 limit is not as obvious as in case of the CF gauge.
In particular, we have shown that the vacuum energy obtained in
the presented formalism for the CF gauge is independent from the
gauge parameter . As already underlined the 
-independence has to be understood in a  expansion and up
to terms of higher order.We restricted ourselves in this paper to the on-shell BRST
invariant condensate resulting in a mass for the particles. A
gluon mass modifies the behaviour of the gluon propagator in the
infrared (see e.g.) and might be relevant
for the confinement problem. A more intensive study would also
include the pure ghost condensates, also of mass dimension 2,
discussed in
.
These are not directly related to the mass generation for the
gluons, but are relevant for the
 symmetry and can modify the ghost propagator.

Acknowledgments 
One of us (M.P.) would like to thank R. Ferrari for useful
discussions. The Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Cienti fico e Tecnolo gico CNPq-Brazil, the
Fundac  a  o de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de
Janeiro (Faperj), the SR2-UERJ and the Ministero dell'Istruzione
dell'Universita e della Ricerca - Italy are acknowledged for the
financial support.

 99 
  F. V. Gubarev, L. Stodolsky and V. I. Zakharov,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86  (2001) 2220

  F. V. Gubarev and V. I. Zakharov, Phys. Lett. B
501  (2001) 28

  P. Boucaud et al. , Phys. Rev. D 
66  (2002) 034504

  P. Boucaud, A. Le Yaouanc, J. P. Leroy,
J. Micheli, O. Pene and J. Rodriguez-Quintero, Phys. Rev. D 63 
(2001) 114003

  G. Burgio, F. Di Renzo, G. Marchesini and
E. Onofri, Phys. Lett. B 422  (1998) 219

  K. Langfeld, H. Reinhardt and J. Gattnar, Nucl.
Phys. B 621  (2002) 131

  C. Alexandrou, P. de Forcrand and E. Follana,
Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002) 114508

  R. Fukuda and T. Kugo, Prog. Theor. Phys.
60  (1978) 565

  R. Fukuda, Phys. Lett. B 73  (1978) 33
Erratum-ibid. B 74  (1978) 433

V. P. Gusynin and V. A. Miransky, Phys. Lett. B 76  (1978)
585

  K. I. Kondo, Phys. Lett. B 514  (2001) 335

  K. I. Kondo, T. Murakami, T. Shinohara and T. Imai, Phys.
Rev. D 65  (2002) 085034

  H. Verschelde, K. Knecht, K. Van Acoleyen, M. Vanderkelen,
Phys. Lett. B 516  (2001) 307, erratum-ibid., to appear

  R. Delbourgo and P. D. Jarvis, J. Phys. A
15  (1982) 611

  L. Baulieu and J. Thierry-Mieg, Nucl. Phys. B
197  (1982) 477

  B. M. Gripaios, The 'BRST-invariant' condensate of dimension two in QCD ,
hep-th/0302015 

  G. Curci and R. Ferrari, Nuovo Cim. A 32 
(1976) 151

  G. Curci and R. Ferrari, Phys. Lett. B 63 
(1976) 91

  J. de Boer, K. Skenderis, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and
A. Waldron, Phys. Lett. B 367  (1996) 175

  I. Ojima, Z. Phys. C 13  (1982) 173

  K. Knecht and H. Verschelde, Phys. Rev. D 
64  (2001) 085006

  O. Piguet and S.P. Sorella, Algebraic Renormalization 
, Monograph series m28 , Springer Verlag, 1995

  D. Dudal, H. Verschelde, V. E. Lemes, M. S. Sarandy, S. P. Sorella
and M. Picariello, JHEP 0212  (2002) 008

  F. Delduc and S.P. Sorella, Phys. Lett. B 231 
(1989) 408

  D. Dudal, S. P. Sorella and H. Verschelde, Phys.
Lett. B 555  (2003) 126

  J. A. Gracey, Phys. Lett. B 552  (2003)
101

  V. E. Lemes, M. S. Sarandy and S. P. Sorella,
hep-th/0210077

  A. G. Williams, Lattice QCD, gauge fixing, and the transition to the perturbative  regime , hep-lat/0212038

  A. G. Williams, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.
109  (2002) 141

  Y. Frishman and R. Roth, Nucl. Phys. B 
146  (1978) 20

  Y. Frishman and R. Roth, Nucl. Phys. B 165 
(1980) 185

  L. Stodolsky, P. van Baal and V. I. Zakharov,
Phys. Lett. B 552  (2003) 214

  T. Kugo and I. Ojima, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.
66  (1979) 1

  K. I. Kondo and T. Imai, A confining string theory derivable from Yang-Mills theory due to a  novel vacuum condensate , hep-th/0206173

  K. I. Kondo, Phys. Rev. D 57  (1998) 7467

  D. Dudal and H. Verschelde, On ghost condensation, mass generation
 and Abelian dominance in the  maximal Abelian gauge , hep-th/0209025

U. Ellwanger and N. Wschebor, Massive Yang-Mills theory in
Abelian gauges , hep-th/0205057

  K. I. Kondo and T. Shinohara, Phys. Lett. B
491  (2000) 263

  M. Schaden, Mass generation in continuum SU(2) gauge theory in
covariant Abelian  gauges , hep-th/9909011

  T. Shinohara, T. Imai and K. I. Kondo,
The most general and renormalizable maximal Abelian gauge ,
hep-th/0105268

V. E. Lemes, M. S. Sarandy and S. P. Sorella, Ghost number
dynamical symmetry breaking in Yang-Mills theories in the maximal
Abelian gauge , hep-th/0206251

V. E. Lemes, M. S. Sarandy, S. P. Sorella, M. Picariello and
A. R. Fazio, Ghost condensates in Yang-Mills theories in
nonlinear gauges , hep-th/0210036



