














Quiver Gauge Theory and Unification at About 4 TeV 

P.H. FRAMPTON 

Department of Physics and Astronomy, 

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3255, USA.
 
E-mail: frampton@physics.unc.edu 







The use of the AdS/CFT correspondence to arrive at quiver
gauge field theories is dicussed, focusing on the orbifolded
case without supersymmetry. An abelian orbifold with the finite
group  can give rise to a  gauge group
with chiral fermions and complex scalars in different
bi-fundamental representations of . The precision
measurements at the  resonance suggest the values
 and , and a unifications scale
 TeV.The robustness and predictivity of such
grand unification is discussed. 


Quiver Gauge Theory 

The relationship of the Type IIB superstring to conformal gauge theory
in  gives rise to an interesting class of gauge
theories.
Choosing the simplest compactificationon  gives rise to an  SU(N) gauge theory
which is known to be conformal due to
the extended global supersymmetry and non-renormalization theorems. All
of the RGE functions for this 
case are vanishing in perturbation theory. It is possible to break
the  to  by replacing
 by an orbifold 
where  is a discrete group with

respectively.

In building a conformal gauge theory model,
the steps are: (1) Choose the discrete group ; (2) Embed
; (3) Choose the  of ; and
(4) Embed the Standard Model 
in the resultant gauge group  (quiver
node identification). Here we shall look only
at abelian  and define
. It is expected from the string-field
duality that the resultant field
theory is conformal in the  limit,
and will have a fixed manifold, or at least a fixed point, for  finite.

Before focusing on  non-supersymmetric cases, let
us first examine an  model first
put forward in the work of
Kachru and Silverstein.
The choice is  and the 4  of 
is 4  = . Choosing N=3
this leads to the three chiral families under 
trinification 
In this model it is interesting that
the number of families arises as 4-1=3,
the difference between the 4 of SU(4) and ,
the number of unbroken supersymmetries.
However this model has no gauge coupling unification;
also, keeping  supersymmetry is against the
spirit of the conformality approach. We now
present an example which accommodates
three chiral families, break all supersymmetries
() and possess gauge coupling unification, including the
correct value of the electroweak mixing angle.

Choose , embed the 4 of SU(4)
as , and
choose N=3 to aim at a trinification
.

The seven nodes of the quiver diagram will
be identified as C-H-W-H-H-H-W.

The behavior of the 4 of SU(4) implies that the bifundamentals
of chiral fermions are in the representations
 
Embedding the C, W and H SU(3) gauge groups as
indicated by the quiver mode identifications
then gives the seven quartets of irreducible representations
 
Combining terms gives, aside from (real) adjoints and overall singlets
 
Cancelling the real parts (which acquire Dirac masses at the conformal
symmetry breaking scale) leaves under trinification

 
which are the desired three chiral families.

Given the embedding of  in SU(4) 
it follows that the 6 of SU(4) transforms as
.
The complex scalars therefore transform as
 
These bifundamentals can by their VEVS break the symmetry 
=  down
to the appropriate diagonal subgroup
.

Now to the final aspect of this model 
which is its motivation, the gauge coupling
unification. The embedding in  of
 means that the
couplings  are
in the ratio
.
Using the phenomenological data given at the beginning,
this implies that
. On the
other hand, the QCD coupling is
 which is too low unless the
conformal scale is at least 10TeV.

Gauge Couplings. 

An alternative to conformality, grand unification with supersymmetry,
leads to an impressively accurate gauge coupling unification.
In particular it predicts an electroweak mixing angle
at the Z-pole, . This result
may, however, be fortuitous, but rather than
abandon gauge coupling unification, we can rederive 
in a different way by embedding the electroweak  in
 to
find .
This will be a common feature of the models in this paper.

The conformal theories will be finite without
quadratic or logarithmic divergences. This requires appropriate
equal number of fermions and bosons which can cancel in
loops
and which occur without the necessity of space-time supersymmetry.
As we shall see in one example, it is possible to combine
spacetime supersymmetry
with conformality but the latter is the driving principle and the former
is merely an option: additional fermions and scalars are predicted by
conformality in the TeV range,
but in general these particles are different and distinguishable
from supersymmetric partners.
The boson-fermion cancellation is essential for the
cancellation of infinities, and will
play a central role in the calculation of the cosmological constant
(not discussed here). In the field picture, the
cosmological constant measures the vacuum energy density.

What is needed first for the conformal approach is a simple
model.

Here we shall focus on abelian orbifolds characterised by the discrete group
. Non-abelian orbifolds will be systematically analysed elsewhere.

The steps in building a model for the abelian case (parallel steps
hold for non-abelian orbifolds) are:

 

(1)  Choose the discrete group . Here we are considering
only . We define .

(2)  Choose the embedding of  by
assigning 
such that . To
break  supersymmetry to
 ( or ) requires that
none (or one) of the  is equal to zero (mod p).

(3)  For chiral fermions one requires that 
for the embedding of  in .

The chiral fermions are in the bifundamental representations of 
 
If  we interpret  as a singlet plus an adjoint
of .

(4)  The 6  of  is real 6  = 
with
,
,

(recall that all components are defined modulo p).
The complex scalars are in the bifundamentals
 
The condition in terms of  for  is
.
(5)  Choose the  of  (where the  are the
dimensions of the representrations of ). For the abelian case
where , it is natural to choose  the largest
 of the standard model (SM) gauge group. For a non-abelian 
with  the choice  would be indicated.

(6)   The  quiver nodes are identified as color (C), weak isospin (W)
or a third  (H). This specifies the embedding of the gauge group
.

This quiver node identification is guided by (7), (8) and (9) below.

(7)   The quiver node identification is required to
give three chiral families under Eq.()
It is sufficient to make three of the  to be W and the fourth H, given that there is only
one C quiver node, so that there are three . Provided that
 is avoided by the  being H, the remainder
of the three family trinification will be automatic by chiral anomaly cancellation.
Actually, a sufficient condition for three families has been given; it is
necessary only that the difference between the number of 
nodes and the number of  nodes
which are W is equal to three.

(8)   The complex scalars of Eq. () must be sufficient for their
vacuum expectation values (VEVs) to spontaneously break

.

Note that, unlike grand unified theories (GUTs) with or without supersymmetry,
the Higgs scalars are here prescribed by the conformality condition.
This is more satisfactory because it implies that the Higgs sector cannot be chosen
arbitrarily, but it does make model building more interesting

(9)  Gauge coupling unification should apply at least to the electroweak mixing
angle . For trinification
 so that  is
correctly normalized. If we make  and 
then  with sufficient accuracy.


We now answer all these steps for the choice 
for successive  up to .

 

p = 2  

In this case  and therefore one cannot
costruct any complex 4  of  with
.
Chiral fermions are therefore
impossible.

p = 3  

The only possibilities are  or .
The latter is real and leads to no chiral fermions.
The former leaves  supersymmetry and is a simple three-family
model by the quiver node identification C - W - H. The scalars 
are sufficient to spontaneously break to the SM. Gauge coupling unification is, however,
missing since , in
bad disagreement with experiment.

p = 4  

The only complex  choice is . But
then  and any quiver node identification
such as C - W - H - H has 4 families and the scalars are insufficient to
break spontaneously the symmetry to the SM gauge group.

p = 5  

The two inequivalent complex choices are  and .
By drawing the quiver, however, and using the rules
for three chiral families given in (7)
above, one finds that the node identification and the prescription of the scalars
as  and  respectively does not permit
spontaneous breaking to the standard model.

p = 6  

Here we can discuss three inequivalent complex possibilities as follows:

(6A)  which implies .

Requiring three families means a node identification C - W - X - H - X - H
where X is either W or H. But whatever we choose for the X the scalar representations
are insufficient to break  in the desired fashion down to the SM. This
illustrates the difficulty of model building when the scalars are not
in arbitrary representations.

(6B)  which implies .

Here the family number can be only zero, two or four as can be seen by inspection
of the  and the related quiver diagram. So (6B) is of no phenomenological interest.

(6C)  which implies .

Requiring three families needs a quiver node identification which is of the form
either 
C - W - H - H - W - H or  C - H - H - W - W - H. The scalar representations
implied by  are, however, easily seen to be insufficient to do the required
spontaneous symmetry breaking (S.S.B.) for both of these identifications.

p =7  

Having been stymied mainly by the rigidity of the scalar representation
for all , for  there
are the first cases which work. Six inequivalent complex embeddings of 
 require consideration.

(7A) 

For the required nodes C - W - X - H - H - X - H the
scalars are insufficient  for S.S.B.

(7B) 

The node identification C - W - H - W - H - H - H leads
to a successful  model.

(7C) 

Choosing C - H - W - X - X - H - H to derive three families, the
scalars fail  in S.S.B.

(7D) 

The node choice C - W - H - H - H - W - H leads
to a successful  model. This is Model A of.

(7E) 

The nodes C - H - H - H - W - W - H are
successful .

(7F) 

Scalars insufficient  for S.S.B.


The three successful models (7B), (7D) and (7E) lead to
an . Since 
it suggests a conformal scale  TeV.
The above models have less generators than an
 GUT and thus  merits
further study. It is possible, and under investigation, that non-abelian
orbifolds will lead to a simpler model.

For such field theories it is important to establish the existence of a fixed
manifold with respect to the renormalization group. It
could be a fixed line but more likely, in
the  case, a fixed point. It is known that in the
 limit the theories become conformal, but
although this 't Hooft limit is where the field-string duality
is derived we know that finiteness survives to finite N in the
 case and this makes it plausible
that at least a conformal point occurs also for the 
theories with  derived above.

The conformal structure cannot by itself predict all the dimensionless ratios of
the standard model such as mass ratios and mixing angles
because these receive contributions,
in general, from soft breaking of conformality. With a
specific assumption about the pattern of conformal
symmetry breaking, however, more work should lead to
definite predictions for such quantities.



4 TeV Grand Unification 

Conformal invariance in two dimensions has had
great success in comparison to several condensed matter
systems. It is an
interesting question whether conformal symmetry
can have comparable success in a four-dimensional
description of high-energy physics.

Even before the standard model (SM)
 electroweak theory
was firmly established by experimental
data, proposals were made
 of models which would subsume it into
a grand unified theory (GUT) including also the dynamics of
QCD. Although the prediction of
SU(5) in its minimal form for the proton lifetime
has long ago been excluded, ad hoc  variants thereof
 remain viable.
Low-energy supersymmetry improves the accuracy of
unification of the three 321 couplingsand such theories encompass a "desert" between the weak
scale  GeV and the much-higher GUT scale
 GeV, although minimal supersymmetric
 is by now ruled out.

Recent developments in string theory are suggestive
of a different strategy for unification of electroweak
theory with QCD. Both the desert and low-energy
supersymmetry are abandoned. Instead, the
standard 
gauge group is embedded in a semi-simple gauge
group such as  as suggested by gauge
theories arising from compactification of the IIB superstring
on an orbifold  where
 is the abelian finite group .
In such nonsupersymmetric quiver gauge theories
the unification of couplings happens not by
logarithmic evolution over an
enormous desert covering, say, a dozen orders
of magnitude in energy scale. Instead the
unification occurs abruptly at  through the
diagonal embeddings of 321 in .
The key prediction of such unification shifts from
proton decay to additional particle content,
in the present model
at  TeV.

Let me consider first the electroweak group
which in the standard model is still un-unified
as . In the 331-modelwhere this is extended to 
there appears a Landau pole at  TeV
because that is the scale at which 
 slides to the value
.
It is also the scale at which the custodial gauged
 is broken in the framework
of.

Such theories involve only electroweak
unification so to include QCD I examine the running
of all three of the SM couplings with  as
explicated in e.g. .
Taking the values at the Z-pole

 (the errors in
 and  are less than 1)
they are taken to run between  and  according
to the SM equations
 
 
 
where .

The scale at which 
 satisfies 
 is found from Eqs.(,)
to be  TeV as stated in the introduction above.

I now focus on the ratio 
using Eqs.(,). I find
that  while ,
 and
 correspond to

respectively.
The proximity of  and , accurate to a few percent,
suggests strong-electroweak unification at  TeV.

There remains the question of embedding such unification
in an  of the type described in.
Since the required embedding of 
into an  necessitates 
the ratios of couplings at  TeV
is: 
and it is natural
to examine  with diagonal embeddings of
Color (C), Weak (W) and Hypercharge (H)
in  respectively.

To accomplish this I specify the embedding
of  in the global  R-parity
of the  supersymmetry of the underlying theory.
Defining  this specification
can be made by 
 with 
and all  so that all four supersymmetries are
broken from  to .

Having specified  I calculate the content
of complex scalars by investigating in 
the 
 with
 where
all quantities are defined (mod 12).

Finally I identify the nodes (as C, W or H)
on the dodecahedral quiver such that the complex scalars
 
are adequate to allow the required symmetry breaking to the
 diagonal subgroup, and the chiral fermions
 
can accommodate the three generations of quarks and leptons.

It is not trivial to accomplish all of these requirements
so let me demonstrate by an explicit example.

For the embedding I take  and for
the quiver nodes take the ordering:
 
with the two ends of () identified.

The scalars follow from 
and the scalars in Eq.()
 
are sufficient to break to all diagonal subgroups as
 

The fermions follow from  in Eq.() as
 
and the particular dodecahedral quiver
in () gives rise  to exactly three 
chiral generations which transform under ()
as
 
I note that anomaly freedom of the underlying superstring
dictates that only the combination
of states in Eq.()
can survive. Thus, it
is sufficient to examine one of the terms, say
. By drawing the quiver diagram
indicated by Eq.() with the twelve nodes
on a "clock-face" and using

in Eq.() I find
five 's and two 's
implying three chiral families as stated in Eq.().

After further symmetry breaking at scale  to
 the
surviving chiral fermions are the quarks and leptons
of the SM. The appearance
of three families depends on both
the identification of modes in ()
and on the embedding of . The
embedding must simultaneously give adequate
scalars whose VEVs can break the symmetry
spontaneously to ().
All of this is achieved successfully by the
choices made.
The three gauge couplings evolve according to
Eqs.(,,) for
. For  the
(equal) gauge couplings of 
do not run if, as conjectured inthere is a conformal fixed point at .

The basis of the conjecture inis the proposed duality of Maldacenawhich shows that in the 
limit  supersymmetric
gauge  theory, as well as orbifolded versions with
 and become conformally invariant.
It was known long ago
 that the
 theory is
conformally invariant for all finite .
This led to the conjecture inthat the 
theories might be conformally
invariant, at least in some case(s),
for finite .
It should be emphasized that this
conjecture cannot be checked
purely
within a perturbative framework.
I assume that the local 's
which arise in this scenario
and which would lead to 
gauge groups are non-dynamical,
as suggested by Witten,
leaving 's.

As for experimental tests of such
a TeV GUT, the situation at energies
below 4 TeV is predicted to be the standard model with
a Higgs boson still to be discovered at a mass
predicted by radiative corrections
 to be below 267 GeV at 99 confidence level.

There are many particles predicted
at  TeV beyond those of
the minimal standard model.
They include
as spin-0 scalars the states of Eq.().
and
as spin-1/2 fermions the states
of Eq.(),
Also predicted are gauge bosons to fill out the gauge groups
of (), and in the same energy region
the gauge bosons to fill out all of
. All these extra particles are necessitated by
the conformality constraints of to lie
close to the conformal fixed point.

One important issue is whether this proliferation
of states at  TeV is
compatible with precision
electroweak data in hand. This has
been studied in the related model of
 in a recent article. Those results
are not easily translated to the present
model but it is possible that such an analysis
including limits on flavor-changing neutral currents
could rule out the entire framework.

As alternative to 
another approach to TeV unification has as its
group at  TeV  where
one  breaks diagonally to color
while the other two 's each break to
 where level
 characterizes irregular embedding.
The triangular quiver 
with ends identified and 
, ,
preserves  supersymmetry.
I have chosen to describe the 
 model in the text
mainly because the symmetry breaking
to the standard model is
more transparent.

The TeV unification fits 
and , predicts three families,
and partially resolves the GUT hierarchy.
If such unification holds in Nature there is a
very rich level of physics one order of
magnitude above presently accessible energy.

Is a hierarchy problem resolved in the present theory?
In the
non-gravitational limit 
I have, above the weak scale, the new unification
scale  TeV. Thus, although not totally resolved,
the GUT hierarchy is ameliorated.

Predictivity 


The calculations have been done in the one-loop
approximation to the renormalization group equations
and threshold effects have been ignored.
These corrections are not expected to be large
since the couplings are weak in the entrire energy
range considered. There are possible further corrections
such a non-perturbative effects, and the effects of
large extra dimensions, if any.

In one sense the robustness of this TeV-scale
unification is almost self-evident, in that it follows from the weakness
of the coupling constants in the evolution from  to .
That is, in order to define the theory at ,
one must combine the effects of
threshold corrections ( due to O()
mass splittings )
and potential corrections from redefinitions
of the coupling constants and the unification scale.
We can then impose  the coupling constant relations at 
as renormalization conditions and this is valid
to the extent that higher order corrections do
not destabilize the vacuum state.

We shall approach the comparison with data in two
different but almost equivalent ways. The first
is "bottom-up" where we use as input that the
values of  and
 are expected to be 
and  respectively at .

Using the experimental ranges allowed for
,
 and

 we have calculatedthe values of 
and 
for a range of  between 1.5 TeV
and 8 TeV.
Allowing a maximum discrepancy of  in
 and
 in 
as reasonable estimates of corrections, we deduce that
the unification scale  can lie anywhere
between 2.5 TeV and 5 TeV. Thus the theory is
robust in the sense that there is no singular
limit involved in choosing a particular value
of .

Another test of predictivity of the same
model is to fix the unification values at  of
 and 
. We then compute the
resultant predictions at the scale .

The results are shown for 
in Fig. 1 with the allowed range. The precise
data on  are indicated in Fig. 1 and
the conclusion is that the model makes correct
predictions for .
Similarly, in Fig 2, there is a plot of the
prediction for  versus
 with  held
with the allowed empirical range.
The two quantities plotted in Figs 1 and 2 
are consistent for similar ranges of .
Both  and  are within the empirical limits
if  TeV.

The model has many additional gauge bosons
at the unification scale, including neutral 's,
which could mediate flavor-changing processes
on which there are strong empirical upper limits.

A detailed analysis wll require specific identification
of the light families and quark flavors with
the chiral fermions appearing in the quiver diagram
for the model. We can make only the general
observation that the lower bound on a 
which couples like the standard  boson
is quoted as  TeVwhich is safely below the  values considered here
and which we identify with the mass of the new gauge bosons.

This is encouraging to believe that flavor-changing
processes are under control in the model but
this issue will require more careful analysis when
a specific identification of the quark states
is attempted.

Since there are many new states predicted
at the unification scale  TeV, there is a danger
of being ruled out by precision low energy data.
This issue is conveniently studied in terms
of the parameters  and  introduced inand designed to measure departure from the predictions
of the standard model.

Concerning , if the new  doublets are
mass-degenerate and hence do not violate a custodial
 symmetry they contribute nothing to .
This therefore provides a constraint on the spectrum
of new states.

According to, a multiplet of degenerate
heavy chiral fermions gives a contribution to :

 
where  is the third component of weak isopspin
of the left- and right- handed component of
fermion  and  is the number of colors.
In the present model, the additional fermions are non-chiral
and fall into vector-like multiplets and so do not
contribute
to Eq.().

Provided that the extra isospin multiplets
at the unification scale  are sufficiently
mass-degenerate, therefore, there is no conflict
with precision data at low energy.

Discussion 

The plots we have presented clarify the accuracy
of the predictions of this TeV unification scheme for
the precision values accurately measured at the Z-pole.
The predictivity is as accurate for  as
it is for supersymmetric GUT models.
There is, in addition, an accurate prediction for 
which is used merely as input in SusyGUT models.

At the same time, the accurate predictions are seen to be robust
under varying the unification scale around 
from about 2.5 TeV to 5 TeV.

In conclusion, since this model ameliorates the GUT hierarchy
problem and naturally accommodates three families, it
provides a viable alternative to the widely-studied
GUT models which unify by logarithmic evolution
of couplings up to much higher GUT scales.


Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by the
Office of High Energy, US Department
of Energy under Grant No. DE-FG02-97ER41036.

Figure Captions 

Fig. 1.

Plot of  versus  in TeV, assuming
 and .

Fig.2.

Plot of  versus  in TeV, assuming
 and .


 

 

 a3fixed2.eps 


 

 

 

 

 sin2fixed2.eps 


 

 

 99 
J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2,  231 (1998).
hep-th/9711200 .

S.S. Gubser, I.R. Klebanov and A.M. Polyakov, Phys. Lett.
B428,  105 (1998). hep-th/9802109 .

E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2,  253 (1998).
hep-th/9802150 .
P.H. Frampton, Phys. Rev. D60,  041901 (1999). hep-th/9812117 .
P.H. Frampton and W.F. Shively, Phys. Lett. B454,  49 (1999).
hep-th/9902168 .
P.H. Frampton and C. Vafa. hep-th/9903226. 
S. Kachru and E. Silverstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,  4855 (1998).
hep-th/9802183 .
A. De Ru jula, H. Georgi and S.L. Glashow.
Fifth Workshop on Grand Unification .
Editors: P.H. Frampton, H. Fried and K.Kang.
World Scientific (1984) page 88.
U. Amaldi, W. De Boer, P.H. Frampton, H. Fu rstenau and J.T. Liu.
Phys. Lett. B281,  374 (1992).
P.H. Frampton, Phys. Rev. D60,  085004 (1999). hep-th/9905042 .
S. Mandelstam, Nucl. Phys. B213,  149 (1983).
J.C. Pati and A. Salam,
Phys. Rev. D8,  1240 (1973); ibid  D10,  275 (1974).
H. Georgi and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32,  438 (1974).
H. Georgi, H.R. Quinn and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.
33,  451 (1974).
P.H. Frampton and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Lett. B131,  340 (1983).
U. Amaldi, W. de Boer and H. Fu rstenau, Phys. Lett. B260,  447 (1991).
H. Murayama and A. Pierce, Phys. Rev. D65, 
055009 (2002).
F. Pisano and V. Pleitez, Phys. Rev. D46,  410 (1992).
P.H. Frampton,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,  2889 (1992).
S. Dimopoulos and D. E. Kaplan, Phys. Lett. B531,  127 (2002).
P.H. Frampton and P. Minkowski, hep-th/0208024 .
M. Bershadsky, Z. Kakushadze and C. Vafa,
Nucl. Phys. B523,  59 (1998).
M. Bershadsky and A. Johansen, Nucl. Phys. B536,  141 (1998).
E. Witten, JHEP 9812:012  (1998).
Particle Data Group. Review of Particle Physics. 
Phys. Rev. D66,  010001 (2002).
C. Csaki, J. Erlich, G.D. Kribs and J. Terning,
Phys. Rev. D66,  075008 (2002).
K.R. Dienes and J. March-Russell, Nucl. Phys. B479,  113 (1996).
M. Peskin and T. Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65,  964 (1990);
Phys. Rev. D46,  381 (1992).
S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D24,  1681 (1981);
Phys. Lett. B112,  133 (1982).
P.H. Frampton, R.M. Rohm and T. Takahashi. hep-ph/0302XXX .
S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B193,  150 (1981).








