
February 2003   

Stability Issues for  Dark Energy 
Paul H. Frampton
 

Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC  27599. 
 


 
Global fits to precision cosmological data which
show that there is a dark energy component
comprising about 2/3 of the total cosmological energy also hint that a
dark energy with 
is viable, even favored.
Here we discuss implications of such a surprising ,
including whether it jeopardizes vacuum stability.
It appears to be secure in microscopic processes,
but why bulk dark energy
has not decayed spontaneously
is mysterious.
 

Introduction .

The equation of state for the dark energy component
in cosmology has been the subject of much recent 
discussion
Present data are consistent
with a constant   corresponding to
a cosmological constant. But the data allow a present value
for
 in the range
.

If one assumes, more generally, that  depends on 
then the allowed range for  is approximately the
same. In the present article we shall
forgo this greater generality as not relevant.
Instead, in the present article we address the question
of stability for a dark energy with constant 
.

Behavior of  Under Boost 

Consider making a Lorentz boost along the
1-direction with velocity  (put c = 1). Then
the stress-energy tensor which in the dark energy
rest frame has the form:
 
is boosted to  given by

 

We learn several things by studying Eq.().

First, consider the energy component .
Since  we see that for  this is positive 
and the Weak Energy Condition (WEC) is respected.
For ,  as  and
is still never negative. For , however, we see that 
 if  and this violates the WEC
and is the first sign that the case  must be studied
with great care.

Looking at the pressure component  we see the special
role of the case  because 
 remains Lorentz invariant
as expected for a cosmological constant. Similarly
the off-diagonal components 
remain vanishing only in this case.

The main concern is the negativity of 
which appears for .

Interpretation as Limiting Velocity 

One possibility is that it is impossible
for . The highest velocities known are
those for the highest-energy cosmic
rays which are protons with energy .
These have 
corresponding to . This would imply
that:
 
which is one possible conclusion.

Interpretation as Vacuum Instability .

But let us suppose, as hinted at by 
 
that more precise cosmological data
reveals a dark matter which
violates Eq.(). Then, by boosting to an inertial
frame with , one arrives at 
and this would be a signal for vacuum instability.
If the cosmological background
is a Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric the physics
is Lorentz invariant and so one should be able to see evidence
for the instability already in the preferred frame
where  is given by Eq.().

This goes back to work in the 1960's and 1970's
where one compares the unstable vacuum to a superheated
liquid. As an example, at one atmospheric
pressure water can be heated carefully 
to above  C without boiling.
The superheated water is metastable and attempts to nucleate
bubbles containing steam. However, there is an energy
balance for a three-dimensional bubble between the positive
surface energy  and
the negative latent heat energy of the 
interior  which
leads to a critical radius below which 
the bubble shrinks away and above which
the bubble expands and precipitates boiling.

For the vacuum the first idea inwas to treat the spacetime vacuum as a 
four-dimensional material medium just like superheated water.
The second idea in the same paper 
was to notice that a hyperspherical bubble expanding at the speed of light
is the same to all inertial observers. This Lorentz invariance 
provided the mathematical  relationship
between the lifetime for unstable vacuum decay and
the critical radius of the four-dimensional 
bubble or instanton.

In the rest frame, the energy density is
 
since . In the last expression
of Eq. () 
is the present Hubble constant which numerically is the dark energy
contained in about a million cubic fermis; these alternatives will be used nearer 
the end of this article.

In order to make an estimate of the 
dark energy decay lifetime
in the absence of a known potential,
we can proceed by assuming
it is the same Lorentz invariant 
process of a hyperspherical bubble
expanding at the speed of light, the same for all
inertial observers.

Let the radius of this hypersphere be R, its energy density be 
and its surface tension be . Then according tothe relevant instanton action is
 
where  and  are the volume and
surface energy densities, respectively.

The stationary value of this action is
 
corresponding to the critical radius
 
We shall assume 
that the wall thickness is negligble compared to
the bubble radius.
The number of vacuum nucleations in the
past lightcone is estimated
as
 
where  is the 4-volume of the past and
 is the mass scale relevant to the
problem.

This vacuum decay picture led
to the proposals of inflation,
for solving the horizon, flatness and monopole problems 
(only the horizon problem was generally known at
the time of).
None of that work addressed why the true vacuum has zero energy.
Now that the observed vacuum has non-zero energy
density

we may interpret it as a "false vacuum" lying
above the "true vacuum" with .

In order to use the full power 
of Eqs. ( , , ,
)
taken from we need
to estimate the three mass-dimension parameters
 and  therein.
Let us discuss these three scales in turn.

The easiest of the three to select is . If we imagine a
tunneling through a barrier between a false vacuum
with energy density  to a true vacuum at energy density zero
then the energy density inside the bubble will
be . No other
choice is reasonable.

Next we discuss the typical mass scale  in the prefactor
of Eq. (). Here we argue that the value of 
does not matter. Suppose we take the largest imaginable scale, the Planck scale, 
. Then the prefactor has the value .
But even this is easily compensated by the factor .
To ensure  one needs  which means:
 
Given that  this requires only that
.
This will ensure  for any smaller  and
thus the prefactor, and the scale ,
does not strongly influence
vacuum stability just as is the case in field theory.

The most difficult scale to estimate is the value of . 
Given that the dark energy
has not already "boiled" would require that .
But why this value of ? This question could
be answered given a potential barrier to
characterize the transition between dark energy and
true vacuum. Here the potential is unknown but
we would expect dimensionally that
.
Given the inequality on 
 we know that the critical radius of a nucleation
bubble would be macroscopic since, from Eq.(),
 mm.
This means that any smaller quantity of dark energy,
with total energy ,
will be of a subcritical size and hence unable to
make the transition to the real vacuum. The observed
stability of the dark energy
suggests  and hence an upper limit
to the dynamical length size ().

Let the quantity of dark energy which would
decay, were Eq.() violated, be  in eV units. 
Assuming that the dynamical mass scales which generate 
 are the quantities  and  we may assume 
from dimensional analysis that for some 
 
If we write  then
 
and we now express theoretical prejudices about .

The first observation about  is that it is inconceivable that it fall
outside of the range
 because, if ,  is the radius of the visible universe
while, if ,  is the Planck length.
Our previous discussion of dark energy stability suggests
that  in order that  mm, so
eliminating . 

This brings us to the question of whether such
decay can be initiated in e.g.  a
high energy particle collision.
This was first raised inand revisited for cosmic-ray collisions
in. That was in the context of
the standard-model Higgs vacuum and the
conclusion is that high-energy colliders
are safe at all present and planned foreseeable energies because
much more severe conditions have already
occurred (without disaster) in cosmic-ray
collisions within our galaxy.
More recently, this issue has been addressed
in connection with fears
that the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
(RHIC) might initiate a diastrous 
transition
but according to careful analysisthere was no such danger. 

Unimodular gravity can be interpreted
to suggest  in Eq.().
The arguments in
 compellingly suggest similarly the scale corresponding to
 in Eq.() and ()
i.e.  
which is the dark energy contained in a volume .
The discussion of suggests that the graviton
could be composite with a scale in a range around  and that the
interactions with standard model
particles are not point-like but via
"stringy" halos.
This could cut-off in the ultra-violet the contributions of the
QCD and weak scales in the effective
gravity theory, and explain why the corresponding much-too-large
vacuum energies do
not show up in the vacuum
energy appearing on the Friedmann equations.
The graviton-compositeness scale
cannot be much larger than
 otherwise the cosmological
term would be too large; it
cannot be much smaller, otherwise deviations from
Newton's inverse square law would already
have been detected in terrestrial
experiments such as.

The case  is by far the most plausible since any
 invokes a new mass scale.
For , stability in the sense of Eq.()
requires, from Eq.(), that  which 
implies  in order to  
ensure, for stability, the absence
of nucleations .
But qualitative arguments
would instead suggest, in the absence of another
mass scale, that  in which case
the observed stability of the bulk dark energy 
is rendered a mystery which
leads to our dramatic  conclusion about .
The type of dark energy instability discussed
in this paper merits consideration.

As a first remark, since the critical radius 
for nucleation is macroscopic, it appears that
the instability cannot be triggered by any 
microscopic process.
While it may be comforting to know that the 
dark energy is not such a doomsday phenomenon, it
also implies at the same time the dreadful conclusion 
that dark energy may have no 
microscopic effect.
If any such microscopic effect in a terrestrial 
experiment could be 
found, it would be crucial in 
investigating the dark energy phenomenon.

In closing one may speculate 
how such stability arguments may evolve in the future.
As prognostications, we may expect most conservatively that
the value  will eventually be established empirically in which case 
both quintessence and the "phantom menace", as well
as the stability arguments presented above,
will all be irrelevant. 
In that case, indeed for any , we may still hope that dark energy will
provide the first connection
between string theory and the real
world as in e.g. .
If more precise data do establish ,
as in the "phantom menace" scenario, the 
stability arguments presented here seem
so serious that,
since the data suggest that the dark energy
has existed for gigayears
and the theoretical arguments suggest it decayed long ago,
one is led to question
the validity of the Friedmann equations or, in other words,
of classical general relativity.

Acknowledgements 

This work
is supported in part by the
US Department of Energy under
Grant No. DE-FG02-97ER-41036.
 
 99 
A. Melchiorri, L. Mersini, C.J. Odman and M. Trodden.
astro-ph/0211522 .
P. Schuecker, R.R. Caldwell, H. Bohringer, C.A. Collins and L. Guzzo.
astro-ph/0211480 .
S. Hannestad and E. Mo rtsell.
Phys. Rev. D66,  063508 (2002). astro-ph/0205096 .
R.R. Caldwell,
Phys. Lett. B545,  23 (2002).
astro-ph/9908168 .
P.H. Frampton. astro-ph/0209037 .
M. Bastero-Gil, P.H. Frampton and L. Mersini, Phys. Rev. D65, 
106002 (2002).
D.A. Dicus and W.W. Repko.
hep-ph/0211109 .
P.H. Frampton and T. Takahashi.
astro-ph/0211544 .
S.M. Carroll, M. Hoffman and M. Trodden. astro-ph/0301273 
S.W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys. 25,  152 (1972).

L.H. Ford. gr-qc/0301045 . 
J. Langer, Ann. Phys. 41,  108 (1967).
J. Langer, Ann. Phys. 54,  258 (1969).
P.H. Frampton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37,  1378 (1976).
A.H. Guth, Phys. Rev. D23,  347  (1981).

A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B108,  389 (1982).

A. Albrecht and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48,  1220 (1982).
P.H. Frampton, Phys. Rev. D15,  2922 (1977). 
P. Hut, Nucl. Phys. A418,  301C (1984).

P. Hut and M.J. Rees, IAS-Princeton preprint 83-0042 (1984)
R.L. Jaffe, W. Busza, F. Wilczek and J. Sandweiss,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 72,  1125 (2000).
A. Dar, A. De Rujula and U. Heinz, Phys. Lett. B470,  142 (1999).
R.D. Sorkin, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 36,  2759 (1997).
gr-qc/9706002 .
Y.J. Ng and H. Van Dam, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D10,  49 (2001).
hep-th/9911102 .
Y.J. Ng, private communication.
R. Sundrum, JHEP 9907 (1999) 001. hep-ph/9708329 .
C.D. Hoyle et al.  (Eot-Wash group), Phys. Rev. Lett.
86,  1418 (2001).
hep-ph/0011014 .





















