

theorem Theorem 
definition Definition 
example Example 






 
SISSA 20/2003/fm
 
Toward the construction of a -algebra in string field theory  
  
A. Parodi (adryparodi@libero.it; aparodi@sissa.it) 
 
S.I.S.S.A. - I.S.A.S. International School for Advanced Studies, 

Via Beirut 2-4, Trieste, Italy 
 

Abstract
  

In string field theory there is a fundamental object, the algebra of string field states , that must be understood better from a mathematical point of view. In particular we are interested in finding, if possible, a  structure over it, or possibly over a subalgebra .

In this paper we define a  operation on , and then using a particular description of Witten's star product, the Moyal's star product, we find an appropriate pre -algebra  on a finite dimensional manifold, where the finite dimensionality is obtained with a cutoff procedure on the string oscillators number. Then we show that using an inductive limit we obtain a pre -algebra  that can be completed to a -algebra.



Introduction 

A very important object in String Field Theory (SFT), introduced for the first time by Witten for the bosonic open string in, is the algebra of string states . It includes string states given by the sum of of all possible states arising in first quantization of the string: 

that are used to build the cubic string field action (see).

But string fields describe also non perturbative solutions like -branes; particularly they were found using a slightly different version of SFT, called Vacuum String Field Theory (VSFT) described in. Such solutions are described by exponentials, whose exponents are quadratic in the string oscillators.



String fields are described as functionals over a particular string configuration, given by its Fourier modes , so we would like to treat those fields as we do for ordinary quantum mechanic where the particle states are functions in  and we have all the appropriate mathematical tools to deal with them. It is clear that for SFT it is much more difficult as we have to deal with infinite dimensional spaces, so we have to find some useful method to treat them.



Returning to -branes, a very important tool used in superstring theory to study them is the -theory of spacetime that gives the -branes -charge (see). In bosonic string, -branes are unstable, due to the presence of a tachyonic mode in the spectrum of the brane worldvolume theory, so we expect to have no conserved charges that is, a trivial -theory. 
Nevertheless, as preliminary step in view of mathematical (supersymmetric examples) we are interested in having some informations on the -theory of the algebra  or of some subalgebra  in order to verify its triviality in the context of SFT.



All the above listed motivations bring us to the need of a better mathematical understanding of the string states algebra . In particular there exists a well known structure that can be very useful for our purposes: it is the -algebra structure. Infact the theory of -algebras allows the extension from finite dimensional to the infinite dimensional case, as we will see, while on the other hand it is intimately related with -theory.

In this work we will manage to show that  is a algebra, and we will find an appropriate pre -algebra  which contains many known string state solutions arising in VSFT, like the squeezed state, the butterfly and the stringy version of GMS solitons found in.

In order to determine such  we had to find the right enviroment, infact Witten's product , as it is defined, is rather obscure from mathematical point of view, but fortunately there are various different descriptions of it. In particular we used the fact that Witten's  product can be also described by Moyal's product (see), which is a very well known object.

One of the problems we had to face was the fact that, as already said, string field states are defined on an infinite dimensional space whose coordinates are the string modes  with , so in order to remedy this, we considered a cutoff, taking only a finite even number of oscillators and we managed to define an appropriate pre -algebra given by the Schwartz functions . This construction was shown to work for every even finite dimensional space , so that we have a pre -algebra for every finite even dimensional space. Then taking the inductive limit of the closure of various pre -algebras we extended the construction to the whole infinite dimensional space.



The paper is organized as follows.

In section 2 we recall some basic definitions about -algebras and give two different definitions of Moyal's product, explaining when they agree.

In section 3 there is a brief review of different various approaches to interpret the Witten's  product. We have focused mainly on half string approach and, of course, Moyal's approach, as they are intimately related to this work.

In section 4 we show that  is a algebra, using some different methods.

In section 5 we describe the infinite dimensional space  of string configurations modelled on a Hilbert manifold. The string fields are defined on it.

In section 6 we consider a cutoff so that we can deal with a finite dimensional string configuration space , and then we analyze the algebra of Schwartz functions  where the composition is given by the Moyal's product. Such functional space can be seen as an operator space over a  Hilbert space (where the product between function is the Moyal's product instead of ordinary pointwise product) and so it is possible to introduce an operator norm over it such that  becomes a pre -algebra. This construction is valid for each finite even dimensional space .

In section 7 we consider the inductive limits of -algebras obtaining a pre -algebra of functions on the infinite dimensional space .

Finally in section 8 we comment on the usefulness of the construction.



Mathematical preliminaries 

In this section we will recall some of the basic constructions needed in this work. It can be useful in order to get the mathematical taste of the problematic.

Definition of -algebra 

In this section we want to recall briefly the basic definition of a -algebra.


 a -algebra  is:



 a linear associative (in general noncommutative) algebra over the field  ;



 a Banach algebra, that is a normed space such that:





The last requirement tells us that the product  in the algebra is continuous (clearly  is a complete space with respect to the topology defined by the norm) ;



 a algebra, i.e. there exists an antilinear  operation

such  that

with the involutionary property

 it satisfies the  condition:


If all the conditions but the completeness are fulfilled we have a pre -algebra  that can be completed to a -algebra adding the missing elements.

Actually a generic abstract non commutative -algebra can be described in terms of bounded operators over some appropriate Hilbert spaces, thanks to the GNS theorem (see).



Infact a very important exemple of -algebra is given by the space  of all bounded operators over a Hilbert space  with norm . It can be shown that the operator norm defined by
 
induces a structure of -algebra on .

Mathematical foundation of Moyal's product 


Introduction 

The Moyal's product is usually applied in the context of quantum mechanic. Infact, given a classical system we can obtain its quantum description by promoting all physical observables (defined by functions on the phase space ) to operators:

Of course we have a huge change in the nature of observables, in particular the commutative pointwise product defined on the algebra of continuous functions , becomes a noncommutative product in the realm of operators.

In the past people tried to understand quantum mechanics remaining in the realm of functions defined on the phase space of a classical system, but changing the product between observables (functions), introducing the so called Moyal's product  which is a noncommutative, associative product that allows a comparison with the operators approach.



There have been two different approaches to the problem which, at first sight seem to be the same, but in general they are not.

The first is based on the so called deformation quantization , built using a deformation of the usual pointwise product, that aims to obtain a noncommutative, associative product. It can be called differential Moyal's product . There is also another definition, based on a different quantization procedure, related to group theoretical considerations that can be called integral Moyal's product . Both of them depend on a parameter  describing the non commutativity (in the case of a quantum mechanical system we have ). Taking the limit  it can be shown that for quite general functional and distributional spaces the two definitions agree.

For completeness we will recall briefly the two constructions.

Deformation quantization 

Let us see the very basics of differential Moyal's product referring to and.

Poisson Manifolds. 

First of all we want to generalize to a generic differentiable manifold the Poisson structure that is well defined in the case of , related to the Poisson brackets.

Let us take a differentiable manifold  and the algebra of its  functions .

If we consider  the Poisson brackets are  linear operators acting on  

such that

Among other properties they satisfy the so called Jacobi identity :

They can also be described using a skewsymmetric rank 2 controvariant tensor  acting on the differentials , by means of the internal product .

Using  we define 

with

With this formalism Jacobi identity becomes
 
In the case of ,  is an antisymmetric tensor with entries different from zero only when we have coordinates , while they are zero if we have  with .



On a generic manifold  we do not have this symplectic structure  and so there are problems to define Poisson brackets.



So we will consider particular manifolds, called Poisson manifolds  that are characterized by the fact that they admit a degree 2 skewsymmetric tensor  called Poisson structure  such that the Schouten brackets vanish:
 
Requirement () is of fundamental importance as the Poisson structure enters  the definition of Poisson brackets and so also in the Jacobi relation. From () we see that if we want them to hold we need exactly the condition ().



Given a Poisson manifold  we can introduce a particular connection, called Poisson connection   such that

A flat Poisson manifold is a manifold whose Poisson connection has no curvature.



Now we can begin the part on deformation.

 Differential Moyal's product. 

Let us take a flat Poisson manifold and after having considered the classical hamiltonian mechanics on it, we want  to "deform" something in order to obtain the quantum mechanics.

As already said one of the main properties which is lost passing from classical to quantum mechanic is the commutativity of the product between observables, while associativity is mantained.

So if we want to describe of the system using classical functions on phase space we need to change their composition law introducing an associative, noncommutative product that will not be pointwise any more.

Let us begin noticing that the Poisson brackets have the structure of a noncommutative product and then see if we can use this fact.

So consider a flat Poisson manifold  and bidifferentials operators  of order :

with

Let us consider some cases:

: by definition we set ;

: as  we find Poisson Brackets: ;

: .



Let us put all these bidifferentials together using a power expansion, and we expect to find a noncommutative product. So let us consider a function

and

Now we can substitute 

where  is the so called deformation parameter  that encodes the information about how far we are from commuting coordinates.

In this way we obtain an operator given by a formal series where the coefficients are elements in . This operator is bidifferential and acts on . So we can define a formal deformation of the usual product, given by
 
It is clearly noncommutative. We have to check it is associative that is

In it is shown that it is associative only if , that is, if the formal series gives an exponential:

where  represents the Poisson brackets. This can also be written as (setting  and considering :

 
We can immediately notice from () that unless we have particular functions like polynomials or exponentials, it's very difficult to calculate the product of two generic functions, so we need a more treatable definition.


Integral Moyal's product 

Now we recall briefly the main concepts that bring to the definition of Integral Moyal's product which is realized assigning operators to functions in an appropriate way, and then imposing consistency conditions on the product. The main reference is.

Let us consider a phase space , with a measure  and a Hilbert  space associated to  in some way. 
 
A Moyal's quantizer  for  is a mapping  of  into the space of bounded self adjoint operators on  such that  is weakly dense in , and moreover it has to verify
 
 
The quantization of a function  defined on  is defined by
 
We can also perform the opposite operation: given a linear operator  we associate a function by
 
It can be shown that  and  are inverse operations.



Let us consider now the following Moyal's quantizer: 
 
and the action of the Moyal's quantizer on functions, given by the following expression:
 
Now if we consider a function  we can determine the action of  over functions:




Now that we have a way to assign an operator to functions we can wonder if there exists a product  between functions so that the following requirement is fulfilled: 
  
where the right hand side is the usual operators product. The answer is yes, and we give the following
 
Given two functions , there exists a product, called integral Moyal's product   defined so that () holds. It is given by
 
where  and  is the Poisson structure.


Comparison between the two definitions 

As already said, at first sight the two definitions seem to be equivalent: starting from the differential Moyal product
 
with , we can consider 
 
Then plugging () into () and considering the Fourier transform of the result, we find
 
This form is related to () by simply taking the Fourier transforms 

then plugging them into () and finally the inverse transform of .



From these considerations it seems that differential Moyal product and the integral Moyal product are equivalent. The problem is that some mathematical passages are formal and are well defined only if we work on suitable functional spaces. What we have is that in general the two definitions agree when the non commutativity parameter , although there are particular cases in which the correspondence holds for every values  that is, when the functions that are multiplied are analytic.
 
We will not deal with this problem. Very good references on it are and.


Various different approaches to String Field Theory 

The initial formulation of String Field Theory, given by Witten in is quite formal and it does not actually allow much developements if not suitably reinterpreted. There have been various different approaches to the subject, aimed to understand the rather obscure Witten's noncommutative star product .

Now we will review them briefly in order to have a precise idea of the subject.

Original Witten's method 

In its original work Witten defined string field theory by means of a quite abstract algebra  containing all possible string states , together with a noncommutative product .

The form of the action is the following

 

where  is the BRST operator.

The product has to glue together two half strings in order to describe the string interaction: if we suppose to have two string fields  then their product 
 
has the following meaning:

 

We can give a mathematical meaning to such operation noticing that a string state  is built using string oscillators  acting on the vacuum . If we consider now the string  in terms of Fourier modes, given by
 
or also, using the midpoint coordinate :
 
then we can express Fourier modes  in terms of oscillators  and so we can give a functional form to the string states . First of all let us define the state :

with 

so we get
 
This point will be explained better later on.

So using a functional algebra we can rewrite the Witten's product in the following formal way:

 

But it is not useful for practical calculations.

CFT method 

If we consider a string field made of all states arising in first quantization given by

 

then we can use the correspondence between states and operators that we have in CFT (considering a wordsheet approach to the problem), so the interaction between two open strings can be described in terms of OPE of vertex operators (see and). This is one of the most useful methods if we want to consider the interactions of a finite number of string fields using truncation level techniques (see).

Algebraic method 

There is also a very powerful method developed in that uses an algebraic approach based on string oscillators.

It starts from the observation that the cubic interaction term can be written using an operator vertex  (a state in the tensor product ), as follows:
 
and this vertex can be written explicitly by imposing the gluing conditions at algebraic level. The final result is
 
having considered only bosonic modes and not ghosts.

Here the indices  take values  and indicate which string of the three strings involved in the interaction is acted on, while  with  fixed, are the coefficients of an infinite dimensional matrix.

Now if we want to perform a product between two string fields  then we can use such vertex:


Half string method 

This is based on a technique that manages to break the string oscillators into two distinct sectors, and will turn out to be very useful for our purpose, so we will explain it in more details. The original references are,,.

In these works it is shown how the  product can be interpreted as a matrix product.

In order to do it we have to change the description of the string. Let us consider the original function  given by () and ().

Then we can break the string into its left half  and its right half  defined in the following way:

 
 

Now, both  and  can be described in terms of Fourier modes  and  respectively and the expansions are given by (see):




and there is a relation between the original  modes of  and . The relations are described by
 
 
 
with


The inverse relations are

 
 
 

with

and .

So a generic string field can be described as 
 
but also in the split string formalism as 


Now we have described the description of the string fields, it is time to move to the Witten's product  and to understand why it can be seen as a matrix product.



Let us recall the functional form of Witten's  product described in ().

If we use the half string approach the product becomes formally easier, infact we have

 

Now we can interpret  as the rows of the "matrix"  and  as the columns, so the  becomes a matrix product of infinite dimensional matrices.

It can also be written as 

 

Moyal's method 

The Moyal's method is very important in our searching for a -algebraic structure inside , as it relates the Witten's  product to a well known noncommutative, associative product, the Moyal's product. Its main definitions and constructions are reviewed in section 2. Here we will focus our attention on, the work in which the above relation is explained.



First of all it is necessary to study another way to perform Moyal's product: so far we have seen the product on the phase space described by the integral kernel (using the integral Moyal product):
 
with , and it is the case in which we perform a Fourier transform of all the coordinates on the phase space (see eq. ()). Now we want to see what happens if we Fourier transform only half of the coordinates and precisely the . Starting from a function  we consider

Then we can define two new coordinates

so that we define a third function . Now, the Moyal's product can be calculated in any variables we want, but it can be shown that if we use the set  we find a particularly easy form: if we associate  that is

then we have
 
with ; we can easily see that () tells us that the Moyal's product can be seen as a sort of matrix product with infinite entries.

We can apply all this procedure to the case of string field theory.

In Moyal's product using the half Fourier approach, we have the following steps: we start from coordinats on the phase space  and then obtain :

 
and then we have
 

But now we can notice the following important fact: () is very similar to the Witten's product in split string field theory, described by ().
So in the case of string field theory we have to perform the transformations in the opposite direction: we have the coordinates  corresponding to the previous . We want to relate them to  which correspond to  above.
In this case the relation is more complicated than in (), infact we have relations () and () with  the equivalent of  and  the equivalent of .

So now we consider the coordinates  and perform a Fourier transformation of  to get the conjugate momentum, but instead of using  we choose a more complicated expression at first sight, that will simplify calculations later on:

that is, it plays the role of the Moyal's coordinate  on the phase space.

So we find, after Fourier transforming (here we use the convention )

 

and this is the expression of the string field theory on the phase space with coordinates
.

Now if we calculate the Moyal's brackets of the coordinates  we find

but using  we can simplify the above expression obtaining the independency for each mode:

At this point we can remove the martices  and so we find the string field .
So we get finally the expression of the string field theory on the phase space with coordinates .

The string fields in this final form can be  multiplied using a Moyal's product described by the coordinates on the phase space, given by equation () with .



Remark.  There are some calculations that do not depend on the specific functional space we are considering. In this case we can also use the differential form of the Moyal product that is
 
Sometimes this expression will be more suitable than the integral form to check some properties of the algebra .


 as a algebra 

So far we have simply recalled the main tools involved in SFT. Now we want to begin the search of a -algebra inside . In this section we will show, using some of the different approaches described previously, that  is indeed a algebra.

As already said,  is defined as an abstract noncommutative, associative(Actually it is not always true: there are some pathological cases in which we have the so called associativiy anomaly , for an introduction to the problem see [14],[15])  algebra.

Given three fields  we have:

and also the distributive property w.r.t. the addition:

We also assume that  has an identity  such that 


Now we want to find an operation  that satisfies the requirements of definition .


Witten's approach 

As already seen, this approach consists in gluing parts of the interacting strings. In particular we want to describe in terms of such prescription the antilinearity:

 

So we need some operations that naturally change the order in the  product. One possibility is given by reversing the orientation of the two strings  so that

so that we define
 
notice that the complex conjugation is needed in order to fulfill the requirement

Let us check if it satisfy also the others:



 ;



 the check for 
 
can be performed graphically considering the changing in the orientations; in this way the following diagram 


 

under the  prescription seen above becomes


 

so graphically we have shown ().


Half string approach 

For our purposes it is one of the easiest contructions, infact it uses heavily the possibility of describing the star product in terms of infinite dimensional matrices. This fact simplifies our job as we know how to define a operation on a matrices algebra: it is the usual hermitian conjugation; given  then



It is also immediate the interpretation of the operations: the transposition consists in the exchange , so the action on the field becomes

 

It is immediate to verify that

 

So we verified that  is indeed a algebra.

Moreover we can compare this approach with the previous one simply noticing that the transposition of the matrices given by the exchange  corresponds exactly to the inversion in the orientation . The complex conjugation is exactly the same.


Moyal's approach 

In this approch we can describe the string fields  as fields  having performed a Fourier transform only on the odd coordinates .

So the Witten's product between two fields , becomes 



Now if we define a  operation on the algebra  of functions  as the usual complex conjugation (in the next formulas  stands for the usual complex conjugation) we fulfill all the requirements of a algebra:

with . Infact we have



 ;



 ;



  from




So again we have the confirm that  is a algebra.






















































































Functional approach to  

The problem of finding a algebra was not too hard after all and we have seen that the whole of  is a algebra. Now we want to see if is it possible to introduce a -algebraic structure, and it is a harder challenge, expecially because we need to have a better defined mathematical background. At the end we will find that not the whole of  is a -algebra but only appropriate subsets. In particular we will find one of them.

In order to have a well defined mathematical problem we have to understand all the variuos mathematical objects that enter the game.



In this section we will show that it is possible to approach the task from a functional point of view in which the string field states  become functionals over some suitable defined space.

The space of string states  

The basic object we start with is the physical string . It is described by a vector field defined on a closed interval  and the only requirement is the continuity as we suppose the string does not break. So all possible string configurations are given by all possible continuous vector fields

where  is the dimension of spacetime.

So we get a set 

Such vector fields can be described by their Fourier expansion
 
where each  as the vector field is real: .

Now we can fix the attention on a single component . It is a continuous function on a closed interval , so it is a  function, and, as shown in () it is written in components on a basis , so that it can be described by infinite coordinates . They describe an infinite dimensional space, and if we suppose , then they describe a  manifold. This is an example of Hilbert manifold  that is a manifold that is locally homeomorphic to a Hilbert space (in our case we have a global homeomorphism).

So we have a map

which allows us to describe a generic string state using coordinates  living in a subset of  (and not all  as the space  is not a Banach space in the  norm: there are  functions which are not continuous, like a step function on ). What is important here is the possibility of describing a string state by coordinates  living in some subspace .

So our starting point is a space , and any string field  can be defined as function on it:

as we suppose to have complex valued fields.

Now the string fields algebra  has a good mathematical foundation and we can consider the functional analysis on it, as we usually do for quantum mechanics where we deal with functions

and  is a finite number. In that case we consider only appropriate subsets  (where  is the space of all possible functions on ) with physical meaning (e.g. ).

In this case too we can restrict the class of functions to appropriate subsets  on which we can define a norm.





























Pre -algebras on finite dimensional spaces 

Looking at all various approaches we have to SFT, we see that mabye the most rigorous is the Moyal's approach, at least if we consider a cutoff in the string modes, that is we consider all modes  with  with  finite. This implies that the space defined in the previous section is a finite dimensional manifold . On such spaces we have a well defined functional analysis where instead of the pointwise product we use Moyal's product. Then only at the end we will take an inductive limit in order to extend the construction to all string modes, removing the cutoff.

The big problem we had to face was to find a space of functions that is a -algebra, or even more simply a pre -algebra in which the composition law is the Moyal's product. The first hint in this direction was found in, while the mathematical details were found in.


Construction and main properties of the space  

We start with a finite even dimensional space  and the space  of rapidly decreasing smooth functions, given by the conditions

 

Such space, called Schwartz space , is a Frechet space, that is, its topology is given by a family of seminorms, either 
 
or
 
and it is complete with respect to such families.

Now we want to see if  can be a -algebra (eventually a pre -algebra).

First of all we need to verify it is an algebra under the Moyal's product.

Given two functions  we define the Moyal's product using () setting in particular . Then we want to show that , and that the Moyal's product is a continuous bilinear operation, that is we need to show that  is bounded .
 
So let us consider the following relations
 
 
where
 

Now, from the definition of Moyal's product we have that 

 

so  is bounded. Now using () and () we find
 

and using the definition of seminorms () and () we find
 
with , so by induction, . Moreover () shows also that Moyal's product is continuous in the topology induced by the seminorms used.


Operator norm on  

Now we can consider  as a space of operators acting on a Hilbert space  where the norm on  is defined by means of the Moyal's product

with 

It can be shown to be a norm.

So if we define the action of  on  by means of a left  product:

with .

We can wonder if the action of  on  still gives an element in . The answer is yes, and it is a consequence of the theorem 8 of reference p.878:

Now we can define the -algebra norm for the operators :
 

From the general theory of -algebra of bounded operators (see) and what said in section () the space  with such operator norm is a pre -algebra as it is not complete. Anyway it can be completed to obtain a -algebra.



Remark : there are two different kinds of norm on the space  and it is better to clarify this point in order to avoid confusion. As said at the beginning, as functional space it is a Frechet space, its topology is given by a family of seminorms, and it is complete with respect to such topology.

But  can also be seen as an operators space acting on a "Moyal Hilbert space" , and in this case we can define an operator norm, which a priori has nothing to do with the previous family of seminorms, and with respect to which it is not complete.



Let us notice that the squeezed states representing branes in VSFT, after we have used a cutoff on the string oscillator modes, are gaussians, so they are elements of . This is good as the space we have found is meaningful for our purposes.


Inductive limit 

The construction seen so far is mathematically well posed, and satisfies our requirements, but it can be applied only after we have considered a cutoff procedure, so we are missing a part of the theory. The purpose of this section is to extend the above construction to the infinite dimensional case, and this can be done using a procedure which is quite general in the theory of -algebras, called inductive limit .


General construction 

First of all we notice that we have a pre -algebra  for each positive .

Now we describe the general procedure (see p.468), and later on we will specialize to our concrete case.



We take a directed set  (a directed set  is a set with a partial ordering  such that  with ) . Then  let  be a -algebra;  with  let us consider the map 

then we require  to have the following properties:



 ;

 ;

(that is  is a homomorphism and this implies )(Now we show it.
)  given a Banach algebra  and , the spectral radius  is defined as follows:

   we have .
In particular we have the following
   if a is a normal element of a -algebra , then  (in particular it holds if  is hermitian).
Finally we have
  any homomorphism  of a Banach algebra  into a -algebra  is continuous and norm decreasing.
Proof  Take  with  so . Then we can apply  on  and we obtain that  has an inverse in , so  and that gives 

Now we take  and put , as  is hermitian (as  is), so

so, in the end we have

 

 

  with  and .



A system  fulfilling all the requirements is called directed system of -algebras .

Now we consider the set  and let us introduce an equivalence relation :
 
So we can define equivalence classes  and the set of all such classes is given by . It can be shown that  is a pre -algebra if we define the following operations:



 ;

 ;

 ;

 ;

 .



Notice that in the last line we have a well defined finite limit as  is a positive defined, norm decreasing homomorphism.

Of course the algebra  can be completed to a -algebra.


Application to the  case 

It is time to consider our case where , ,  with  and . Then let us put coordinates  on  and  on .

At this point let us consider the following maps:

with
 
where the product is the usual pointwise product.

If we have  then we define .

Then, by construction

and 

So the hardest check is
 
In order to show it let us consider the following functions


Then


but we can easily factorize the exponents:
 
the same for the other two bits, so plugging in the above relation we find





where we defined with  the gaussian function such that under Moyal's product is a projector: . So we can show also relation () infact we have:

while



so we satisfied the requirements.

So, summarizing, we managed to define homomorphisms  and so from the general procedure seen before, we manage to build a pre -algebra .


Conclusions 

The algebra  we have built is very interesting for our purposes. First of all it is possible to consider generalizations of the maps () (for example we can multiply a generic function  by  where  is a suitable polynomial and  is the usual Gaussian.) , so that  contains all various states found in VSFT, which represent nonperturbative solutions of the VSFT equation of motion (in the matter sector):

physically interpreted as -branes and which are clearly projectors.

Moreover now that we have a mathematical description of string states we could try to find all projectors. The problem is that we do not have the completion of algebras , so when we take the inductive limit if we take only the pre -algebra without paying attention to the completion it can happen that we miss some projectors.

Anyway, if we managed to get the completion we would have in principle all possible projectors and it would be very interesting, at least for three reasons:



 we would get all  solutions and this would be important for the analysis of the non perturbative behaviour of string field theory;

 the knowledge of all projectors allow us to build the -theory of . As already said, the -theory is useful to check the instability of the -brane states found. This would be a further confirmation that the states found in VSFT are indeed -branes;

 we could try to extend in some way such analysis to the superstring field theory and see if the already known results about the  charges of -branes can also be obtained in this formalism.



We leave these interesting challenges for future work.







Acknowledgments 



The author is very grateful to G. Landi, F. Lizzi and U. Bruzzo for the very helpful discussions and correspondence. A particular ackowledgment to professor L. Bonora for the reading of the work and very useful comments and suggestions. 


 99 
 Dieudonne': "Foundation of modern analysis" ;
 I. Bars: "Map of Witten's  to Moyal's " , hep-th 0106157 ;
 Bayen, Flato  al. : "Deformation theory and Quantization 1. Deformation of symplectic manifolds" , Annals of Phys 111 , (1978);
 Bayen, Flato  al. : "Deformation theory and Quantization 2. Physical applications" , Annals of Phys 111 , (1978);
 J. Harvey: "Komaba lectures on noncommutative solitons and D-branes" , hep-th 0102076 ;
 E. Witten: "Non commutative geometry and string field theory" , Nucl. Phys. B268  (1986) p.253;
 K. Ohmori: "A Review on Tachyon condensation in open string field theories" , hep-th 0102085 ;
 A. Leclair, M.E. Peskin, C.R. Preitshopf: "String Field Theory on the conformal plane (1)" , Nucl. Phys. B317  (1989), p.411;
 W. Taylor: "D-brane effective field theory from string field theory" , hep-th 0001201 ;
 D.J. Gross, A. Jevicki: "Operator formulation of interacting string field theory (1),(2)" , Nucl. Phys. B283  (1987), p.1;  Nucl. Phys. B287  (1987), p.225;
 L. Rastelli, A. Sen, B. Zwiebach: "Half string, projectors and multiple D-branes in VSFT" , hep-th 0105058 ;
 D. Gross, W. Taylor: "Split string field theory 1" , hep-th 0105059 ;
 J.M. Garcia-Bondia, J.C. Varilly: "Algebras of distributions suitable for phase-space quantum mechanics.1" , J. Math. Phys. 29  (1988), p.869;
 I. Bars: "Associativity anomaly in string field theory" , hep-th 0202030 ;
 I. Bars: "Computing in string field theory using Moyal product" , hep-th 0204260 ;
 J.M. Garcia-Bondia, F. Lizzi, G.Marmo, P.Vitale: "Infinitely many products to play with" , hep-th 0112092 ;
 J.M.G. Fell, R.S. Doran: "Representation of algebras, locally compact groups and Banach algebraic bundles" , Vol. 1; ed. Accademic Press Inc.;
 L. Rastelli, A. Sen, B. Zwiebach: "Classical solutions in string field theory around the tachyon vacuum" , hep-th 0102112 ;
 L. Bonora, D. Mamone, M. Salizzoni: "VSFT ancestors of the GMS solitons" , hep-th 0207044 ;
 J.M. Garcia-Bondia, J.C. Varilly, H. Figueroa: "Elements of Noncommutative geometry" , Birkhauser, Boston, 2001;
 R. Estrada, J.M. Garcia-Bondia, J.C. Varilly: "On asymptotic expansions of twisted products" , J. Math. Phys. 30 (12)  (1989), p.2789;
 E. Witten: "-branes and -theory" , hep-th 9810188 ;


