Supersymmetry breaking and 4 dimensional string models 
Michael Hewitt 

Computing Services, Canterbury Christ Church University College,

North Holmes Road, Canterbury, CT1 1QU, U.K. 
 email:
mike@cant.ac.uk,
 tel:+44(0)1227-767700. 
26 February 2003 
 

A family of superpotentials is constructed which may be relevant
to supersymmetry breaking in 4 dimensional (0,1) heterotic string
models. The scale of supersymmetry breaking, as well as the
coupling constant, would be stable and could not run away to
zero.




PACS numbers:  11.25.Mj, 04.65.+e, 11.25.Sq



Introduction 
   In this paper we will study a family of superpotentials
which may be relevant to supersymmetry (susy) breaking in 4
dimensional (0,1) heterotic string models, and which generalise
those given in [1,2]. By 4 dimensional string models we have in
mind that the extra string degrees of freedom are subject to
twisted boundary conditions in such a way that no 'breathing'
modes for extra dimensions appear in the level zero spectrum [3].
Stability is a feature of such  string models, for which
decompactification cannot take place. There is a fixed, arbitrary
gauge coupling, related to string topology through the genus
expansion. There may be a possible restriction of this coupling
constant required for the consistent propagation of knotted and
linked strings, which are features which appear when  is
reduced to 4, with strings producing orbifold-like singularities
in space-time. The origin of susy breaking is often ascribed to
the gaugino condensation mechanism [4,5]. This relies on a
variation of the gauge coupling with a scalar field, which is
therefore absent in these models. Consequently, there would need
to be susy breaking by some fundamental rather than composite
Goldstone supermultiplet. If this is possible, there would be
benefits in avoiding problems with the stability of the gauge
hierarchy and a shallow potential well which could lead to
decompactification during inflation [6]. A vanishing 4 dimensional
cosmological constant also seems more natural in a model without
extra dimensions. For the present, we will consider the scalar
fields only for simplicity. A vanishing cosmological constant may
be viewed as a balance between local and global susy breaking.
This can be described geometrically as a requirement that the
field-space vector formed by all auxiliary fields be null. In
terms of the geometry of the chiral scalar fields, this is
equivalent to the superpotential  having a critical slope of
 in field space. The polarization of positive and
negative energy auxiliary fields due to this local/global susy
breaking is much greater than the energy due to non-cancellation
between bosons and fermions from global susy breaking. A small
adjustment of the balance between gravitational and other
auxiliaries would cancel the residue to keep . We will
assume that such a balancing mechanism applies. A small failure of
the balance mechanism could give a small , as may be the
actual case in cosmology, but we will not attempt to understand
this here.

In  susy, we may make a decomposition of the chiral fields
into the Goldstino  and other fields ,where ,
are orthogonal at the vacuum expectation values ,
 
We propose that the Goldstino scalar  can be approximated by
the spin 0 part of the dilaton supermultiplet, which may be
regarded as scalar and pseudoscalar components of the graviton, as
we can form a massive gravitino multiplet, or extended graviton
multiplet by taking the full content of the spin 
 heterotic level zero fields. Our motivation is
that the dilaton multiplet in  is naturally present, and has
a flat potential, or critical-slope superpotential (implementing
the local/global balance principle) in the absence of other
sources of susy breaking [7]. The pseudoscalar graviton mass is
zero, protected by a gauge invariance, and therefore the
pseudoscalar part of  will be a pseudo-Goldstone boson with a
relatively long range. Mixings between the gravitational and other
scalars will be suppressed by factors of , since the
contributions of different superfields to the Goldstone
supermultiplet would be in proportion to their auxiliary
components. CP violation may give a small scalar component to the
pseudo-Goldstone boson, but we will neglect this below.
 The situation in realistic models where there are also terms in  from the gauge
auxiliary  fields is more complicated, but providing that the
local/global balance principle applies, there will again be zero
cosmological constant with a small mixing  between
 and other superfields.
Derivation of the Superpotentials 
    Decomposing  into scalar and pseudoscalar parts, we have
 where
  
( is the Green-Schwarz 3-form) so that under the
transformation , 
 or
 
i.e. . For any function  which
depends only on  we have
 
so that the potential for  becomes (neglecting for now the
contribution from other fields)
 
Introducing the notation
 
we can write
 
For a vanishing cosmological constant, we require that  should
have a zero. The simplest ansatz with this property is essentially
 
Here we have used the linear transformation 
to arrange  at  without loss of generality
(these values are chosen to simplify the formulas below). The case
 gives the flat, no-scale solution

 

We will now derive the solution corresponding to eq.().
Rearranging eq.() gives the first order differential
equation
 
with solution
 
giving
 
where
 
Now
 
where the constant of integration  gives the value of
 at the potential minimum. We have
 
and using
 
gives us, on eliminating  by using elementary identities,
 
Here  will be confined to the range where  is finite i.e.
 for . For the mass of the
scalar  we have

 
giving the interpretation of the parameter  as
. As argued above the mass of the
pseudoscalar  will be
 
The solution eq.() may be written implicity as a function
of the sigma model parameter

 
with standard kinetic term. Now consider the limit 
 corresponding to the physically interesting case
. Going back to eq.() with 
gives

 
Introducing an alternative parametrization by
 
(so that  and  are identified), which is natural
when we recall the origin of  as the 4 dimensional dilaton,
gives the solution
 
Here the value of  is kept away from zero by the divergence in
. In this case the sigma model field is 
, so that if we write  we can write the
Lagrangian terms for  as

 
(Here  is the usual  metric determinant.) An interesting
feature of this model is that the scalar and pseudoscalar fields
will be described by a sigma model with the flat Kahler metric

 

 We will now consider the origin of the integration constant , which determines .
 Suppose that, near ,  takes the form
 
solving eq.(), where  takes the form discussed
above and for the remaining chiral fields ,  is the
Kahler potential (generating the field kinetic terms) and 
represents the chiral scalar superfield interactions. 
represents mixing terms of higher order in  relative to
, with . We expect ,
giving
 
where  is the minimum value of  - since the vacuum
represents the minimum of  w.r.t. , it also represents the
minimum of . Now the leading renormalizable contribution
gives  where  may acquire
expectation values by a Coleman-Weinberg mechanism well below the
string tension scale. For  1TeV, the  may
come from GUT symmetry breaking, a neutrino mass see-saw mechanism
or some other hidden sector. String diagrams with zero background
field give . While this may represent the 
 limit of the family of models represented by
eq.(), it may alternatively represent the limit
, in particular with ,
allowing stable supersymmetry breaking in 4 dimensional string
models. For ,  is prevented from running
away to zero, so that it is natural in this scenario for susy
breaking to survive inflation.



References 


[1] J.Polonyi, Budapest Preprint KFKI-1997-93.

[2] E.Cremmer, S.Ferrara, C.Kounnas, and D.V.Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett B 133  (1983) 61.

[3] H.Kawai, D.C.Lewellen and S.H.H.Tye, Nucl. Phys. B 288  (1987) 1.

[4] S.Ferrara, L.Girardello and H.P.Nilles, Phys. Lett
B 125  (1983) 457.

[5] M.Dine, R.Rohm, N.Seiberg and E.Witten, Phys. Lett
B 156  (1985) 55.

[6] R.Brustein and P.J.Steinhardt, Phys. Lett B 302 
(1993) 196.

[7] M.Dine and N.Seiberg, Phys. Rev. Lett 57  (1986)
2625.






