






-7mm  
5.0mm  
8.0mm  
225mm  
8.0mm  
4.8mm  
4.8mm  
160mm  
 






et al.  
e.g.  
i.e.  
0.3ex   
0.3ex   
#1  #2   
 
 
 
 
 
C   
O   
 
 
 
 

 
 



     Ann. Phys. (NY)  #1  (#2) #3 
  Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.  #1  (#2) #3 
    Nucl. Phys.  B#1  (#2) #3 
    Nucl. Phys.  (Proc. Suppl.)B#1  (#2) #3 
    Phys. Lett.  B#1  (#2) #3 
    Phys. Rev.  D#1  (#2) #3 
   Phys. Rep.  #1  (#2) #3 
    Phys. Rev. Lett.  #1  (#2) #3 
    Prog. Theor. Phys.  #1  (#2) #3 
    Rev. Mod. Phys.  #1  (#2) #3 
    Zeit. fur Physik  C #1  (#2) #3 
   Mod. Phys. Lett.  A #1  (#2) #3 
   Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.  #1  (#2) #3 
     Yad. Fiz.  #1  (#2) #3 
     Nuovo Cim.  #1  (#2) #3 
  JETP Lett.  #1  (#2) #3 
   ibid.  #1  (#2) #3 

Iban ez  
Mun oz  
i.e.  
0.3ex   
0.3ex   
#1  #2   








KUNS-1826 
 
  Heterotic Yukawa couplings and continuous Wilson lines

  
 Tatsuo Kobayashi  and Oleg Lebedev 
 
Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502,  Japan
 
Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1
9QJ,  UK
 

 
Abstract 


Realistic heterotic string models require the presence of
the Wilson lines.
We study the effect of continuous Wilson lines on the heterotic Yukawa couplings for abelian orbifold compactifications  and find that  
the presence of continuous Wilson lines 
affects the magnitude of the twisted Yukawa couplings
resulting in their stronger hierarchy.


1. Introduction. 

One of the ultimate tests of string theory is the prediction
of the quark and lepton masses. This necessitates the
knowledge of the Yukawa couplings in string models.
In the context of the heterotic string, which provides many
attractive models, the desired Yukawa couplings have been
explicitly calculated for the orbifold compactifications.
The Yukawa couplings of the twisted sectors are generated
by the world sheet instantons and can be computed using 
conformal field theory techniques.
The original calculation was performed by Dixon . .,
and Hamidi and Vafa, and later refined in,.
The Yukawa couplings were found to be exponentially suppressed
by the distance between the orbifold fixed points where
the twisted fields reside. This offered a natural explanation of 
 a 
hierarchical pattern of the quark and lepton mass matrices
(see   for  related studies).
The effect of the antisymmetric background field  
was included in.
This had important implications for the studies of CP violation
in the context of string theory. In particular, it was realized
that the antisymmetric background field may lead to complex
Yukawa couplings and eventually to CP violation in the
Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix 
(For analogous results in Type I
models, see.) .

In addition to  , there may exist other
backgrounds such as the Wilson lines . 
In fact, their presence is necessary to produce reasonable
phenomenology, e.g. the Standard Model gauge group (or close to such) and 
a small number of generations,.
The missing link so far has been the effect of the Wilson lines on
the Yukawa couplings. 
Wilson lines can be continuous or discrete depending on the embedding
of the space group into the gauge degrees of freedom. 
Realistic models involve discrete or, possibly, both types 
of the Wilson lines. 
In this Letter, we study continuous Wilson lines and defer
the analysis of discrete Wilson lines 
until  our subsequent publication.

 

The presence of background fields generally
breaks the CP symmetry (as defined in 
Refs.  
in the context of string theory).
So, an important question to address is whether or not this CP violation
shows up in the Yukawa couplings.
In the case of the intersecting brane models, this issue 
has been considered in Ref.   with the result that
the Wilson lines induce CP violating Yukawa couplings.
In heterotic models, the problem is more complicated. In this work,
we compute the Wilson line contribution to the Yukawa couplings
for orbifold compactifications admitting the decomposition
.

We start with reviewing the technique of computation of the Yukawa couplings.


2. -moduli dependence of the Yukawa couplings. 

A  orbifold is  defined as  a torus modded by a twist 
which acts as a discrete rotation of order  (for a review, see
).
Strings closed on the original torus correspond to the untwisted
sector, while those closed only on the orbifold form twisted sectors.
Twisted states have no momentum in the compactified directions
and have their center of mass at one of the fixed points 
defined by
 
where  is a torus lattice vector.
Below we consider Yukawa couplings of the twisted states. 
They depend on various moduli such as compactification radii,
Wilson moduli, etc. In contrast,  Yukawa couplings
of the untwisted states are constant and therefore irrelevant
for our purposes.

A twisted trilinear coupling of two fermions and a boson 
corresponds to a string amplitude for massless states
 
where  are associated with twists
 of a  orbifold and 
label orbifold fixed points. The twisted vertex operators are defined
through the twist fields :
 
and  creates a twisted ground state from an
untwisted  vacuum (For higher twisted sectors, the twist fields 
 themselves, in general, 
do not correspond to eigenstates of .
One has to take their linear combinations to obtain 
physical states.) ,  

 with  .

The vertex operator for the emission of an untwisted massless state
with momentum  is given by
 
where  is the superghost contribution,
 is an  weight vector, and  
represents bosonized NSR fermions. Since twisted strings have no momentum
in the orbifold directions, the path integral in Eq.()
factorizes:
 
In the second factor the path integral is to be performed over six
"internal" string fields. The twisted Yukawa coupling is then given 
by a low-energy limit of this  expression integrated over all
possible vertex locations . We note that the first factor is 
needed to make the result  invariant, while the second factor
contains the orbifold information.
Furthermore, only the  part of  provides the moduli 
dependence relevant for our purposes.

Thus, the  Yukawa couplings among the twisted sectors  
can be expressed as 
 
where  are solutions to the string equations of motion in the
presence of the twist fields 
 located
at points  of the world sheet.
With the normalization of  Ref., the classical action is(Note the difference in the definitions of ,
see Eqs.(3.47) and (1.48).) 
 
with ,    and . Henceforth, roman indices label the compactified directions,
i=1,..,6, while italic indices label the compactified planes,
=1,3,5.
The resulting equations of motion are
 
such that  can be split into a holomorphic and an antiholomorphic pieces,
.
The holomorphic (right-moving) piece  belonging to the
twisted sector  can be expanded as
 
where  is a fixed point, and 
 and  are  the annihilation and creation operators.
For ,
 
so we have the following OPE
 
where the operator  creates an excited twisted state from
an untwisted vacuum.
Therefore, the classical solutions with the correct behaviour at the
twist insertion points  are of the form
 
for each complex plane. The constants  are to be determined by the
boundary conditions for . In particular, encircling the twist
insertion points an appropriate number of times produces a winding vector.
Therefore, we have the following  conditions
 
with the complex lattice vector  defined by 
and .
Here the contour  is chosen such that  gets shifted but
not rotated upon going around .
These equations allow to solve for  in terms of the winding
vectors .

In the case of a three point correlator,  can be 
transformed into  , , and  by  an appropriate 
transformation. 
By encircling point   times clockwise and point 1  times
anticlockwise,  is shifted by
 
This follows from the space group multiplication rule for

with 
and .
Encircling all three points produces a contractable  cycle,

,
 hence we obtain the point group selection rule  and 
the space group selection rule(See 
for discussion.) 
 
up to a lattice vector.

Typically there is only one independent nontrivial contour  
in the monodromy condition(yet, there may be
subleties discussed in Ref.), while other contours can be obtained by
adding   and trivial contours which encircle one point
 times or all three points.
Correspondingly, there is  one equation
for two variables  and . The case with non-zero  does not contribute
to the Yukawa couplings due to a divergence of the action (
). Thus, we set  and find (for each complex plane)
  

The Yukawa couplings are determined by the holomophic instantons, i.e.
classical solutions with holomorphic  and antiholomorphic 
(yet, this does not imply that  is purely right- or left-moving). 
Performing the  integral using the method of Kawai et. al. 
,
we obtain 
The sum over  in the correlation function reduces to the 
sum over  which is parametrized by a lattice vector 
through (). The -moduli dependence is contained in
 which is proportional to the square
of the relevant compactification radius, and Re.
3. Effect of continuous Wilson lines. 


A continuous Wilson line is realized through the correspondence
between the space group and rotations and shifts of the gauge
 lattice:
 
where  is a point group element,  is a rotation
of the  lattice, and  and  are related by
 
Here  are some integers,  are the torus basis vectors,
and  are the Wilson lines.
In contrast to the discrete Wilson lines, 
 are unconstrained as long as they are rotated by 
since  automatically.
Note that if we identify  with 
, the group multiplication rule

requires us to identify  
with .
In particular, if 
, then 
.



The presence of a Wilson line  gives an additional contribution to the action 
with I=1,..,16 labelling the left-moving gauge space coordinates
 .
Summing up the contributions from 
and using  the complex coordinate , 
we write the  action as
 
where h.c. replaces a quantity with the corresponding barred one
and conjugates , and
we have defined 
 
The expression for the action can be simplified using the fact that
 is a left mover, .

The addition of the Wilson line does not affect the equations
of motion for  since it generates only a boundary term contribution.
Nor does it affect the monodromy conditions because the boundary conditions
for  remain intact. As a result, the classical solutions for 
are the same as in the case without Wilson lines.

We also note that the pure gauge space contribution  to the action
 
vanishes when the left-mover constraint is applied.
Thus, the only effect of the Wilson lines on the Yukawa couplings comes
from the additional term () in the world sheet action. 

The Wilson lines are subject to certain constraints. In particular,
the invariance of the action ()  under twisting requires
(in orthogonal coordinates)
 
A common choice (the "standard embedding") is 
which acts on a 6D sublattice of the  lattice, while
leaving the other components intact.
For a twist of any order, this implies(In the convention of  Ref., 
our Wilson matrix  corresponds to
 up to an overall normalization,  
where C is the  Cartan metric and diag(2,2,..,2). )  
 
for each  of the three planes.
Here  are real continuous moduli. As a result,  and 
 
where we have applied the left-mover constraint
and used .

In the case of the standard embedding,  and 
 have the same 
structure. In particular, they have the same singular behaviour
at the twist operator insertion points:
 
The constant  is determined by the monodromy condition for :
 
with the result
 
Here  is the gauge space representation of the space group element
 which appears in the monodromy condition for .
For example, 
in the basis 
   this correspondence is given  (in each plane) 
by(Here we have set the compactification radii to one.
In general, these expressions are valid for  and .)  
 
Here .


The remaining integral  is identical to the one appearing
in the calculation of the Yukawa couplings without the Wilson lines.
The only difference arises due to the factor
 
for each plane. 
Here  is the space group element from the monodromy condition.
As a result,
 
for each plane.

Turning on the antisymmetric background field 
, we obtain the 
following Yukawa couplings
 
 where we have defined .
Clearly, this expression is invariant under rotations of the Wilson lines.
We see that, for , the presence of the Wilson lines   amounts essentially
to a rescaling of  or the compactification radii. This creates a 
hierarchy of the Yukawa couplings of the fields placed at
different fixed points of the orbifold. 


These results can be generalized to a class of non-standard embeddings
such that a  twist is associated with rotations of more than one
planes in the gauge space, 

In this case  can be split into the  blocks
 
This results in the substitution
 
in Eq.().

In terms of the T-moduli,
 
where  is a constant depending on the orbifold.
The effect of the axionic shift   on the Yukawa couplings is 
therefore the same as in the case without the Wilson lines.
For phenomenological applications it implies that
the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) phase vanishes for 
Im and at the fixed points of the modular group,
in particular (see also). This follows from the fact that the 
Jarlskog invariant =ImDet
satisfies 
for Im. The Jarlskog invariant serves as an indicator of 
CP violation in the Standard Model such that its vanishing
implies a zero CKM phase. This means that if the -moduli
are the source of the observed CP violation, they cannot be
stabilized at Im. This requirement puts rather
severe constraints on heterotic string models.

A curious feature of this result is that the Wilson line
background in heterotic models does not lead to CP violating 
Yukawa couplings. This is in contrast to the open string case 
,
in which the Wilson lines provide phase factors in the Yukawa
matrices and may in principle  be a source of CP violation.
The difference arises due to the  embedding of the space group
into the gauge group via the Wilson line, which is not implemented
in the open string case(Yet, the effect of 
is CP violating in both cases.) . 
Even though the Wilson line background may break CP,
this sort of CP violation does not appear in the Yukawa couplings.
In a way, this is analogous to the case of a complex 
vacuum expectation value of the dilaton when CP gets broken via
the QCD -term rather than the Yukawa couplings.

Another consequence of the above result is that
there is an additional contribution to the trilinear soft
SUSY breaking  parameters 
coming from the Yukawa coupling dependence on the Wilson moduli :
 
where  denotes the -components of 
 and 
we have taken into account the dominance of  the first term in the sum ().
Since one expects  (1), 
generally this contribution is significant and should be included
in phenomenological analyses (see also).
In particular, due to its flavor-dependence, this additional term is
relevant to the "string CP problem".


To conclude, we have studied the effect of the continuous Wilson lines
on the twisted Yukawa couplings.
Unlike in the open string case, the presence of the Wilson lines
affects the magnitude and hierarchy of the Yukawa couplings
instead of producing  phase factors.
These results have implications for the studies of CP violation
and supersymmetry breaking in heterotic string models. 

Acknowledgements.  We thank J. Erler and D. Jungnickel for
communications, and D. Bailin and T. Higaki for discussions.  
T.K. is supported in part by the Grants-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research No.14540256 from the Japan Society 
for the Promotion of Science.
O.L. is supported by PPARC.
 
 99 

D. J. Gross, J. A. Harvey, E. J. Martinec and R. Rohm,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  54 , 502 (1985).

L. J. Dixon, D. Friedan, E. J. Martinec and S. H. Shenker,

Nucl. Phys. B 282 , 13 (1987).

S. Hamidi and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 279 , 465 (1987).

T. T. Burwick, R. K. Kaiser and H. F. Muller,

Nucl. Phys. B 355 , 689 (1991).

J. Erler, D. Jungnickel, M. Spalinski and S. Stieberger,

Nucl. Phys. B 397 , 379 (1993).

L. E. Ibanez,

Phys. Lett. B 181 , 269 (1986);
J. A. Casas and C. Munoz,

Nucl. Phys. B 332 , 189 (1990)
[Erratum-ibid. B 340 , 280 (1990)];
J. A. Casas, F. Gomez and C. Munoz,

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 8 , 455 (1993);
Phys. Lett. B 292 , 42 (1992);
A. E. Faraggi and E. Halyo,

Nucl. Phys. B 416 , 63 (1994);
T. Kobayashi,

Phys. Lett. B 358 , 253 (1995);
T. Kobayashi and Z. z. Xing,

Mod. Phys. Lett. A 12 , 561 (1997);

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 13 , 2201 (1998);
J. Giedt,

Nucl. Phys. B 595 , 3 (2001)
[Erratum-ibid. B 632 , 397 (2002)];
S. A. Abel and C. Munoz,

arXiv:hep-ph/0212258.



See, e.g., D. Bailin, G. V. Kraniotis and A. Love,

Phys. Lett. B 435 , 323 (1998).

O. Lebedev,

Phys. Lett. B 521 , 71 (2001).


G. Aldazabal, L. E. Ibanez, F. Quevedo and A. M. Uranga,

JHEP 0008 , 002 (2000);
S. A. Abel and A. W. Owen,

Nucl. Phys. B 651 , 191 (2003).


K. S. Narain, M. H. Sarmadi and E. Witten,

Nucl. Phys. B 279 , 369 (1987).

L. E. Ibanez, H. P. Nilles and F. Quevedo,

Phys. Lett. B 187 , 25 (1987).


L. E. Ibanez, H. P. Nilles and F. Quevedo,

Phys. Lett. B 192 , 332 (1987) and refs. therein.


M. Dine, R. G. Leigh and D. A. MacIntire,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  69 , 2030 (1992);
K. w. Choi, D. B. Kaplan and A. E. Nelson,

Nucl. Phys. B 391 , 515 (1993).


T. Kobayashi and C. S. Lim,

Phys. Lett. B 343 , 122 (1995).


D. Cremades, L. E. Ibanez and F. Marchesano,

arXiv:hep-ph/0212064;
hep-th/0302105. 

D. Bailin and A. Love,

Phys. Rept.  315 , 285 (1999).

T. Kobayashi and N. Ohtsubo,

Phys. Lett. B 245 , 441 (1990).


T. Kobayashi and N. Ohtsubo,

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 9 , 87 (1994).



H. Kawai, D. C. Lewellen and S. H. Tye,

Nucl. Phys. B 269 , 1 (1986).


T. Mohaupt,

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 9 , 4637 (1994).

M. Cvetic, B. A. Ovrut and W. A. Sabra,

Phys. Lett. B 351 , 173 (1995).

T. Dent,

Phys. Rev. D 64 , 056005 (2001).


S. Khalil, O. Lebedev and S. Morris,

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 115014 (2002);
O. Lebedev and S. Morris,

JHEP 0208 , 007 (2002).

D. Bailin, G. V. Kraniotis and A. Love,

Phys. Lett. B 432 , 343 (1998).

H. B. Kim and C. Munoz,

Mod. Phys. Lett. A 12 , 315 (1997).

S. Abel, S. Khalil and O. Lebedev,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  89 , 121601 (2002).








