175mm
250mm
-1mm

-38mm

 
SUPERPARTNER STATES IN QUANTUM MECHANICS OF COLORED PARTICLE  

 
Sh.Mamedov

 
High Energy Physics Laboratory, Baku State University, 

23 Z. Khalilov , 370148 Baku, Azerbaijan,
e-mail: shmamedov@yahoo.com


 
Superpartner correspodence of states of colored particle in external
chromomagnetic field given by non-commuting axial vector potentials is
determined. Squared Dirac equation for this particle is solved exactly and
explicit expressions of superpartner states are found. The wave functions of
states with definite energy are found. Supersymmetry algebra and
superpartner states in three dimensional motion case are considered.


Supersymmetry and superpartner states in abelian quantum mechanics is well
studied [1-3]. For example, electron moving in homogenous magnetic field has
superpartner states differing from each other by projection of spin and main
quantum number [3,11,12]. 

Supersymmetry in quantum mechanics of colored particle in chromomagnetic
field given by non-commuting vector potentials was studied in paper [8]. It
was constructed supercharge operators  and was shown, that these
operators form closed algebra together with so-called Hamiltonian -the
square of Dirac operator in given field. Of course, there are superpartner
states - states with same energy and different quantum numbers of colored
particle in such external field. But energy spectrum in this case is
continous and bosonic operators of creation and annihilation are different
from that one's in abelian quantum mechanics. So, it has sense to find
superpartner states in this case as well. The supersymmetry in Dirac
equation shows up the spin diagonal form of Hamiltonian for this particle
[8]. This means the equations corresponding to different projections of
quark's spin are separeted and can be solved independently. In this way
Dirac equation can be solved and superpartner states could be found.

Let us define external chromomagnetic field by constant vector potentials
[5]. Within SU(3) color symmetry group they look as

 
where  is a color index and  is a constant.
The field (1) is directed along third axes of ordinary and color spaces :

 
Here  is color interaction constant.

The Dirac equation for a colored particle in the external color field has a
form

 
where  , 
 is Gell-Mann matrices describing particle's color spin. The equation (3)
is divided into two equations for Maiorana spinors  and  , 












 
where Pauli matrices  describe particle's spin. The spinors 
 and  has two components corresponding to two spin states of a
particle
























Each component of  and  transforms under fundamental
representation of color group SU(3) and has three color components
describing color states of a particle and corresponding to three eigenvalues
of color spin 




























Acting on equations (4) by the operator  and
taking them into account once more, we get the same equations for spinors 
 and 

 
For the particle with  the Hamiltonian  in (5) and the supercahrge
operators  form supersymmetry algebra 
(for more detail see [8]) . Here the
operators of bosonic and fermionic states are defined by formulas





and obey next relations






As we know, the superpartner states are received in the result of
supercharge operators  action. The action of fermionic operators
of creation and annihilation is turning over ordinary spin of particle

 
It is seen is from (6) that bosonic operator of creation  act only at 
 and annihilation operator  only at . These
operators mix color states  and 

 
In the result of this mixing the superpartner states 
of pure color states  and  will be
mixed color states.

By use of supercharge operators it is easy to observe the spin diagonal form
of Hamiltonian 

 
So, due to spin diagonal form of  the equation (5) is splitting into two
non-mixed spin indicies + and - equations for components  and 







 
Taking into account the fact that the states  are stationary (
the field (1) is time independent ) 
 , the explicit form of equations (9) will be

 









The energy spectrum  in the field (1) was found in [3] and equal to ( on 
 )

 
The energy spectrum  corresponds to colorless particle state 
 So, the degeneration of  is a spin
degeneration. The spectra  are received from (10) solving it for 
 in momentum representation. The sign at last term in the expression of 
 is defined by the operator

 
square of which is same for spin  and  indices

 
and has eigenvalues 

(Sign before the root shouldn't be confused with the spin + and - indices.) 
. The operator  is different for 
 and  and the superpartner Hamiltonians in (10) are
different for them as well. But solving characteristic equation gives same
energy spectrum branchs (11) for both of them. So, both energy branchs 
 are degenerated by ordinary spin [7]. It becomes clear that
energy spectrum is not defined neither by spin nor by color
quantum numbers 
(The quantum nimber   is not a conserved  quantity in the field (1) too  .) 
. Energy branchs and  are defined only by
eigenvalues of  operator. So, both
energy branch are fourfold degenerated. This means that both spin and color
states  and  may be in the energy
branch  or and the equations (10) for given energy 
 or should be solved for all spin and color states.
The operator  mixes the color states 
 and . But the solutions of equation (10) could be
received for pure color states because of color diagonal form of (13).

In order to solve equations (10) it is reasonable to use polar coordinates 
. We have two variables 
 and one constraint due to the conservation of quantity 
 
 In reference frame,
where  is angle between  and 
 

 is a constant. Consequently  is constant
too and  Then
equations for  look as

 






from which we get equation for a pure state 

 
The solution of (15) will be in the form 
 Putting this solution in equation (15) we find next expressions for 
 








The sign in the bracket is the sign in the energy spectrum. The solution 
 has a form

 
Here isarbitrary constants.The wave function 
 can be found from (12) using solution  as
well

 

By the same way the solutions  and 
could be found

 

 
And the simplest solutions  are well known plane waves

 
It is seen from (16) that for  spectrum the expression under the root
in  is negative at values 
 So, the term 
 in solutions  is infinite at 
 This infinity is connected with that the movement of a colored
particle in the field (1) is infinite in space volume, since the energy
spectrum of this particle (11) is continious [9]. So, we shouldn't throw
away this term for normalizibility of the solutions.

In order to find wave functions of states and  with
definite energy and  we have to solve next equations for them 
 
Here we have differential operators under the root. Solutions of these
equations are found in appendix and are equal to following expressions








Thus we can find following superpartner correspondence between states from
same energy branch by use of formulae (7) and solutions (16) - (20):













 



















At now we can consider particle with  Hamiltonian in (5) for
this case is defined by




and keep its spin diagonal form

 

This means operators  also keep their anticommutation property and
could be choosn as a fermionic operators. Solutions of (23) equations are
received from (16)-(20) only by multipling on . Supercharge
operators defined in the form

 
obey following relations

 
last one of which is differ from ordinary supersymmetry algebra. Mutually
hermitian conjugate operators  constructed in ordinary
way has the form

 
and obey relations

 
If we define , we get ordinary anticommutation 
 and commutation 

supersymmetry relations. But for this definition we have 

In addition to this definition, if we define operators
in following way 




we get for them expressions in (26) with ordinary anticommutation relation
(27). The operators  contain  matrix. So,
superpartner states in this case are received mixed spin states 


















That means in this three dimensional motion case superpartner states are not
states with definite projection of ordinary spin.

Author thanks to Prof. V.Ch.Zhukovsky for useful remarks.

Appendix 

Let us demonstrate solution of first equation in (21), which in polar
coordinates has got form 




where we have made designations





Equation (A.1) could be written in the form




square root from which gives 




Squaring equation (A.2) again and doing replacement 
 we get next equation for 






Considering  and taking
into account 
 in equation (A.3) we get first order
non-linear differential equation for  




Equation (A.4) should be solved without right hand side at first



which implies for 



Equation (A.5) gives  which
means



Taking into account in equation (A.4) last constraint for  we get
equation for  solution of which is 





where  is integrate constant. We shall seek solution  for 
 This means to demand function  to be
finite at some finite  points, for which 
 Using explicit expression of  we find 




Integration of (A.6) is carry out for  and  values
of 
 and gives same result for 




Only solution with  obey initial equation. Same calculation for
second equation of (21) gives




From these expressions we can find  points of  





 

 99 
  F. Cooper, A. Khare and U.Sukhatme, Phys. Report 251
(1995) 267, hep-th/ 9405029.

  A. Das and S.A. Pernice, Mod. Phys. Lett. A12 (1997) 581,
hep-th/ 9612125

  L. Gendenshtein and I. Krive, Uspekhi Fizicheskikh
Nauk 146 (1985) 552 [Sov. Phys. Usp.28 (1985) 645

  Sh.S. Agaev, A.C. Vshivtsev, V.Ch.Zhukovskii and O.F.
Semenov, Izv.Vissh.Ucheb.Zaved. Fizika, 1 (1985) 78

  L. S. Brown and W. J. Weisberger, Nucl. Phys. B157 (1979)
285, M.Reuter and C. Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B334 (1994) 412.

  V. Ch. Zhukovskii, JETP 90 (1986) 1137.

  V. Ch. Zhukovskii and Yu. N. Belousov, Izvestiya
Vissh. Ucheb. Zaved., Fizika N2 (1989) 40.

  Sh. Mamedov, Jian-zu Zhang and V. Ch. Zhukovskii, Mod.
Phys. Lett. A, vol.16, No 13 (2001), 845, hep-th/ 0101183.

  A.A. Sokolov, I.M. Ternov and V. Ch. Zhukovskii, 
, M. Nauka (1979)

  A. S. Vshivtsev, V. Ch. Zhukovskii, P. G. Midodashvili
and A. V. Tatarintsev, Izvestiya Vissh. Ucheb. Zaved., Fizika N5 (1986) 47.

  L.Gendenshtein, Phys.of Atom. Nucl. 41 (1985) 261.

  A. Khare and J. Maharana, Nucl. Phys. B244 (1984) 409

