
 
 


    
#1  
#1  
#1  
 #1 
  
1 2  
Im  
 #1 
Re  
Tr  
diag  

  
sech  
Arcsech  
() 
#1#2 




UPR-1032-T,  MIFP-03-05, hep-th/0303065  

Phases of  Supersymmetric Gauge Theories with Flavors 

Vijay Balasubramanian,
Bo Feng,  
Min-xin Huang, and Asad Naqvi 

 
















vijay@physics.upenn.edu, fengb@ias.edu, 
minxin@sas.upenn.edu, naqvi@physics.upenn.edu 
 



We explore the phases of  supersymmetric  gauge theories with fundamental matter that arise as deformations of  SQCD by the addition of a superpotential for the adjoint chiral multiplet.  As the parameters in the superpotential are varied, the vacua of this theory sweep out  various branches, which in some cases have multiple semiclassical limits. In such limits, we recover
the vacua of various product gauge group theories, with flavors charged under some group factors. 
We describe in detail the structure of  the vacua  in both classical and quantum regimes, and 
develop general techniques such as an addition and a multiplication map which relate vacua of different gauge theories. We also consider possible indices characterizing different branches and potential relationships with matrix models. 
 


Introduction 

Traditionally, there are two senses in which two quantum field theories can be "dual" to each other.   On the one hand, two theories can be equivalent  to each other in the sense that all the correlation functions of one can be computed from the other (and vice versa) by a suitable identification of dual variables.  An example is the electric-magnetic duality of the  super Yang-Mills theory.   Another kind of duality, described by Seiberg for  supersymmetric field theories 
occurs when two different microscropic theories have identical macroscopic (or infra-red) dynamics.   For example, an  supersymmetric   gauge theory with  fundamental flavours has the same long distance physics as an  gauge theory with  flavours.
Recently, Cachazo, Seiberg and Witten have proposed another notion of duality in certain   supersymmetric field theories. Related observations were also made by Ferrari. 

This new notion of duality has arisen in the context of
the   theory with an adjoint chiral multiplet  and superpotential .  This theory has the same matter content as the  pure  gauge theory, and can be thought of as a deformation of that theory by the addition of a superpotential . The fascinating relation of this theory to a bosonic matrix model was uncovered by Dijkgraaf and Vafa in. It was shown that the superpotential for the glueball superfield can be computed in an auxiliary matrix model of a single  matrix  with potential  in the  limit. 


At the classical level, the theory has vacua in which the diagonal vacuum expectation value for  breaks the gauge group down to . The VEV for  has diagonal entries , each repeated  times, where  are roots of the polynomial . Quantum mechanically, the classical vacua lead to  different vacua. This description in terms of the unbroken product gauge group only makes sense if the difference between 's is much larger than , the dynamical scale of the  theory. It is interesting to vary  by varying the parameters in the superpotential to pass through a region where the  are approximately equal to each other, before being far apart once again. In such a situation, it is possible that a vacuum of the  theory is continuously transformed into a vacuum of  gauge theory, where  are not the same as . Such a phenomenon was studied in.   
The possibility of a smooth transition of this kind between two microscopically different theories exists only in cases where the theories in question possess vacua with the same low energy dynamics, since it is not then necessary to encounter any singular loci such as points of enhanced symmetry during the interpolation.
Cachazo, Seiberg and Witten proposed that such smooth transitions should be understood as a new kind of duality, relating microscopic theories which have vacua with identical low energy dynamics.



It is interesting to understand how these ideas extend to the case where fundamental matter is included.(The generalization ofto some other cases has been made in)    In particular, how does Seiberg duality of  theories fit into the story of?
Accordingly,
we study   theory with an adjoint chiral multiplet , and  fundamental and anti-fundamental chiral multiplets  and  (). We also add a superpotential 
. This model is an   gauge theory with  fundamental hypermultiplets which is deformed to  by addition of the tree level superpotential . This theory has classical vacua in which the gauge group is broken down to , with  fundamental flavors charged under the  factor.  As in the case without flavors, this description in terms of product gauge groups is only valid in the regime of parameters in the superpotential when the roots  of  are widely separated () and the gauge group  is broken down to  at a scale at which the  gauge coupling is weak.  The quantum dynamics in each of these factors depends critically  on : an Affleck, Dine, Seiberg (ADS) superpotential is generated for ;
confinement
with a quantum deformation of the moduli space
occurs when ; confinement 
without quantum corrections to the moduli space occurs when ;  a  magnetic description in term of dual quarks and 
gluons is relevant when ,
leading to a dual gauge symmetry  with  fundamental quarks and a meson singlet . By incorporating these phenomena in our analysis for each gauge group factor, we can determine the vacua of the product gauge theory. 

We can then ask a similar  question in the presence of flavors to the one asked in:  by varying the parameters in the superpotential, can we follow these 'weak coupling vacua' into the 'strong coupling region', before taking another limit in the space of parameters which takes us to perhaps another weak coupling region? In fact, we will show that  it is possible, by a smooth variation of parameters in the superpotential,  to continuously interpolate between vacua of theories with different underlying product gauge groups and different arrangements of charged fundamental matter under each gauge group factor. 
This leads to a picture where, as we modifiy the tree-level superpotential , a low energy observer will see the same physics while the natural underlying microscopic dynamical variables change completely.
Continuous interpolation is not possible between all  vacua of a theory with the same low energy behaviour - most interpolations will pass through singular points in the moduli space.
Indeed, we point out  a set of selection rules that restrict which classical vacua admit continuous interpolations between each other.  More accurately, these selection rules provide necessary but not sufficient conditions  to establish which vacua of classical theories we can interpolate between. 


In Sec. , we review the classical moduli space of  SQCD deformed to  by adding a superpotential . The pure Coulomb branch (where all squarks have vanishing VEVs) only exists if  where  are the quark masses. We will mostly restrict ourselves to superpotentials which satisfy this condition. On the pure Coulomb branch, the adjoint acquires a diagonal VEV, with the diagonal entries being roots  of the polynomial . With  of the diagonal entries being , the gauge group is broken down to , with  flavors charged under the  factor.  For each of these  factors, there is a rich structure of Higgs branches, indexed by an integer . 
These Higgs branches meet the Coulomb branch along a submanifold called the root of the -th Higgs branch. 

In Sec. , we explore the quantum theory. We employ two approaches which are valid in different regimes of parameters in  the superpotential. We first consider the case when the difference between the roots of  is much greater than , the  dynamical scale. In this regime (the weak coupling region), the semiclassical description in term of product gauge groups is valid and we can analyze each gauge group factor separately.  The adjoint field with mass  can be integrated out from the low energy theory.  At scales below  (given by the matching relation ), the strong coupling dynamics of the resulting  theory with  flavors (which depends critically on )  becomes relevant. We analyze the vacuum structure of these  theories in detail. In these vacua, the meson  has a non-zero VEV, which can be characterized by an integer . In addition, if , there are vacua in which the  baryons and dual quarks  have non-zero VEVs. 

When  roots of  are nearly the same, it is more appropriate to consider the  theory as a small perturbation of a strongly coupled  gauge theory with no superpotential.  The description of the theory in terms of product gauge groups is not appropriate. To find the vacua in this regime, we start by characterizing the submanifold of the  Coulomb branch which is not lifted by the  deformation.  This  consists of special points in the roots of the various -th Higgs branches where a certain number of mutually local magnetic monopoles become massless.  We will label our branches with index . Furthermore,  it turns out 
we must distinguish between two types of branches - the "baryonic" and "non-baryonic" branches, which have different numbers of massless magnetic monopoles.   The baryonic branches only exists for certain special values of .  
On  each branch, the Seiberg-Witten curve, which encodes the quantum dynamics of the   theory, factorizes in a particular way. 
Extremizing the superpotential on this factorization locus gives us the  vacua. By a holomorphic variation of the parameters in the superpotential, we can take a semiclassical limit which transports these vacua to a regime in which they are appropriately interpreted as vacua of a product gauge theory with charged flavors under the group factors. These are the vacua  discussed in the previous paragraph. In fact, occasionally, it will be possible to take multiple classical limits such that the same vacuum in the strong coupling region can be transported to multiple weak coupling regions where it becomes the  vaccum of different product group theories. 

In Sec. , we  develop general techniques which we  use to relate vacua of different theories. In particular, we introduce an addition map , which  relates vacua of a  theory with  flavors in the -th branch to vacua of a  theory, with  flavors on the  branch. This map proves to be very useful  in later sections. We also generalize the muliplication map of to include flavors. This can be used to relate vacua of a  theory to vacua of a  theory.  The multiplication map suggests how we might
define a new index in the presence of flavors that is in analogy with the "confinement index" defined in the flavorless case  case of which would  enable us to distinguish different branches of vacua.

In Sec , we discuss the phase structure of our theory when the superpotential is quadratic in the adjoint field. We only consider cases with all the flavors having the same mass. 
For a  theory with  flavors, we analyze two special branches (with  and the "baryonic" ) where a general discussion is possible. Otherwise,  
we mostly restrict ourselves to working out specific examples. In particular, we discuss theories with   and  gauge groups and an even number of flavors. We find the vacua in the strong coupling region on the various branches and transport them to the weak coupling regime by variation of the parameters in the superpotential. We check that the number of strong coupling vacua on a particular branch matches with the number of vacua in the weak coupling region.  In the case of a quadratic superpotential no interpolations between different classical vacua are possible, but the phase structure is nevertheless interesting. 



In Sec. , we consider the theory with a cubic superpotential and analyze in detail the  phase structure of specific theories on  various branches. In particular, we consider the ,  and  theories with various number of flavors. In the semiclassical limits, the we approach a theory with two gauge group factors and flavors charged under one of the factors.  We analyze the classical limits of various branches, count the number of
vacua  and find  a match between the weak and strong coupling analyses. In particular, on some branches of  theory with zero, two and four flavors, 
we find smooth interpolations amongst different classical vacua.  The phase structure is different for different numbers of flavors. 
When no flavors are present, a smooth interpolation exists  between some vacua of  and those of .  With two flavors, the three  classical limits, viz  ,  with flavors charged under one  factor,
 with flavors charged under , and  with flavors charged under the   factor,  are all smoothly connected. However,  with four flavors,  the classical limit in which  flavors are charged under   can only be connected with  the one in which  they are charged under .  In addition, there is a different branch on which  the  theories with flavors charged under  and  are smoothly connected.  
Recall that a  theory with four flavors has a dual description in terms of a  theory with four flavors. Thus the smooth interpolation on this branch relates vacua of two Seiberg dual theories.(This is slightly  inaccurate. The two theories in the dual pair are not precisely related by Seiberg duality, but are deformations, by a relevant operator, of theories that are Seiberg dual. ) 
With six flavors, the phase structure of  theory is quite different: there is no smooth interpolation between vacua of the three classical limits mentioned above. 



We end this section by briefly mentioning some assumptions made in this paper to simplify analysis: 

 
All the flavors have the same mass . The generalization to the case with different masses is straightforward. As described above the branches of a single gauge group factor with massless fundamentals are labeled by an integer .  When there are different masses, the possible branches will be more intricate and will be labeled by a set of integers  .   More interesting interpolations between vacua can then occur.  


We have restricted ourselves  to superpotentials  such that   is one of the roots of . This is for the following reason: if ,  (which are flavors under the gauge group factor  arising from  diagonal entries of  in the VEV of )  must necessarily have non-zero VEVs and hence the gauge group  would be completely Higgsed. Thus we will be reduced to the case in which there are no massless flavors under any of the gauge group factor. The latter situation has already been discsussed in.  

We mostly consider an even number of flavors (except for one example). The reason is that the computations in examples with an odd number of flavors are more involved. However, we expect that the difference between even and odd flavors is technical and will not lead to significantly different physical phenomena. 





The Classical Moduli Space 
We will be studying   supersymmetric   gauge theory 
with  fundamental  hypermultiplets, with the supersymmetry broken down
to  by addition of a tree level superpotential for  ,
the adjoint chiral superfield in the  gauge multiplet:
W= W()+ 2   ^a_i ^b_a _b^i+
2   ^a_i m^i_j ^j_a,
where 
W()=_j=1 ^p+1  u_j =_j=1 ^p+1  (^j) j .
The mass matrix is diagonal as
m=diag  [ m_1 I_M_1 ,m_2 I_M_2 , ...,m_k I_M_k ],     _i=1 ^k M_i=N_f, 
with different .
The anomaly free global symmetry is . 


An important property of this theory is the existence of classical flat directions.( The moduli space of this theory but with gauge group  instead of  has been discussed extensively in the literature

. We will adapt these results for the  theory.)  These are determined by solving the F and D-term equations:
0 & = & [,^]   

0 & = & ^i_a (^)_i^b - ( ^)^i_a 
 _i^b          D-terms  

&& 

0 & = & W'()^a_b+2   ^a_i  _b^i   

0 & = &  ^a_j ^b_a +  ^b_i m^i_j                F-terms  

0 & = &  ^b_a _b^i+m^i_j ^j_a  
Eq () implies that  can be brought into a diagonal form via a gauge transformation: I_N_1 , _2 I_N_2 ,...., _s 
I_N_s ],   
_i=1 ^s N_i=N.
The gauge symmetry is broken down to 
. 

 are  matrices. From 
eq () and (), we can see that these matrices are  non-zero if and only if  for some .  This simply reflects the statement that the Higgs branch emanates from the point in the Coulomb branch where the quarks are massless. By relabeling indices, we can choose  for . Then,  and  are:
   ],      ^tQ =[     ],
where  are  matrices. With this form for  and  and the diagonal form for  (eq ()), the F-term equation, eqs () and ()  become(Here, we abuse notation slightly. The indices ,  and  run over the colors and massless flavors in a given block . This is different from the role of these indices in  () and (), where they represented color and flavor indices in the full .) 
-12   W'(-m_u) _a^b& = 
& (Q_u)^i_a (Q _u)^b_i,      u=1,....,h  

W'(_v) & = & 0,    v=h+1,...,k.  Furthermore, the D-terms in  () decompose into D-terms for each
'th block: 
0 = Q_u Q_u^- Q ^_u Q _u,    u=1,...,h
In this way, we obtain the reduced F () and D-term () conditions for each 'th block. The solutions to these conditions are indexed by an integer  with 
r_u min  (M_u 2  , N_u).
In particular, on the th Higgs branch(We will drop the index  to simplify notation.) , 
 
where  is a diagonal  matrix with non-zero diagonal elements. 
If , we must have  and  is a non-degenerate
  matrix. Thus at a generic point on this branch, the gauge group factor  is completely
broken.   On the other hand, if , the solution has  and 
.
Generically, on this branch, the unbroken gauge group is   
with  massless flavors and  neutral hypermultiplets.
It is useful to compute the gauge invariant meson matrix :
M_i^j= Q _i^a Q_a^j=[   ].
For the 'th branch, the meson has rank .
The global flavor symmetry is spontaneously  broken down to . 

Summary of the classical moduli space  
We are now ready to discuss the complete picture of the classical moduli space. Above, we have described how the adjoint vevs break the gauge group  into a product of  factors, each with  massless flavors. Below, we summarize the structure of the Coulomb and Higgs branches of each of these factors. 
Coulomb branch: 
On the Coulomb branch,  and  both vanish and the adjoint  has diagonal entries , where each   is a root 
of the polynomial  (). The
gauge group is broken to 
. The Higgs branches (with  and  non-zero) touch the Coulomb branch at special points, called the roots of the Higgs branch. These points will only exist if  has a zero at . This is clear from eq (): vanishing quark vevs necessarily imply that . 

Higgs branches:  
On the Higgs branch, the quarks generically have non-zero vevs. 
On such branches, the diagonal entries for the adjoint are  if  and  are non-zero.  does not have to vanish. However, if  , the gauge theory is necessarily Higgsed, and the  factor is completely broken. We will not pursue this case further in this paper. 

If , there is a richer structure of Higgs branches, indexed by an integer . These 'th Higgs branch are shown in (). At the root of the Higgs branch,  and  vanish and there are massless flavors charged under the group  at these points. In the next section, we will see how we can use the Seiberg-Witten curve describing the Coulomb branch of the  theory (without the superpotential ) to study the dynamics at these roots. 
In order to explore these roots, 
we will need to tune the parameters of the theory (the masses  and the parameters in the superpotential ) to  guarantee that  are roots of  (  can have some
roots which are not equal to ). 


In summary, classically,   with  flavors is broken to  non-interacting factors with
 gauge symmetry and  massless flavors. Each factor has a Coulomb and various Higgs branches.  In the 'th Higgs branch, the unbroken gauge group is
  with  massless flavors and   neutral hypermultiplets.

Below, we will see how this classical picture changes in the quantum theory and then we will explain how strong coupling dynamics enables one to interpolate smoothly between vacua of theories with different classical product gauge group and matter contents. 


The Quantum Theory 
The above classical picture is modified significantly in the quantum theory. The low energy dynamics on the Coulomb branch of the  quantum theory  (without ) is described by the Seiberg-Witten curve. In such a theory, it was shown that the moduli space locally is a product of the Coulomb and Higgs branches (by using powerful non-renormalization theorems due to  supersymmetry). The metric on the Higgs branch does not receive any quantum corrections. However, the location of the roots of the Higgs branch, i.e.  the points where the Higgs branch meets the Coulomb branch will be modified in the quantum theory. On the other hand, if the theory has only   supersymmetry, the metric and even the topological structure of the Higgs branch is modified quantum mechanically. The familiar example of such a phenomenon is  SQCD .

We can analyze the  quantum theory in two ways. The first approach is to consider this theory as a small perturbation of a strongly coupled  gauge theory with .
We will call this the strong coupling analysis.
The Seiberg-Witten curve encodes the low energy quantum dynamics of the  theory on the Coulomb branch. Turning on a tree-level superpotential lifts almost all points on the Coulomb branch, except points in the Higgs branch roots where a certain number of mutually local monopoles become massless. Furthermore, on this sub-manifold of the Coulomb branch, the tree-level superpotential has to be minimized to find the  vacua.  By varying the parameters of the superpotential, these   vacua can be moved around on the  moduli space. In particular, special corners in the parameter space will place these vacua in regions where the  gauge symmetry breaking scale is much greater than , the  dynamical scale. Thus the gauge group is higgsed   when the gauge coupling is small and the description in terms of non-interacting product gauge group factors is valid. More concretely, we can integrate out (in each gauge group factor) the massive adjoint chiral field, , which has a mass well above . The corresponding  theory thus obtained, valid below scales of order  can be analyzed in various group factors separately. In each factor, it will become strongly coupled in the infra-red  and will have vacua, details of which will depend on the number of flavors charged under the group factor. The vacua of the product group theory (which are just products of vacua of each factor)  thus obtained have been relocated from the strong gauge coupling region by variations of the parameters in the superpotential. 
We will call discussions of this region of moduli space the weak coupling analysis.

In summary, the strong coupling analysis involves treating the superpotential as a small perturbation around the  theory, with all the non-trivial dynamics included in the SW curve. The weak coupling analysis involves integrating the adjoint out, and studying the non-trivial dynamics of the resulting  theory. 
We can interpolate smoothly between vacua in the weak and strong coupling regions by holomorphic variation of the parameters in the superpotential  because the theory has  supersymemtry.  Hence there is no phase transition in moving between these points.
What is perhaps most interesting is the fact that different weak coupling regions with different microscopic physics can be reached smoothly from the same strongly coupled point. Of course, this also provides a smooth interpolation between vacua of the two different  theories obtained  in the weakly coupled region. 


Weak gauge coupling analysis  
The weak coupling analysis is valid when the differences between the roots of the polynomial  are much bigger than .  In this case, we can trust the classical description of the theory in terms of low energy group  with almost decoupled factors and adjoints  having a large mass of order . The adjoints  can be integrated out from the low energy theory in each group factor separately. Therefore, we will focus our attention on a single  factor, with  flavors.  In this integrating out procedure, we will only consider the quadratic part of the effective potential since the higher powers will be suppressed by .   Hence 
our analysis below of the structure of the quantum mechanical vacua will only receive small perturbative corrections.  The relevant part of the superpotential is then
W=  (^2) + 2  Q ^a_i ^b_a Q_b ^i.

Integrating  out yields
W=-12  (M^2),    M_i^j=Q ^a_i Q_a ^j,
where we have defined the gauge invariant meson . The effective low energy superpotential will consist of this classical piece as well as non-perturbative effects which will depend on , the number of flavors charged under  (for a review see).  Quantum effects will become important at a scale  determined by the matching relation . To find the vacua of the  theory, we  need to extremize this effective superpotential. 
This problem has been studied in various papers. 
Here, we will simply summarize the results. 

 with  flavors :  We start with a  simple  example. Since the theory is IR free, we can use the tree-level superpotential to determine the vacuum structure. After the adjoint is integrated out, the superpotential is 
W=-12  (Q _i Q^i)^2. 
There are two different solutions to the F and D-flatness conditions:
 
, which leaves  unbroken (we will  call this the  vacuum).
 is Higgsed by nonzero VEVs of squarks.
By flavor symmetry, we can set  and 
. The unbroken flavor symmetry is
.   We will call  this  vacuum since the squark VEVs match the form of the  Higgs branch described in the previous section.


 flavors : 

For , non-perturbative  dynamics generates an Affleck-Dine-Seiberg (ADS) superpotential. Hence the effective superpotential is 
 
There
are three roots  for which the first
and the second terms in () dominate as .
There is one root
 for which the fourth and the
fifth terms in () dominate.   Finally there are 
four roots  for which 
the second and the fourth terms in () dominate.   

As we have already analyzed, the four roots  have semiclassical limits with a single gauge group factor: .   The three roots
 also have a single gauge factor in the semiclassical
limit: .(However, we will see later by using the addition map that this case will explain the physics of   theory with  in the  branch.) 
The single root
 has the semiclassical limit
.  This the solution with two gauge group factors that we are looking for.   The single vacuum matches the counting in the weak coupling region.

Non-baryonic  branch:   The Seiberg-Witten curve
 must have a double root. Suppose
. Then the Seiberg-Witten
curve is
 
So .    There are two
solutions for given : ,
.
 In the semiclassical
limit, one solution gives the breaking pattern   and the other solution gives 
. These two breaking pattern do not interpolate between
each other because they arise as different solutions for the vacua.

To count the number of vacua, we need to fix  and  and
find the number of solutions for  and . For each
 there are two solutions. In the semiclassical limit they
become ,  and
, or ,  and
.    The count of vacua is consistent with the weak coupling limit as follows.
For flavors under the ,  the factor  has one vacuum and the  with  in the  branch has  vacua giving a total of  vacua.     For flavors under , the confining  factor leads to 2 vacua.


Addition map:    We can also explain these results from the point of view of the addition map that we introduced.   We have claimed that 
 with  at  branch can be reduced to  with  at
 branch. From our previous discussion in  section, the later has only 
one solution for  .
Using the addition map to go from  to
 we get only one solution for 
. 
Note that the addition map does not
recover the case with flavors  charged under .    This is because 
 with  at  will formally reduce to  with  in the  branch
which does not exist. In fact, since the case with flavors in the 
 is in the baryonic branch we should
not expect to recover it from the non-baryonic branch in . 
This example demonstrates  us that the general 
addition map is very useful, but does not cover all cases.





  
It is difficult to analyze the case with an odd number of flavors and we only study the baryonic branch where the analysis simplifies.


Baryonic  branch:  
Two semiclassical limits ,  and   are possible.
As we will demonstrate shortly, we can smoothly interpolate between these classical theories by passing through the strong coupling region.


Suppose , then the Seiberg-Witten curve is
 
We require  to have a double root. Suppose
 
We equate the coefficients of the powers of  and find 
equations for , , , , . Eliminating  and  we
find
 
We can take two different semiclassical limits 
 
 and  fixed and finite. Then
according to () , ,
. So ,
.

,  and
 fixed. Then
, . So
, 
.
Thus we indeed find two semiclassical limits which are smoothly connected to each other.

Both semiclassical limits are in baryonic branches, but the vacua arise in different ways.
For flavors charged under , we are in the  branch
while for flavors charged under , we are in the
 branch.   However, in both cases  and this is why there is possibility of smooth interpolation.   In both cases one of the gauge group factors (either  or )  is totally higgsed, leaving a single decoupled  from the other factor.  (When the  is Higgsed  confines.)   Thus the low energy
theory is identical. Generically, for this to happen with our cubic superpotential
we need  or .   We have seen one example here and will see another we we consider  with four flavors in the  branch.






 
In this case we can have  branches. The  branch exists
only for flavors charged under  and is a baryonic branch.
The  branch is non-baryonic if the flavors charged under 
and is baryonic if  flavors are charged under . The  branch is 
non-baryonic for both breaking patterns.


Baryonic  branch:   The
 branch can only be a baryonic branch. By the addition map this reduces to a 
baryonic  branch in  with two flavors that have already studied. It
is obvious that the only semiclassical limit is 
.

Baryonic  branch:  
The curve is
y^2=(x+m)^2[P_2(x)^2-4^2 (x+m)^2]
Requiring one double root gives(We have put  to make the computation simpler.) 
P_2(x)-2 x= (x+a)^2  .
On this branch the Coulomb moduli are therefore
u_1=-2(a+),  u_2=a^2+ 4 a+ 2 ^2 
Actually we are just looking at the  arising from the part of the SW curve inside the square brackets.   The  for the full  are given by shifting the above by .
For the  factor we also have .     Putting everything
into the superpotential which now becomes  and minimizing it
we get
a=12 [ ^2-4 +20^2 ]
To have two classical gauge group factors we need to take  sign which 
gives us .
We have two solutions for .  In the weak coupling region the corresponding two vacua arise from confinement of .



Non-baryonic  branch:   
This case reduces by the addition map to the non-baryonic  branch in  with two flavors.
The semiclassical limit is  and
. As in the  case, the curve of this  branch looks like the curve for an  branch, again because we are considering a non-baryonic branch embedded within a baryonic one.



Non-baryonic  branch:   The Seiberg-Witten curve
 has a double root. Suppose
. The Seiberg-Witten
curve is
 
So , and
 
from which we read out
 . There
are two solutions: ,  or
, . The first
solution coincides with an  branch and leads to the classical limit  
 while the second solution becomes
.

To count the number of vacua, we need to fix  and  and
find the number of solutions for  and . In the first
solution ,  we have
 
The solution is the same for , so there is actually
only one solution with a semiclassical limit .   According to the weak coupling analysis, we should
expect two vacua from the  factor with four flavors. 
However, since the curve coincides with that on the  branch, we should count the weak coupling  vacua for with . This counting gives one vacuum, consistent with the above analysis. 
For the second solution  and
, the choices  are different;  so we have two 
vacua for .  The two vacua come from the confininement in the  factor.


Before ending this subsection, note a special fact concerning
flavors charged under the  factor: all  branches have the 
same curve as in  branch after the minimization of the superpotential.   We we later use this fact when use the addition map to study the  with six flavors charged under a  factor.



The  gauge group  
For the  gauge group we will discuss  flavors. There are three
breaking patterns , 
 and .   In this case we will observe smooth interpolations between
classical limits with different product gauge groups.   We summarize the number of
vacua for various  and the possible interpolations in the following table. 

[h]
 
We have indicated the number of non-baryonic and baryonic vacua as "n" and "(n)" respectively.  In cases where there are smooth interpolations between classical limits with different gauge symmetry breaking patterns we have indicated a "yes" in the last column. 
  
The details of the table are explained below.

 
The flavorless case has been studied in. As discussed in Sec , we can label the various branches by integers  which indicate the number of double roots in different factors of the SW curve. 
There are four vacua for
,  two of which are confining and  lie on the   and  branches, and 
two of which are Coulomb vacua and lie in the  branch. We denote these two vacua in the two different branches as
 in Table .
There are six vacua for  arising from two different distributions of the roots of the superpotential in the factors of the SW curve, and the confinement of the  factor which gives three vacua in each case.
Furthermore, the Coulomb vacua in the semiclassical limit with  symmetry are continuously conencted to the  vacua.



 
In this case we can have  and  branches. For the breaking  
pattern with flavors charged under , the  branch is non-baryonic
while  branch can be non-baryonic or baryonic. 
For the pattern with flavors under , the  branch is baryonic
while the  branch is non-baryonic. For the pattern with 
flavors under , both  and  branches must be
non-baryonic. 
All these discussions can be summarized by the table
[h] 
 
We remind the reader that  represents a semiclassical limit with gauge group  and flavors charged under .   labels  baryonic branches and  labels non-baryonic branches. The last column indicates if vacua in these classical limits can be smoothly transformed into one another.  


Baryonic  branch:  
The only semiclassical limit we expect is 
. Indeed,
suppose  and that  has two
double roots.   Using the addition map  this is exactly the same problem we faced in the
baryonic  branch of  with no flavors. We have shown
there that we can find three solutions with the semiclassical limit 
.   In the weak coupling analysis these three vacua come
from confinement in . 

Non-baryonic  branch:  
 In this case  and  has one
double root. Suppose ,
then
 
So we read off the tree level superpotential
, which gives two
solutions ,  or , . The
corresponding semiclassical limits are 
 or . To
count the number of vacua, note that for each  and fixed
 and  there are two solutions for , so the
number of vacua for these two semiclassical limits are both two.
This is consistent with the weak coupling analysis since  and thus  the number of
vacua is given by   for 
, and also  for .  The final factor of two in the latter case comes from the confinement of . These results can also be easily derived by the addition map which reduces
the problem to the non-baryonic  branch of  without
flavors.   


There is another interesting phenomenon happening here.  The SW curves of above two
solutions are
y^2 &= & (x+m)^3 (x+)^2 [(x+)^2 (x+m)-4 ^3]

y^2 &= & (x+m)^4 (x+) [(x+m)^2 (x+)-4 ^3]
Notice the  factors  and  . They indicate the presence of nontrivial conformal fixed points in the  theory.
.(Specifically,
these points are in the class 4 of the classification inwith  for () and class 4 with  for ().) 
 In fact, the appearance of
such points is a general phenomenon in our framework. 
In the flavorless case, the Seiberg-Witten curve is factorized as the product of 
and  at points which survive the  deformation. The  factor is parametrized by  variables. It is 
easy to see that some  values of these  variables will lead to a common factor with . In the flavorless case
we can adjust the 
superpotential  freely, and so we can avoid such a special point.
Our treatment of massless flavors gives a different story. Since we now
require the squark mass to be a root of the superpotential,  
we have less freedom in the choice of   and the non-trivial superconformal fixed points
are generically the locations in the  moduli space that are not lifted by the  deformation.  


Baryonic  branch:  
On general grounds the only semiclassical limit with two gauge group factos that 
we expect is 
.  The Seiberg-Witten curve
 must  have three double roots. We solve
the factorization problem and find
 
with the constraints
 
There are two semiclassical limits
 
, with  fixed and finite.  Then from
the constraints we must have both , so that
.  This gives a semiclassical limit with one gauge group factor.

, .  Then, from
the constraints, only one of  goes to zero if we keep 
keeping  fixed. Suppose  is finite(Since  and  appear symmetrically, when  is kept finite, we get the same solution.) , then
.  This leads to a semiclassical limit with two gauge group factors.
So we reproduce our expectation that the only semiclassical limit with two gauge group factors gives a .   However, both semiclassical limits are smooth.   So here we are seeing a smooth interpolation between vacua of a  theory with no flavors and a  theory.   Physically, in the semiclassical  limit the flavors are classically massive, so that the  confines leaving a decoupled .   In the  limit,   is in the baryonic branch and is completely Higgsed.  Meanwhile, in the other  the  confines, leaving a decoupled .  Thus the low energy physics is the same in both limits.  
We already observed a similar interpolation in the baryonic  branch of 
with two flavors but we did not focus on this point there.
Note that  an interpolation between vacua of theories with different numbers of gauge group factors could not have happened in a non-baryonic branch since the number of low energy s in these vacua would necessarily be different.(Below, when  or , we should not expect to find a similar interpolation between vacua of a theory with different number of group factors. This is because in those cases, the we do not have two different types of baryonic branches (with  and ). ) 



By  the addition map, we can generalize this  calculation to the case of
 theory with  flavors in the baryonic  branch. We
have two cases:  and 
. The calculation done
here tells us that for baryonic branch these two classical limits in  
are smoothly connected.




Non-baryonic  branch in  
distributions:   We need 
double roots in the curve for this branch and distribute them as
 in the factors of the SW curve. For the distribution
, we have 
. Then
 
So . There are two solutions:
,  or , . The semiclaasical
limit gives .

To count the number of vacua, we fix  and  and solve for 
 and . Since  and  are symmetric, we have only
one solution for each .  From the weak coupling point of view, the breaking pattern 
 in the  non-baryonic branch will have four
vacua: .   Two of these have been found above
in  the  distributions of double roots.  Another two will be found
in the   distribution described below.


 Non-baryonic   branch in 
the  distribution:    We need  double roots.
We use the freedom of translation in 
to tune the two double roots to be  and  . The general case
can be recovered by shifting: , 
. The factorization is
 
From this we read out  as (now )
 
So  is
 
There are two solutions for  by setting  in ().
(Recall that we require that  is one solution of .)  We find
 

These are the superpotentials that leave this point in the Coulomb
branch unlifted. For each solution there are  semiclassical
limits.
 
 and  fixed and finite. Then
,  . For
each solution the gauge group breaks into 
.


,  with . Then
, and we can keep  fixed. The
two solutions become . For each
solution the gauge group breaks into 
.

, . Then it is possible
to keep  finite by taking the limit 
. In this limit ,
.

Physically, how can we understand these smooth transitions? 
We will see that in all cases the exteme low
energy effective theory is just two decoupled s. 
For the breaking
pattern , the  factor
without flavors  is confined and leaves with one decoupled . 
The  factor with flavors is in the  branch; so the  part 
is confined and there is a decoupled  left.  All told we have a  at low energies. For the breaking pattern , the
 is confined in the  branch and  is
decoupled.  Again we find a low energy .
Finally, for the breaking pattern ,
 is confined. 
Thus we have a  at low energies in this case also.(To show that the full low energy physics is identical in all these cases we should also really discuss what happens to the charged fields, but we will not do that here.) 
The fact that the low energy physics is the same in all the semiclassical limits is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for the existence of smooth transitions.



To count the number of vacua, we first need  fix  and
 and find the number of solutions for  and the shifted
constant . Replacing  and 
 in () we obtain 
W'(x) & = & (x+m)(x+)=( (x+b)+(m-b))( (x+b)+(

& = & (x+b)^2 + ((m-b)+(

& &
(x+b)^2+(m-b)^3 a^3 (x+b)-a^2(1+^3 a^3 ) This leads to the  equations
 
By eliminating  from these equations (),
we find that  must satisfy the equation
 
For fixed  and ,  we find nine solutions which have a  different
behavior when . When , we find two solutions with  and seven solutions at . The two non-zero solutions correspond to two vacua in  . We can analyze the seven solutions with  more carefully. 
Assume  in the  limit. Then we can have the following different cases: If , () reduces to
 which leads to  four
solutions . These four solutions thus  correpond to four vacua in the classical limit 
 . If , () reduces to 
 and the solution is  which contradicts our assumption that  so we should discard this soluton. If ,
 () reduces to 
which has a solution only when , so
 with . These three
solutions lead three vacua in the classical limit .


We can match these numbers of various solutions with the counting of vacua obtained in the semiclassical limits. 
In the   branch, 
has four vacua. We found two vacua in the  
distribution of double roots and  two,  distribution. For ,
we expected three vacua from
the confining  factor and they are indeed found in the  
distribution above. For , we expect  vacua and they are found also
in   distribution. On the  distribution of double roots,  vacua in three different classical limits smoothly interplate between each other.




  
In this case we can have ,  and  branches. The possible semiclassical limits on various -th
baryonic and non-baryonic branches  can be summarized in
following table: 
[h]
 
See caption of Table . The symbol  indicates that the interpolation occurs on the baryonic branch.  

Non-baryonic  branch:  
By using the addition map,  this case can be reduced to a 
 gauge theory with no flavors in the  branch, where we have
only one breaking  pattern . This leads to the unique semiclassal limit,  . There is only one vacuum in both the weak and strong coupling regions. 

Baryonic  branch:  
To obtain the semiclassical limit , we consider the baryonic branch and require an  extra double roots in the curve, which now factorizes as
y^2= x^4 (x+a)^2 [ (x+a)^2- 4^2 ],    or   P_2(x)+2^2
=(x+a)^2

Furthermore, to find the  vacua, we minimize the superpotential on this factorization locus. It is easy to see that this is essentially the same problem(This is not a coincidence. By the addition map, the  theory with four flavors charged under one of the  factors in the  branch can be reduced to a  with two flavors under the  factor in the  branch.)  as in  () where we found that 
. Taking only  sign(The solution with the  sign will not lead to two gauge group factors in the semiclassical limit. ) 
we have two solutions corresponding to . In the weak coupling region, we also have two vacua: The  factor with two flavors has one baryonic vacuum, while the other  factor will give rise to two vacua, leading to a total of two vacua in the  theory on this branch.

Non-baryonic  branch:  
By using the addition map, we can reduce this case to
a  with two flavors in the   branch which we analyzed carefully. 
We found that there are  two vacua for 
and two vacua for the breaking pattern . Thus, by the addition map,  the 
 would have two vacua for  and  two vacua for .


Baryonic  branch:  
Via the addition map, this reduces to the baryonic  branch of a  theory with two
flavors which we analyzed in Sec. . The two semiclassical limits:  and   can be shown to be continuously connected on this branch. 





Non-baryonic  branch in  
distributions:   On this branch with the  and  distribution of roots, we have 
, then
 
So .  There
are two solutions: 
. In semiclassical limit, each solution leads to the breaking pattern .

To count vacua, we fix  and solve :
m+a_1+a_2,      m^2
Since  and  are symmetric, we have only
one solution for each .




Non-baryonic  branch in the  
distribution:   By shifting  by a constant, we can arrange the two double roots to be at  and  . The general case can be
recovered by shifting  by a constant : , 
. The factorization we need is
 
and we find
 
So  is given by 
 
 has to satisfy the following equation:
  
This has three solutions which we denote by ,  and .  Notice that
 () has the symmetry  and .
We now consider the different semiclassical limits.
 
 and  fixed and finite.
Then  from (),  find two solutions 
 or  when  the second and fourth term in
() dominates, and the third solution 
 blows up in the  limit . We will ignore this solution. For  and  we obtain  which implies that
the breaking pattern is  .


, and  with
. The asymptotic behavior of  can be read
off from (). We find the solutions   when
second and fourth term in () dominate and 
 when the first and second terms dominate. 
Thus for  we obtain , which yields a 
singular limit since there is only one gauge group factor. For  if
 the solution blows up and should be discarded. If
 we obtain , which is a
singular limit. 
For 
we obtain a smooth semiclassical limit. In this case
, and we obtain 
. Hence the breaking pattern is 
.


, and  with .
The asymptotic behavior of  can be again read off from
(). We find  and  
For  we get ,
which is a singular limit unless , in which case the gauge
group breaks into . For  we have , which is a singular limit unless
, in which case the gauge group breaks into 
.
Something new has happened here. To determine classical limits, we take a point on the factorization locus (parameterized by  and ) and then determine the superpotential which would yield that point as its minimum. That leads to the consistency condition (), which has three solutions  and .  The three solutions lead to different branches and different interpolation patterns:
 smoothly interpolate between   and  
.    smoothly interpolates between
  and
. We have not encountered this phenomenon in our earlier examples. For example, in the  theory with two flavors, 
the three classical limits  smoothly inteplate between each other with the same choice of . Notice that for the  theory with four flavors, the limit  is not smoothly connected with . 

To count the number of vacua, we need to first fix  and
 and find the number of solutions for  and the shifted
constant . From ()  we obtain the equations
 
Eliminating 

, we obtain the following equation for
:
 
Thus  has eight solution.  We
keep  and  fixed and find the asymptotic behavior of
the eight roots when . First by setting
 in () we find two roots at 
 and six others . 
The two non-zero solutions (which correspond to  in case 1 above) lead to a semiclassical limit  . 
We now analyze the six solutions for  which vanish in the  limit. 
Assume
.  Then from () we find that 
 or . For 
 the dominant terms in () give
 and  we find three roots
with . These solutions (which correspond to   in case (2) above) lead to the semiclassical limit
.
 For  the dominant terms () give
 
This implies that
.
We obtain one solution (corresponding to  in case 3 above) with   and two solutions (corresponding to  in case 3) with 
. 
These three solutions lead to the semiclassical limit  
. 

We now match the number of these strong coupling vacua with the number obtained in the weak coupling region. 
In  branch,  
 has four vacua where two from confining  factor 
and two from the  factor with four flavors (since , we have
 vacua). Two of these four vacua are in 
distribution and two,  distribution.  has three vacua in the   distribution while
  has three vacua (equal to ) in   distribution.

 
In this case we can have , , and  branches. The possible
baryonic and non-baryonic branches can be summarized in Table .
[h]
 
Summary of  with six flavors.   

Baryonic  branch:  
Via the addition map, we can reduce this to a   theory with two flavors in the   branch. 
 Thus we conclude that on this branch, the  theory with six flavors has a unique classical limit
with breaking pattern  .

Baryonic  branch:  
Via the addition map, we can reduce this
to the barynoic  branch of  with four
flavors. There are two vacua coming from the confining 
 factor in the classical limit 
.

Non-baryonic  branch:  
By using the addition map, we can reduce it to a   with two flavors in the . For this theory, we found only one solution which leads to the classical limit .Thus we conclude that the  theory with six flavors has a classical limit with the breaking pattern  . 
The SW curve factorizes as follows
y^2=x^4[(x+a)^2(x+b)^2-4^2 x^2]
Extremizing the  superpotential, we get one solution , which will lead to the  curve . This is the form of the curve in
an   branch. We have seen this phenomenon before: this non-baryonic branch actually lies inside the baryonic  branch. 


Non-baryonic  branch:  
By the addition map, we can reduce this  to a  theory with four flavors in the   branch.  In this reduced theory,  we found
one vacuum which in the semiclassical limit became a vacuum of   and two vacua which 
in the semiclassical limit became vacua of  .
Going back to , we conclude that there is one vacuum which leads to 
  and two vacua for . 



Baryonic  branch:  
After factoring out   factor from  we require
 
with the constraint . In
semiclassical limit  we
find  . Also  
, so .
There are three vacua for a fixed superpotential.





Non-baryonic  branch in  
distributions:   On this branch with  and  distribution of roots, we have
. Then (see ())

 
and
.
We find two solutions: 
.  In semiclassical limit, each solution leads to
.

To count the number of vacua, we fix  and  and solve
 and . Since  and  are symmetric, we have only
one solution for each .


Non-baryonic  branch in the  
distribution:   By a shift in  , we can arrange the two double roots to be at  and  . The general case can be recovered  after shifting by  a constant : , 
. The factorization we need is
 
where  and  are
 
Thus we find
 
and hence  is given by
 

 must satisfy the following equation:
 
which yields four solutions which are given by 
 
We now discuss different semiclassical limits:
 
 with  fixed and finite. Then
 blow up and should be discarded. On the other hand
, ,
and the breaking pattern is  .

,  with .
In this case  is small. Then 
 and . For
the solutions , we find that  in the  limit. To get a  finite , we require
,  so the constant term (in ) drops out and we get
 with . In this  case
the breaking pattern is . 
From the solutions  we always obtain a singular limit .

,  with . Then
, so 
. This is always a singular limit.


Thus we find that for the solutions  the only smooth semiclassical limit is
. For  the
only smooth semiclassical limit is 
.  Since these two classical limits arise from different
solutions, we do not expect them to be connected to each other
smoothly. This result is quite different from the  the  theory with two flavors
where the three possible classical limits were all  connected through the same branch. When we increased the number of flavors to four, the three possible classical limits were connected in pairs on two different branches. With six flavors, we find no smooth interpolations between the different classical limits. 



To count the number of vacua, we need to fix  and
 and find the number of solutions for  and the shifted
constant . From (), we obtain the following equation:
 
We eliminate 

 and find the
equation for :
 
This is a degree five polynomial for ,  and thus has five
roots. Keeping  and  fixed, we find the asymptotic
behavior of the five roots when . First by
setting  in () we find two roots at 
 and three others with . The two non-zero
solutions are  in case (1) for which the semiclassical limit
leads . We can analyze the three vanishing solutions more carefully.  Assume that  . Then from
(), we can conclude that  
 . Then the dominant terms in ()
give  , and we find three roots
. These three solutions correspond to 
in case (2) above, for which   the semiclassical limit leads to  
.

We can match the number of these strong coupling vacua with the number obtained in the weak coupling region. 
  has four vacua,
 two of which are in the   distribution and two are in the  
distribution.  has three vacua which lie in the   distribution.

In our discussion above, we have not found the semiclassical limit  in the  branch. This is because of the following reason. In (), we have implicitly assumes . When , the SW curve is of the same form as on the  branch. In fact, after the minimization of the superpotential, the curve is as it is on the  branch. In the semiclassical limit, this leads to the breaking pattern .(Recall that a similar phenomenon occurred in  with four flavors charged under the  factor. )  



Can we understand this phase structure from a weak coupling point of view?  
In our investigations of  vacua on various branches of a  theory with two, four and six flavors, we encountered a rich phase structure which depended significantly on the number of flavors. Can we understand the structure from the weak coupling point of view?

Recall that in Sec. , we discussed the vacuum structure of an    theory with  massless flavors in the presence of a quartic superpotential of the form . We found that vacua of this theory are characterized by an index  which determines the form of the meson VEV. Furthermore, for , we found  vacua for  ( for r=). For , we found two different sets of vacua. The first set (we will call it ) had  vacua, while the second set (we will call it ) had  vacua. 
In fact the second set is located inside the baryonic branch with 
. We have encountered this in the   gauge theory with
four flavors and quadratic superpotential. 





For  with  flavors,  we can have three semiclassical limits: 
(i) ,  (ii)  and (iii) .
Consider the case . Then, in the semiclassical limit (i) and (ii), the 
   and  factors have , so we expect these factors to have  vacua, all belonging to the set . On the  branch, in the classical limit (iii), the flavors are massive quantum mechanically, and that vacuum should also be considered to be part of the set . Since all three classical limits have vacua in the set , it
is possible  that these vacua are smoothly connected. 

For ,  in the classical limit (i), the   factor has no vacuum in the set  and has two vacua in the set . In the classical limit (ii), there are three vacua, two of which lie in the set  and one lies in the set . In the classical limit (iii), the  factor has one vacuum in the set . Thus we expect vacua of (i) to be smoothly connected to vacua of (ii) (and not  vacua of (iii)), while vacua of (iii) can also only connect with vacua of (ii). This is indeed the structure we found in the previous subsection.  



For , in the classical limit (i), the   factor only has vacua in set B while  the   factor in classical limit (iii) only has vacua in the set . In the classical limit (ii) the  factor also has vacua only in the set . But for this special case, the  branch is actually embedded inside an  branch. Thus we expect no smooth interpolations to be possible between vacua in different classical limits, which is indeed what we found in the previous subsection. 

Conclusion 
In this paper, we have studied the phase structure of  supersymmetric  gauge theories with fundamental matter that arise as deformations of  SQCD by the addition of a superpotential for the adjoint chiral multiplet. The various  vacua lie on different branches, some of which have multiple classical limits in which the vacua are interpreted as those of a product group theory with flavors charged under various group factors. On a given branch, the vacua are all in the same phase. What order parameters (or indices) distinguish between vacua on different branches? An obvious characterization of a branch is the global symmetry group (which in this case will be a flavor symmetry). 
We have mentioned other several quantities, which provide necessary conditions for vacua to be on the same branch. 
One such index is , which characterizes the meson VEV in various vacua in the weak coupling region, and labels the root of the -th Higgs branch in the strong coupling region.
The global symmetry group must be the same on each branch. On the  -th branch, the global flavor symmetry is broken as . 
  Another fact which distinguishes the different branches is if they are 'baryonic' or 'non-baryonic'. These two types of branches differ from each other in the number of condensed monopoles, and hence have different number of s at low energies.  Furthermore, a finer distinction is possible on the non-baryonic -th branches which arise when  and .
In these cases, there are two types of non-baryonic branch.  In the strong coupling region one arises from  a generic non-baryonic root, while the other is special case arising when the non-baryonic root lies inside the  baryonic root.   These two kinds of strong coupling vacua match up with two types weak coupling vacua in which the meson matrix is degenerate and non-degenerate.
 
We have also defined a multiplication index  in our theory with flavors. In, in the absence of flavors, this index is related to a "confinement index" which had a physical meaning in terms of representations whose Wilson loops did not show an area law. The meaning of the confinement index is not clear in the presence of massless flavors because perfect screening prevents Wislon loops in any representation from having an area law and the naive definition of the confinement index  always yields a trivial result. Perhaps the connection to a matrix model can be exploited to define a more useful analog of the confinement index. In any case, the various indices that are available to us are not refined enough to provide sufficient conditions which determine the phase structure completely. 












Acknowledgements 
We thank Alex Buchel, Freddy Cachazo, Josh Erlich, Yang-Hui He, Vishnu Jejjala and Nati Seiberg for useful discussions. B. F. thanks the high energy theory group at the University of Pennsylvania for their kind hospitality through the course of this work. V.B. thanks the George P. and Cynthia W. Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics for hospitality as this work was being completed. 
Work on this project at the University of Pennsylvania was supported
by the DOE under cooperative research agreement DE-FG02-95ER40893, and
by an NSF Focused Research Grant DMS0139799 for "The Geometry of
Superstrings".   This research was also supported by the Institute for
Advanced Study, 
under the NSF grant PHY-0070928. 

JHEP 

 99 
F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Phases of N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories and matrices,"
arXiv:hep-th/0301006.
F. Ferrari,"Quantum parameter space and double scaling limits in N = 1 super  Yang-Mills theory,"arXiv:hep-th/0211069; F. Ferrari,"Quantum parameter space in super Yang-Mills. II,"arXiv:hep-th/0301157.

R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"Matrix models, topological strings, and supersymmetric gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 3 (2002)
arXiv:hep-th/0206255.
R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"On geometry and matrix models,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 21 (2002)
arXiv:hep-th/0207106.
R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"A perturbative window into non-perturbative physics,"
arXiv:hep-th/0208048.C. Ahn and Y. Ookouchi,
"Phases of N = 1 supersymmetric SO / Sp gauge theories via matrix
model,"
arXiv:hep-th/0302150.
A. Brandhuber, H. Ita, H. Nieder, Y. Oz and C. Romelsberger,"Chiral Rings, Superpotentials and the Vacuum Structure of N=1 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories,"arXiv:hep-th/0303001.

F. Cachazo, K. A. Intriligator and C. Vafa,
"A large N duality via a geometric transition,"
Nucl. Phys. B 603 , 3 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0103067].


P. C. Argyres, M. Ronen Plesser and N. Seiberg,
"The Moduli Space of N=2 SUSY QCD  and Duality in N=1 SUSY QCD ,"
Nucl. Phys. B 471 , 159 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9603042].

K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg,"Lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and electric-magnetic  duality,"Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  45BC , 1 (1996)[arXiv:hep-th/9509066].

K. Hori, H. Ooguri and Y. Oz,
"Strong coupling dynamics of four-dimensional N = 1 gauge theories from  M theory fivebrane,"
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  1 , 1 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9706082].


G. Carlino, K. Konishi and H. Murayama,
"Dynamical symmetry breaking in supersymmetric SU(n(c)) and USp(2n(c))  gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 590 , 37 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0005076].


J. de Boer and Y. Oz,
"Monopole condensation and confining phase of N = 1 gauge theories via  M-theory fivebrane,"
Nucl. Phys. B 511 , 155 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9708044].

N. Seiberg,
"Exact results on the space of vacua of four-dimensional SUSY gauge theories,"
Phys. Rev. D 49 , 6857 (1994)
[arXiv:hep-th/9402044].

N. Seiberg,
"Electric - magnetic duality in supersymmetric nonAbelian gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 435 , 129 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9411149].

I. Affleck, M. Dine and N. Seiberg,"Dynamical Supersymmetry Breaking In Supersymmetric QCD,"Nucl. Phys. B 241 , 493 (1984).
 
A. Klemm, W. Lerche, S. Yankielowicz and S. Theisen,"Simple singularities and N=2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,"Phys. Lett. B 344 , 169 (1995)[arXiv:hep-th/9411048].


P. C. Argyres, M. R. Plesser and A. D. Shapere,"The Coulomb phase of N=2 supersymmetric QCD,"Phys. Rev. Lett.  75 , 1699 (1995)[arXiv:hep-th/9505100].

A. Hanany and Y. Oz,"On the quantum moduli space of vacua of N=2 supersymmetric SU(N(c)) gauge theories,"Nucl. Phys. B 452 , 283 (1995)[arXiv:hep-th/9505075].


Y. Ookouchi,
"N = 1 gauge theory with flavor from fluxes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211287.

F. Cachazo and C. Vafa,
"N = 1 and N = 2 geometry from fluxes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0206017.


B. Feng,
"Geometric dual and matrix theory for SO/Sp gauge theories,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212010.

R. Dijkgraaf, M. T. Grisaru, C. S. Lam, C. Vafa and D. Zanon,"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials,"arXiv:hep-th/0211017.

F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,"Chiral rings and anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theory,"JHEP 0212 , 071 (2002)[arXiv:hep-th/0211170].


Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik,"Explicit factorization of Seiberg-Witten curves with matter from random  matrix models,"arXiv:hep-th/0212212.


M. R. Douglas and S. H. Shenker,
"Dynamics of SU(N) supersymmetric gauge theory,"
Nucl. Phys. B 447 , 271 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9503163].

F. Ferrari,
"On exact superpotentials in confining vacua,"
Nucl. Phys. B 648 , 161 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0210135].

V. Balasubramanian, J. de Boer, B. Feng, Y. H. He, M. x. Huang, V. Jejjala and A. Naqvi,
"Multi-trace superpotentials vs. Matrix models,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212082.

P. C. Argyres and M. R. Douglas,
"New phenomena in SU(3) supersymmetric gauge theory,"
Nucl. Phys. B 448 , 93 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9505062].

P. C. Argyres, M. Ronen Plesser, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"New N=2 Superconformal Field Theories in Four Dimensions,"
Nucl. Phys. B 461 , 71 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9511154].

T. Eguchi, K. Hori, K. Ito and S. K. Yang,
"Study of  Superconformal Field Theories in  Dimensions,"
Nucl. Phys. B 471 , 430 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9603002].



N. Seiberg,"Adding fundamental matter to 'Chiral rings and anomalies in  supersymmetric gauge theory',"JHEP 0301 , 061 (2003)[arXiv:hep-th/0212225].


B. Feng,"Note on matrix model with massless flavors,"arXiv:hep-th/0212274.

R. Roiban, R. Tatar and J. Walcher,"Massless flavor in geometry and matrix models,"arXiv:hep-th/0301217.





























