




1.2 







165mm

220mm
-1.5mm

-2pt



0pt

0mm  
hep-th/0303091  

KIAS-P03016 




 
Theta functions on Noncommutative   




Hoil Kim (hikim@knu.ac.kr) 


Topology and Geometry Research Center, Kyungpook National University,

Taegu 702-701, Korea 




and 




Chang-Yeong Lee (cylee@sejong.ac.kr) 

Department of Physics, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Korea 







 
ABSTRACT 
We construct the so-called theta vectors on noncommutative ,
which correspond to the theta functions on commutative tori with
complex structures. Following the method of Dieng and Schwarz, we
first construct holomorphic connections and then find the
functions satisfying the holomorphic conditions, the theta
vectors. The holomorphic structure in the noncommutative 
case is given by a  complex matrix, and the
consistency requires its off-diagonal elements to be the same. We
also construct the tensor product of these functions
satisfying the consistency requirement.









I. Introduction 

Classical theta functions have played an important role in the
string loop calculation. Recently, noncommutative
geometry became an important ingredient of string/M
theory (for instance, see) starting with the work of
.

Along this direction, noncommutative torus and
its varieties, and physics on noncommutative
 have been studied intensively.
However, noncommutative tori with complex structures have been
rarely studied. Noncommutative
geometry with complex structures has been also studied recently
with algebraic geometry approach for Calabi-Yau three folds
, and for K3 surfaces.

Classical theta functions can be regarded as state functions over
commutative tori with complex structures. Noncommutative
generalization of this has been initiated in mathematics in the
quantized theta function approach by Manin, and with
the so-called theta vectors by Schwarz. In the
physics literature, this has appeared in the context of
noncommutative solitons but mostly in the
so-called integral torus case. Recently, Dieng and Schwarz
 have computed the theta vectors and their tensor
products on noncommutative  explicitly without any
restriction.

In this paper, we follow the method of Dieng and Schwarz and
calculate the theta vectors and their tensor products in the case
of noncommutative .
 In section II, we construct modules on
the noncommutative four torus. In section III, we deal with
connections with complex structures. In section IV, we deal with
tensor product of these modules. In section V, we conclude with
discussion.







II. Modules on noncommutative   
In this section, we construct the modules on noncommutative 
following the method of Rieffel.

Recall that  is the deformed algebra of the algebra of
smooth functions on the torus  with the deformation parameter
, which is a real  anti-symmetric matrix. This
algebra is generated by operators  obeying the
following relations
* 
The above relations define the presentation of the involutive
algebra


 where 
 is the Schwartz space of sequences with rapid decay.

Every projective module over a smooth algebra 
 can be represented by a direct sum of modules of
the form , the linear space
of Schwartz functions on , where
 and  is a finite abelian group.
 The module action is specified
by operators on  and the
commutation relation of these operators should be matched with
that of elements in .

 Recall that there is the dual action of
the torus group  on  which gives a Lie
group homomorphism of  into the group of automorphisms of
. Its infinitesimal form generates a
homomorphism of Lie algebra  of  into Lie algebra of
derivations of . Note that the Lie algebra 
is abelian and is isomorphic to . Let 
 be the homomorphism. For each
,  is a derivation i.e., for 
,
 
Derivations corresponding to the generators 
of  will be denoted by . For the
generators 's of , it has the following property
 
If  is a projective -module, a connection
 on  is a linear map from  to  such
that for all ,
 
It is easy to see that
 

We now consider the endomorphisms algebra of a module over 
. Let  be a lattice in 
, where  and
 is its dual. Let  be an embedding map such
that  is the image of  under the map . This
determines a projective module which will be denoted by
. The dual lattice of  can be
defined as


 
since in the Heisenberg representation the operators are
 defined by
 
for  Namely, the operators
defined in the dual lattice,  for 
, commute with all the operators defined in the
original lattice,  for 
.

It is known that the algebra of endomorphisms on ,
denoted by , is a
-algebra obtained by -completion of the space spanned by
operators , .
The algebra  can be
identified with a noncommutative torus 
, i.e.,  is Morita
equivalent to .



Recall that a -algebra  is said to be Morita equivalent to
 if  for some finite projective
module . In general, a noncommutative torus 
 is Morita equivalent to  if
 and  are related by
, where 

 .

In this paper, we consider a projective module of the form 
 with .

For the real part, we choose our



embedding map as
 
then using the previous expression for the Heisenberg
representation with 
 
we get
 

For the finite part, let , where
, () and consider the space
 as the space of functions on
. For all  and 
 such that  and  are relatively prime.

We define the operators  on 
corresponding to our embedding map


 
with  as follows

 

Thus, we define operators  acting on the space

 as
 
One can now see that they satisfy
 

and otherwise .







In order to find operators which commute with the 's, we
recall the definition of the dual lattice :



If we express the embedding map  as
 
and the embedding map  for the dual lattice as
 
then the duality condition above can be written as

where
 
Hence, we obtain the relation between the two embedding maps
 






 Using the above relation, the dual map for the real part is now given by
 
and the finite part is given by
 
Here,  and  for some 
.

The generators of operators corresponding to the embedding map for
the dual lattice are thus defined by
 
Here,
 

where  
 and otherwise . One can check that the
's commute with the 's, i.e., 








III. Connections with complex structures  

In the previous section, connections on a projective 
-module satisfies the condition ()
* 
A connection  is called a constant curvature connection
if  for  constants .
 This condition is satisfied if 
is expressed as 
where  is a derivative with respect to . Note
that the condition () can be regarded as a
compactification condition. This can be seen by considering an
operator  with which the condition is
expressed as
 
and this relation is comparable
to a compactification with radius ,
 

We thus let
* 
where  are constants. If we denote the embedding
maps as  and 
 then  action is expressed  as
* 
The condition () is satisfied if
 
 and
 
 The embedding maps  (), () satisfy
the condition (), and the condition () gives





Therefore the following operators specify a constant curvature
connection of right -module :
 
In general, a constant curvature connection can be obtained by
adding some constants: 
 where  are constants.

A complex structure on the module  can be introduced by
fixing -connection
 
where   Choosing an appropriate basis such
that  becomes
* 
 the   matrix 
 represents
          the complex structure of -module and 1-1 corresponds to
          the complex structure on  via -derivative,
            where  is
           defined by ().

Now we consider holomorphic vectors  in -module. A
vector  is called holomorphic
 if it satisfies
 
where  are constants.
 The above holomorphic
condition for  now takes the form
 






In order for the two equations in () to be consistent
 should satisfy
 
If , Eq.() has 
linearly independent solutions, the so-called theta vectors
 on noncommutative ,
 
where 

 and 




.





IV. Tensor product 

In this section we consider a tensor product of two bimodules.
Tensor product of a -bimodule  and a -bimodule
 over  results in a -bimodule  for algebras
;

where the tensor product over  is obtained by identifying 

. Note that in this identification,  behaves
as a right -module and  behaves as a left -module. Thus,
we will denote  as a right -module and
 as a left -module. Here, we recall that
 is Morita equivalent to  if
 and  are related by
 where 

, and
   for
some finite projective module . In this notation, a right
module  is identified with a left module . Let
us calculate the tensor product 
 which forms a vector space 
, when each
 is reducible into two blocks represented by the values

. For 
, and  where

 the actions of  and 
 are given as follows. 

The right  actions on  are defined as
 
The left  actions on  are defined as
 
The left  actions on  are defined as
 
where  and  for some 


 Following, we define the tensor product 
 as
 
for  Then, one can check
that
* 
for . Notice that in the above calculation 's act on
 as  left actions, since  is regarded here as an element of
a left module . So far, we have only defined the left actions
of  on a right module . Thus, we define left  actions
on a left module  as
* 
where  are defined in ().

If   is a right module expression of 
-bimodule and  is
a left module expression of 
-bimodule, then
 one can also show that  belongs to 
 where 
 and 
 with  when each
 is reducible into 2 blocks in the sense that we
described earlier.




Let us consider the tensor product () between the
two theta vectors,  and ,


 


where 

















.



The resulting function now takes the form
* 
where  and
* 
  From the delta function relations, we rewrite  as 
 for some integers
  where .
 Then,  can be written as
* 
where

* 
This can be decompsed into two parts, including the classical
theta function,
 
Here, the classical theta function  is given by
 

where * 
   with
  










 and the function  is given by




Requiring that  and  have the same complex
structure for consistency of the tensor product, i.e.,
, and the consistency condition
() the resulting function  becomes
 
Here, the function  is given by




 with 










 


 and the constants

are given by


 where



with


























and


with
* 
where  are the same as given
before.

Notice that the function 
 is a theta vector () belongs to 
 with 
 as we expected.









V. Discussion 

In this paper, we first construct a module on noncommutative 
and its dual. Then we define the complex structure on this module
and construct the theta vector which is a solution for a
holomorphic connection. We then consider the tensor product of the
theta vectors satisfying the consistency requirement.

Here, we want to notice what has not been apparent in the
noncommutative  case. When we require the
holomorphic condition (), the symmetry appears
not in the complex structure itself but in the -matrix
which appears in the theta vector (), i.e.,
 instead of  in
the commutative 4-torus case. We consider that this difference
comes from noncommutativity.

As in the noncommutative  case, the tensor products of
modules on the noncommutative 4-torus with complex structures
become very restrictive in order to satisfy the consistency
requirement. We consider this consistency requirement as another
aspect of noncommutativity compared with the commutative case in
which there is no restriction.

So far, theta functions on noncommutative tori have not been
utilized in the physics literature except for the integral torus
case. With the theta functions on
noncommutative tori without any restriction, one can hope to
explore the physical states on noncommutative tori in more general
cases.












Acknowledgments 


Most part of the work was done during
authors' visit to KIAS. The authors would like to thank KIAS for
its kind hospitality. This work was supported by KOSEF
Interdisciplinary Research Grant No. R01-2000-000-00022-0.









 88 

 J. Polchinski, String theory , vol.1 (Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1998).

 M.B. Green, J.H. Scwarz, and E. Witten,
 Superstring theory , vol.2 (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1987).

 A. Connes, Noncommutative geometry  (Academic Press, New York, 1994).

 See, for instance, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
JHEP 9909,  032 (1999), hep-th/9908142 and references therein for
the development in this direction.

 A. Connes, M.R. Douglas, and A. Schwarz,
JHEP 9802, 003 (1998), hep-th/9711162.

 A. Connes and M. Rieffel,
Contemp. Math. 62,  237 (1987).

 M. Rieffel, Can. J. Math. Vol. XL, 257 (1988).

 D. Brace, B. Morariu, and B. Zumino,
Nucl. Phys. B 545, 192 (1999),  hep-th/9810099;
  P.-M. Ho, Y.-Y. Wu, and Y.-S. Wu,
Phys. Rev. D 58, 026006 (1998), hep-th/9712201.

 C. Hofman and E. Verlinde,
Nucl. Phys. B 547, 157 (1999), hep-th/9810219.

 E. Kim, H. Kim, N. Kim, B.-H. Lee, C.-Y. Lee, and H. S. Yang,
Phys. Rev. D 62, 046001 (2000),  hep-th/9912272.

 N.A. Nekrasov and A. Schwarz, Commun. Math. Phys. 198, 689 (1998), hep-th/9802068.

 R. Gopakumar, S. Minwalla,and A. Strominger, JHEP 0005, 020 (2000),
          hep-th/0003160.

 M.R. Douglas and N.A. Nekrasov, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 977 (2001), hep-th/0106048.

 Y. Manin, Quantized theta-functions  in:
Common trends in mathematics and quantum field theories (Kyoto,
1990), Progress of Theor. Phys. Suppl. 102, 219 (1990);
 Theta functions, quantum tori and Heisenberg groups , math.AG/0011197.

 A. Schwarz, Lett. Math. Phys. 58,  81 (2001).

 M. Dieng and A. Schwarz, Differential and complex
geometry of two-dimensional noncommutative tori , QA/0203160.

 D. Berenstein and R. G. Leigh, Phys. Lett. B 499,  207 (2001),
hep-th/0009209; JHEP 0106, 030 (2001), hep-th/0105229.

 A. Belhaj and E.H. Saidi, Phys. Lett. B 523, 191 (2001),
hep-th/0108143.

 M. Bennai and E.H. Saidi, Phys. Lett. B 550, 108 (2002), hep-th/0210073.

 H. Kim and C.-Y. Lee, Phys. Lett. B 536, 154 (2002), hep-th/0105265;
 N-Point Deformation of Algebraic K3 Surfaces , to appear in
     J. Math. Phys., hep-th/0204013.

  E.J. Martinec and G. Moore, Noncommutative Solitons on Orbifolds ,
           hep-th/0101199.

 R. Gopakumar, M. Headrick, and M. Spradlin, Commun. Math. Phys. 233, 355 (2003),
      hep-th/0103256.

 Hou Bo-yu, Shi Kangjie, and Yang Zhan-ying,
Soliton on Noncommutative Orbifold   ,
hep-th/0204102; B.Y. Hou, D.T. Peng, K.J. Shi, and R.H. Yue, Solitons on Noncommutative Torus as Elliptic Algebras and Elliptic
Models , hep-th/0110122.






M. Rieffel and A. Schwarz,
Int. J. Math. 10, 289 (1999), q-alg/9803057.

 E. Kim, H. Kim, and C.-Y. Lee,
 J. Math. Phys. 42,  2677 (2001), hep-th/0005205.




