




0 
           
   
   
      
  plus.25em minus.15em
    height7pt depth2pt width0pt 
   


   

   

   
 



scaled2
scaled1
 
height .#2pt
    width .#2pt height#1pt #1pt
    width.#2pt 
    height.#2pt    
    



The Quantum Structure of Spacetime at the Planck Scale and Quantum Fields Sergio Doplicher, Klaus Fredenhagen, John E. Roberts  Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita di Roma "La Sapienza", I-00185 Roma,
Italy  II Institut fur Theoretische Physik der Universitat Hamburg, D-22761 Hamburg,
Germany  Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita di Roma "Tor Vergata", I-00133 Roma,
Italy  Research supported by MRST and CNR-GNAFA Commun. Math. Phys. 172 , 187-220 (1995)Received: 22 June 199410ptAbstract . We propose uncertainty relations for the 
different coordinates of spacetime events, motivated by Heisenberg's principle and by Einstein's theory of 
classical gravity. A model of Quantum Spacetime is then discussed where the commutation relations exactly implement
our uncertainty relations.We outline the definition of free fields and interactions over QST and take the first steps to  adapting
the usual  perturbation theory. The quantum nature of the underlying spacetime replaces a local interaction by a
specific nonlocal effective interaction in the ordinary Minkowski space. A detailed study of interacting QFT and of
the smoothing of ultraviolet divergences is deferred to a subsequent paper.In the classical  limit where the Planck length goes to zero, our Quantum Spacetime reduces to  the
ordinary  Minkowski space times a two component space whose components are homeomorphic to the tangent bundle
 of the 2-sphere. The relations with Connes' theory of the standard model will be studied
elsewhere. 
3.5truecm

1. Introduction It is generally believed that the picture of spacetime as a manifold  locally modelled on the flat Minkowski 
space  should break down at very short distances of the order of the Planck length

Limitations in the possible accuracy of localization of spacetime events should in fact be a feature of a Quantum 
Theory incorporating gravitation.

There have been investigations on possible mechanisms leading to such limitations in the context of string  theory
[1,2], in Ashtekar's approach to quantum gravity [3], and, in a more formal way, in the context of Quantum Groups
[4,5]. These different approaches have led to different limitations and, more significantly, to different pictures
of spacetime where gravitational effects in the small are necessarily strong (spacetime foam [6]).

Our proposal differs radically: attempts to localize with extreme precision cause gravitational collapse  so that
spacetime below the Planck scale has no operational meaning. We elaborate on this well known remark and are led to
spacetime uncertainty relations. In our proposal, spacetime has a quantum structure intrinsically implying those
relations. Thus the impossibility of giving an operational meaning to spacetime in the small is incorporated in the
mathematical structure of the model.

Similar models can be found in the work of J. Madore [7], where, however, no attempt was made to motivate  the
algebraic structure by an operational analysis of localization.

We thus propose that spacetime ought to be described as a non-commutative manifold , i.e.  the commutative
algebra  of complex continuous functions on  vanishing at infinity should be replaced by a
non-commutative algebra , and points of  by pure states on . The aim of this paper is to
propose an algebra  describing Quantum Spacetime and to look for a formulation of QFT over QST.

We now formulate some criteria for the choice of . We are interested in elementary particle  physics,
that is in describing idealized situations where only few colliding particles are present. Therefore, as a first
state of our project, we are interested in a non-commutative variant of the flat spacetime , deviating from
 only at very short distances, which fulfils the following principles:
  
1)  The commutation relations in  should be motivated by operationally meaningful  uncertainty
relations between the different coordinates of spacetime events.
2)  The flat spacetime  should appear (possibly as a factor) in the large scale limit of .
3)  The full Poincare group should act as symmetries on  .
 
Condition 3 is motivated and made possible by 2) and allows us to adopt Wigner's description of  elementary
particles in terms of irreducible representations of the Poincare group. Parity or time reversal symmetry
breaking might be features of specific interactions but the quantum spacetime should be, as ordinary spacetime,
reflection symmetric. Therefore, in 3) the full Poincare group is required to yield symmetries of the quantum
spacetime.

In Sect. 2 we explore the limitations of localization measurements which are due to the possible  creation of black
holes by concentration of energy.

We find the uncertainty relations




which are implied by those limitations but do not necessarily imply them. In Sect. 3 we find  algebraic relations
which imply these uncertainty relations. They have the form






The resulting algebra has a centre generated by the commutators .  The physical meaning
of this centre has still to be understood. It is responsible for the fact that in the large scale limit, performed
at fixed spectral values of the centre, the resulting classical space is , where




In Sect. 4 we define a -algebra  to which the operators  are affiliated.   turns
out to be isomorphic to the algebra  of continuous functions from  to 
vanishing at infinity, where  is the algebra of compact operators in a fixed separable Hilbert space.
States on  describe the possible localization of events. For optimal localization in a specific Lorentz
frame, in the sense that  is minimal, the state must be concentrated on spectral values of
the centre in a compact submanifold  of  with .

In Sect. 5 we develop calculus on . In particular we define a spacetime integral as a positive 
Poincare invariant trace and integrals over spatial hyperplanes as positive weights. The existence of these
latter integrals will be crucial for introducing an interaction and depends on the fact that the uncertainty
relations admit an absolutely precise determination  of time at the cost of complete uncertainty in at least one
spatial coordinate.

In Sect. 6 we take the first steps towards quantum field theory on the quantum spacetime.  We define free fields
and show that their commutator at spacelike distances decreases like a Gaussian. We give a formal recipe for
defining interaction Hamiltonians, interacting fields and the perturbative expansion of the -matrix. This
expansion could be derived from a specific nonlocal effective interaction on ordinary Minkowski space where the
nonlocal corrections are at least quadratic in .

Gauge theories on the quantum spacetime should be formulated in the framework of non-commutative  geometry [8].
More substantial deviations from theories on classical spacetime are to be expected; quantum electrodynamics, for
example, will be a non-Abelian gauge theory. The occurrence of the two point set  in the classical limit
recalls Connes' theory of the standard model [8,9]. We hope to take up these problems elsewhere.

The quantum aspects of gravitation might, however, well lead to a more drastic deviation from  the classical
structure of spacetime than is shown in our model, which is motivated by semiclassical arguments pertaining to
classical gravity.

Some of the structures discussed in this paper have already appeared in the literature in different  contexts. Thus
our commutation relations occur in the theory of charged particles is constant electromagnetic fields (see e.g.
[10]). A Euclidean version of fields on a non-commutative spacetime related to ours was proposed in [11]. The
Schwinger model on Madore's fuzzy sphere [7] was discussed in [12]. For other models of quantum spacetime see e.g.
[13].

A less technical version of our main results has appeared in [14].

2. Spacetime Uncertainties 

We start our discussion by pointing out that combining Heisenberg's uncertainty principle with  Einstein's theory
of classical gravity leads to the conclusion that ordinary spacetime loses any operational meaning in the small.

Measuring a spacetime coordinate with great accuracy  causes an uncertainty in momentum of  the order 
 (unless otherwise stated, we will use natural units ). Neglecting rest masses, an energy of the
order  is transmitted to the system and concentrated at some time in the localization region. The
associated energy-momentum tensor  generates a gravitational field which, in principle, should be
determined by solving Einstein's equations for the metric ,

The smaller the uncertainties  in the measurement of coordinates,  the stronger will be the
gravitational field generated by the measurement. When this field becomes so strong as to prevent light or other
signals from leaving the region in question, an operational meaning can no longer be attached to the localization.
 
Our task is now to investigate how localization is restricted by requiring that no black hole  is produced in the
course of measurement. Since pair creation is important in processes involving high energy transfer, the framework
of quantum field theory has to be used.

Our information on the localization of events in spacetime is obtained by using operations  which prepare a state
localized in a region with sides of lengths , that we take as a measure of the uncertainties in the
spacetime coordinates of an event. We will admit only those states whose associated energy-momentum tensor, taken
as a source in Einstein's equation, does not generate closed trapped surfaces in the sense of
Penrose(Cf. [15, 8.2]: we are grateful to D. Boccaletti for calling our attention to this reference.) .

As a consequence, the  will be subject to some restrictions preventing them  from being
simultaneously arbitrarily small. We may then pose ourUncertainty Problem : Find the restrictions on the uncertainties  
valid in all admissible states .To formulate our problem precisely, we turn to the free neutral scalar field and use the  coherent states as a
model for a class of states prepared by such operations. The corresponding state vector have the form

where  denotes the vacuum state vector and  a real smooth test function with compact  support where the
state (2.2) is strictly localized [16,17]. We have to choose the function  so that  differs significantly
from the vacuum in the support of , a region whose extent is characterized by , .
To this end we require the state to be significantly different from its translate through . This may
be expressed by the condition

which will be analyzed more thoroughly elsewhere.

The mean energy-momentum tensor of the state induced by (2.2) is given by

where  is the normal form  of the energy-momentum density of the field




The mean energy-momentum tensor (2.3) coincides with the energy-momentum density associated  with a suitable
solution  of the Klein-Gordon equation, , using the expression (2.4) in classical
field theory. Here



(where  is the invariant measure on the positive energy mass  hyperboloid   and
 the commutator function for the free scalar field of mass ). By the support properties of ,
 is localized at some time with the same accuracy , ,  as ;
furthermore, by (2.6),  cannot be a positive energy solution since  has compact support. However,
 has the same mean energy

where  is the one particle Hamiltonian and  the free field Hamiltonian.  Thus our problem is equivalent to
its variant dealing only with wave functions. We will not try to solve this problem here; instead we propose as an
ansatz the following spacetime uncertainty relations  in generic units:


We will motivate these relations heuristically limiting ourselves to a crude estimate,  where (2.1) is replaced by
the linearized equations, the components of  with  are neglected, and the total
energy , where  if  is very small, is supposed to be distributed with
constant density  at negative times  over a volume with sides , ,
.

In other words we assume uniform spreading with all speeds not exceeding the speed of  light and localization
around the origin, up to , , , at .

The gravitational potential  at  can be evaluated as the retarded potential


and we impose the condition that photons of energy  should not be trapped, i.e. 
 or .

It is easy to compute the leading behaviour of (2.10) in the three regimes:  
; ; . One finds 
 in the first two cases, and 
 in the third. If  is of the order
of unity we are back to the first case, so that  is the absolute
limitation, according to (2.8), in the third case too. If  we must take
 and we find (2.9).

If  is very large compared with , , we can take as an extreme  idealization a
static solution and the Schwarzschild and Kerr solutions motivate (2.9). For, if 
, we could take a spherically symmetric solution with mass , and our condition
says that  should be not smaller than the Schwarzschild radius , i.e. .

If, say , we may take the axially symmetric  Kerr solution with
mass  and angular momentum ; the limit case is  and 
[18, Ch. 7] which gives

in accordance with (2.9). We might further argue that, in the extreme situation considered,  the energy density is
actually concentrated on a thin ring region of radius  and thickness , so that the requirement expressed by
(2.9) that at least one  space uncertainty is large is not in contradiction with the Kerr solution.

However condition (2.9) is actually weaker since it allows  to be arbitrarily  small and 
 to be of order one.

In the next section we discuss covariant commutation relations which do imply that the uncertainty  relations (2.8)
(2.9) hold in each state over the associated algebra. We interpret these states as describing possible
localizations of measurements. 

The separation of the spacetime localization from the measurement of a local observable is due to our  classical
treatment of the gravitational effects of localization. The present approach ought to be considered as a
semiclassical approximation to a theory, presently unknown, where gravity and quantum physics are truly unified.

3. Quantum Conditions on Minkowski Space 

Let ,  be elements of a complex algebra; their non-commutativity   can be measured by
the quantity







If , this is just the commutator; if  and for  and cyclic permutations we set

then

If , we think of operators  describing the coordinates in Quantum   Spacetime and forming a
Lorentz vector and we will use covariant notation. Define

Antisymmetry of  then gives

 so that, setting

as usual, we get

If we denote by ,  the "electric" and "magnetic" components of , respectively, i.e.




the two independent Lorentz invariants which can be constructed with the tensor  are given by


These expressions are invariant under Poincare transformations


and total reflections , but (3.7) is not  separately invariant under space or  time reflections
since the sign of (3.7) changes. Therefore, the natural conditions which are Lorentz invariant and symmetric in
 and  are the following:


From now on, , , ,  will be always assumed to be selfadjoint operators  acting on a Hilbert
space (or affiliated to a -algebra, cf. [19] or Appendix A), and the operators  will be
assumed to have selfadjoint closures  .

We will now show that the conditions (3.9) do yield the uncertainty relations (2.8), (2.9)  provided the
 are central , i.e. commute(Throughout this paper two selfadjoint operators will be said
to commute if they commute strongly, i.e. their continuous functions vanishing at infinity (or, equivalently, their
spectral resolutions) commute.)  with the 's

We will call Eq. (3.9) and (3.10) the Quantum Conditions .

For each selfadjoint operator  on  and unit vector , we will  say that the vector state
 is in the domain of  if , so that


The uncertainty  is defined by 
 and  is said to be definite  on  if and only if 
, i.e.  is an eigenvector of . The same applies if  is affiliated to a -algebra A  and
 is in the domain of  (cf. Appendix A).3.1 Theorem . Let the four selfadjoint coordinate operators  fulfill  the Quantum
Conditions (3.9), (3.10) . For each state  in the domain of the , we have

 

The proof will follow easily from the following propositions.3.2 Proposition . Let  fulfill (3.9)  and  be a state in  the domain
of the 's, which is definite on . Then



 3.3 Proposition . Let A  be a -algebra with unit  and  a (regular) 
probability measure on the state space  with barycentre 
, i.e.

For any selfadjoint elements ,  we have


 Proof of Theorem 3.1 . Let the state  be definite on each ;  then  is
definite on  (cf. (3.4)) and , , so that (3.11),
(3.12) follow from (3.13), (3.14) of Proposition 3.2. If  is any state in the domain of the
's, it suffices, by Proposition 3.3 and Appendix A, to write  as the barycentre of a
(regular) probability measure carried by states definite on the 's.

Since the  are central, , , will lie in the centre of  the
-algebra A  generated by  and , , , 
. For each state  on A  in the domain of the 's, the central decomposition of
 [20, 4.8] will provide a (regular) measure carried by factor states, hence definite on  and
in the domain of  by Appendix A. Proof of Proposition 3.2 . If , ,  are selfadjoint operators with ,  then for
each state  in the domain of  we have


If  is as in the statement of the proposition we have  and by (3.7),

so that . Since by the Schwarz inequality



we get

Since by (3.6), (3.9)  we have ,  
. If we recall definitions (3.3), (3.5) and apply (3.18), we get (3.13) and (3.14) using
 for non-negative . Proof of Proposition 3.3 . With , , we have

But for each  and  we have



so that we also have



Since  is a probability measure, the constant function equal to 1 is square summable with unit  -norm
and by the Schwarz inequality





where we have used (3.19) repeatedly. We now want to consider realizations of (3.9) and (3.10) through operators on Hilbert space.  As we have already
indicated, the  will be supposed to be self-adjoint operators such that  have
self-adjoint closures  commuting strongly with  for all , , . We wish,
however, to impose a further condition namely that the commutation relations between the 's can be
integrated in Weyl form :


Such realizations will be termed regular .

We shall see in the next section that there is a well defined -algebra   whose non-degenerate
representations are in one-to-one correspondence with the regular realizations.  describes our Quantum
Spacetime in the sense that it may be thought of as the space of continuous functions on the Quantum Spacetime
vanishing at infinity.

The situation is therefore analogous to quantum mechanics where we have a -algebra  whose representations are
in one-to-one correspondence with regular realizations of the canonical commutation relations. Furthermore, just
as in quantum mechanics, there are other realizations and thus the possibility of defining -algebras
describing other natural classes of representations and hence other Quantum Spacetimes. Taking quantum mechanics as
our guide, these possibilities will be ignored here.

An important role will be played by the joint spectrum  of the commuting selfadjoint  operators
. By (3.9) it is included in the set  of all antisymmetric real 2-tensors  such that


i.e., writing ; , , where  is  a cyclic
permutation of , such that

We have , where


We can introduce the (Lorentz frame dependent) Euclidean norm on  by


Then  for each  and the unit sphere
 of  is  the compact
manifold


i.e.  is homeomorphic to .

If the four selfadjoint operators  obey the Quantum Conditions (3.9), (3.10) and   is a
state in the domain of the 's then, by the Spectral Theorem,  defines a regular probability
measure  on  s.t.
3.4 Proposition . Under the hypothesis of Theorem 1 , we have
 Proof . By (3.19) it sufficies to prove the above inequality for a state  which is  pure on
the centre.  is then a Dirac measure at a point  and
. Let . For 
 we set  and find the commutation relations

 Now let  be an orthonormal basis of  with
.

Then







for  respectively.

The maximum over  is attained for , hence



The last proposition sheds some light on the role of the manifold . Very accurate measurements of  the
's select states  for which  is essentially concentrated on . In generic
units, the unit sphere  becomes the doubled sphere of radius .

As we will discuss in the next section, if we consider generic states, the manifold  survives in the 
classical limit . But if we limit ourselves to very well localized states, the effect of 
will be not directly visible in that limit. In the next section we will describe explicitly states with optimal
localization where the quantity  actually reaches its minimal possible value.

We collect here some easy results on the manifold  which are either obvious or proved in Appendix B.I.  is a homogeneous space of the full Lorentz group for the action



Under the action (3.24),  are -homogeneous spaces;  are connected.  If 
, the stabilizer of  in  consists precisely of boosts along 
combined with rotations around . If  is chosen as the third axis, the stabilizer of 
is the image of the subgroup  of diagonal matrices under the usual covering map .
Hence we have homeomorphisms and isomorphisms of -homogeneous spaces:
II. As a topological space,  is homeomorphic to , the tangent bundle of the unit sphere  in 
. The two-sphere , naturally embedded in , corresponds precisely to , the Euclidean
unit sphere of . In particular,  is a deformation retract of .III. There are Borel sections for the map of  onto 
,  being a given point in ; we can choose such a section


to be continuous on the complement of a closed set  with zero quasi-invariant measure. We can  choose two such
sections , , such that , each of which can
be written in the form

where  is a boost,  a rotation and   is
continuous.

Choosing  s.t. , , we have



where  is the unit  matrix. Thus the symplectic form , 
 can be written as , where
. In particular,  and hence any
, induces a non-degenerate symplectic form and is an invertible matrix.

A regular realization with  
is given by the Schrodinger operators  in the
plane,  multiplication by  and , , in ,
by setting



By von Neumann's uniqueness theorem, each regular irreducible realization is a (improper) Lorentz  transform
 of ,  , for some . By
reduction theory every regular realization will be a direct integral of multiples of 's.

A Poincare-covariant  realization can be easily constructed as follows. Denoting by  
 and  the complex conjugates of an element  of a Hilbert space  and of a linear
operator  on , i.e. , define


It is easily checked that the  are generators of a representation  of ,  
, which is unitary, strongly continuous and induces translations  on 
:


We can now define, on the Hilbert space 
, the operators






It is easily checked that (3.35) defines a unitary strongly continuous representation of the full  Poincare group
and (3.32) a regular realization, where

By von Neumann uniqueness and uniqueness of the quasi-invariant regular measure class on ,  every
regular realization, covariant in the sense of (3.36), will have to be quasi-equivalent to (3.32).

We close this section with a remark on our Quantum Conditions (3.9), (3.10). We could as well have required  that
the two invariant combinations of the central operators  appearing in (3.9) coincide with generic real
multiples of the identity, say ,
, with . The above discussion would
have shown that for each state , the number ,  fulfil
, . Hence , , leading as above to the uncertainty
relations


Thus our choice ,  is the obvious symmetric choice in natural units.

4. Quantum Spacetime 

In this section we discuss the -algebra describing Quantum Spacetime. This part of our  discussion is not
hard but still rather technical, and readers who are less mathematically minded might prefer to limit themselves to
the statements of the theorems and then proceed to the discussion of localization and the classical limit following
Theorem 4.2.

In view of the discussion towards the end of Sect. 3, we may expect that the -algebra  describing the Quantum
Spacetime associated with the regular realizations  of the Quantum Conditions (3.9), (3.10) (cf. Eq. (3.20))
is related to the norm-closed algebra generated by

where  is the realization (3.32).

In order to nail down the appropriate algebra, it is more instructive to follow von Neumann's approach  to
uniqueness and first introduce a Banach -algebra  associated with the regular realizations.

Let us define  as the Banach space of continuous functions from  to  
vanishing at infinity, equipped with the product, *, and norm:




We define the action  of  on  by


where of course .

The commutative -algebra  of bounded continuous functions on  is  embedded in the
multiplier algebra of  by


Every non-degenerate representation  of  then determines a non-degenerate  representation
 of  s.t. (cf. (4.6))

and  is irreducible only if  s.t.


By von Neumann uniqueness, the irreducible representations  fulfilling (4.8) for a fixed  
are all equivalent to one another and to the representation of  determined by 

where (cf. (3.29))

4.1 Theorem . There exists a unique -norm on . The completion   is
the -algebra associated with a trivial continuous field of elementary algebras on , i.e. it is
isomorphic to , where  is the -algebra of all compact operators on a
fixed separable infinite dimensional Hilbert space. Proof . The representations (4.9), (4.10), for , form a separating family,  hence
 admits a -norm. Let  denote the maximal -norm and  the associated
completion. A non-zero representation  of  is irreducible iff  is irreducible, and
hence iff  is unitarily equivalent to the representation given by (4.9), (4.10) for some
.

Therefore, for each  there is an irreducible representation  of   satisfying
(4.8) which is unique up to equivalence and we have

If we embed  into the Banach -algebra  of bounded continuous functions  from
 to  with product, *, and norm given by (4.2), (4.3), (4.4), then clearly 
, the multiplier algebra of . The maximal -norm
 on  induces a -norm, still denoted by , on . If
 is the completion of  in that norm, we have

and, for each , .

We will show that the bundle  equipped with the continuous  fields
,  is a trivial continuous field  of elementary
algebras.  is then the associated -algebra, i.e. the -algebra of continuous fields vanishing
at infinity, and is isomorphic to .

To this end it suffices to show that our bundle is locally trivial and that there is a continuous field of 
one-dimensional projections (cf. [21, ch. 10, 7.6, 7.15, 8.4]).

We therefore choose the representations ,  in an appropriate way. For each 
, let  be the von Neumann element in the fibre of  at
 corresponding to the selfadjoint projection on the ground state of the harmonic oscillator. Namely, if
 is a section as in Sect. 3, III (cf. eq. (3.29) and II, Appendix B), we
define  by




where  and we used the specific form of our section 
, where  is a rotation thus leaving the Euclidean scalar product invariant.

Since the Lorentz group acts continuously on : 
, and  is continuous (cf. Appendix B),  is
continuous, where .

Now  is a selfadjoint projection of rank 1 [22], so that 
 is a continuous field of rank one projections.

Furthermore the following relation holds for each :


and defines a state  on . From now on let 
be the GNS construction for . We have only to show that our continuous field is locally trivial.

Let ,  be two sections as in III, Sect. 3, continuous on ,  resp.  where
,  is an open covering of  (cf. Appendix B). Define an isomorphism  of 
 regarded as the tensor product of  and the fibre of  at
 (cf. (4.2)) onto  regarded as a subalgebra of  by

one checks that  is a -isomorphism defining a trivialization of our field on . 

Remark . The triviality of our continuous field would follow directly if we could define a  map,
continuous in the appropriate sense, assigning to each  a regular solution  s.t.
. We might tentatively define 
as linear combinations of the fixed choice  of Eq. (3.29) but this approach fails, because the bundle
 is non-trivial and the symplectic group is not simply connected. However,
we have the further possibility of deforming  to , where  is an element of
the unitary group of  using the fact that this group is contractible (cf. [21, Chap. 10]).

It follows from the proof of Theorem 4.1 that each -seminorm on  has the form

for some closed subset  of . Since  is a homogeneous space, the unique -norm  is also the only non-zero -invariant -seminorm , and  extends to a strongly continuous action, still
denoted by , of the full Poincare group by automorphisms of .

The quasiequivalence classes of representations of  are labelled by the regular measure  classes on
. A covariant representation  of  obviously yields a covariant representation  of
 and is hence associated with a quasi-invariant regular measure on . Since there is
only one invariant measure class, it follows that there is only one quasiequivalence class of representations
 of  s.t.  is a covariant representation of   for some
representation  of the full Poincare group.

The -algebra  of Theorem 4.1 does indeed describe the Quantum Spacetime associated  with the class
of regular solutions of the Quantum Conditions (3.9), (3.10), in the sense of the previous section; namely:4.2 Theorem . For each  and  let  
 be the function . We can
define selfadjoint operators , , affiliated to  with support of definition I (Appendix
A), by setting, for each nondegenerate representation  of ,


These operators obey the Quantum Conditions since

the  commute and joint spectrum of  (cf. IV, Appendix A).

Moreover, for each element  of the full Poincare group, we have

where the automorphisms of  act on selfadjoint operators affiliated to   as described in
Appendix A III. We will refrain from spelling out the easy proof of this theorem and limit ourselves to the  remark that, by the
relations defining  and , if two representations ,  of  fulfill
, then , and ,  agree on a total
subset of , hence  on .

In view of Theorem 4.1 we can rewrite Eq. (4.17) as an identity in  involving the  selfadjoint operators
,  affiliated to :


We next discuss briefly the physical meaning of the state space .  We interpret each state
 as specifying the localization of events. Positivity of  and the commutation
relations prevent absolute precision in the localization, but there are states  having optimal localization
properties compatible with Proposition 3.4. The associated measure  on  will be concentrated on
the unit sphere , i.e. on the base  of . The
associated operators , , will be obtained from the solution (3.29), associated
to , by an (improper) rotation.

As is well known from elementary Quantum Mechanics, the minimum of the quantity (cf. (3.29))

is actually 2, and is attained on states which are translates of the ground state of the Hamiltonian   of the
harmonic oscillator in 2 dimensions,

Therefore, we can parametrize the states on  with optimal localization by a vector  in  Minkowski
space and a measure  on  carried  by  and define the associated state  by
its restriction to :



so that  is specified by the values of its normal extension  to the multiplier algbra through


We close this section with a remark on the classical limit  .

In generic units, the twisting factor in the product (4.2) of  takes the form

so that, as , our algebra  deforms to


that is our non-commutative space deforms to the (commutative) space

The factor (4.22) corresponds to writing the Quantum Conditions on , in generic units, in the form


where the  defined this way are selfadjoint operators affiliated to .

Equation (4.23) implies that the large dilation limit and the classical limit coincide. If we  were prepared to
violate  this condition we could write

in place of (4.23) and the  limit would give a dilation covariant Quantum  Spacetime ,
defined by


 is the set of all real antisymmetric 2-tensors such that

Now  is connected  and is a single orbit under  of any  ; for
each ,  with , . For each
, an appropriate boost along  will change  to
. The symplectic form defined by  is now degenerate, 
.

5. Calculus on the Quantum Spacetime 

Let  denote, as before, the -algebra of continuous bounded functions from   to 
, and  the Abelian -algebra of bounded complex continuous functions on
.

With  let  and   denote the Fourier
transform and its inverse.

For each  we can define the function  of the quantum coordinates   as an
element of  by

Spacetime translations act as automorphisms , , such that (cf. Sect. 3,4)

We can now define spacetime derivatives as in Minkowski space as minus the infinitesimal generator of 
translations, i.e.

If we take the product of  operators  defined as in (5.1), we get another  function of 
which on the one side is distinct from the pointwise product  evaluated on  and on the other is no
longer -valued but -valued in general. Both facts are apparent from the explicit formula which is an
immediate consequence of (5.1):

where the twisted convolution  depends on :


so that



In order to develop Quantum Field Theory on the Quantum Spacetime and to apply the conventional  perturbation
methods, it will be important to define the quantum analogues of the positive linear functional on 
 given by the total integral and the integral over space at a fixed time :



Define the -valued trace  on  by

where  is the usual trace on .

If  the formal analogue of (5.7), (5.8) can be defined by




Note that (5.10), (5.11) are consistent since

Positivity can be established either directly, using the first line of (5.11) as a definition and  (5.5) to show that

where of course  as a consequence of the definition (5.1); or else by showing  that the
second equality in (5.11) does hold for an appropriate sequence . To this end it suffices to choose real
functions  such that  approximates the constant function one on space times the Dirac measure at time
. Then, using (5.6) for , we get





where  approximates , so that   can
be replaced by  in the limit, since , and the expression (5.12) approximates 
 , as desired. The positivity of the weight (5.11) can be interpreted in the light of our
spacetime uncertainties which must hold for any positive  functional and are compatible with absolute
precision in the measurement of time together with complete lack of knowledge of the space coordinates. On the
contrary, the functional , , for instance, is not  positive on .

In order to obtain a -valued functional we must integrate over  too. If the result is to agree  with
the classical definition for functions taking values in , we must use a normalized state on
. Unfortunately there is no obvious Lorentz invariant choice since  is not amenable. Motivated by
our discussion of localization, we will choose the state defined by integration over the unit sphere 
with the normalized Lebesgue measure . Of course the result will be rotation but not Lorentz invariant.

We first analyze the -valued weight  in more detail. In fact, in order be able  to define an
interaction Hamiltonian we will need expressions like

Combining (5.6) with (5.11) we see that (5.13) is given by

where the -valued kernel  is given by



 


The explicit expressions are (cf. Appendix C):



and





The kernel  describes the non-locality introduced by the quantum nature of spacetime as  a deviation
of (5.13) from the classical expression . We limit ourselves to the
explicit expressions for , which will be of particular importance in the next section. For  we get


Note that integrating over  gives

so that there is no nonlocal effect in the spacetime integral when .

The nonlocal effects also disappear from the space integral at fixed  time if we restrict ,   to be
solutions of the Klein-Gordon equation  and evaluate the usual scalar product




Indeed we have for any such  and  and for each ,

To prove (5.17) it suffices to note that, by (5.16), the l.h.s. can be written as

 where  is again a solution of the Klein-Gordon equation. Therefore
the  does not depend on  and integrating over  gives the Dirac measure in the variable .
Integrating over  replaces  by  and (5.17) equals  as desired.

The calculation for  gives


so that



Thus the non-local effects are now visible in the full spacetime integral, too, as we see by  integrating (5.20)
over :


It is instructive to write (5.20) in generic units . To this end we must replace  by 
,  by  and  by , where ,  and
 are dimensionless.

We get



Integrating over the  variable and setting

we get


Note that, by the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem (recall that ,  the limit of
the last expression as  is


as expected. The correct  limit is also evident in (5.22) or more generally in (5.15).

Note that in (5.22) the non-local corrections to the classical formula are at least quadratic in  
: the linear term vanishes since



This is a general feature: for each ,  appears in  only through  (cf. (5.15))  and, in
generic units,


Therefore the lowest order corrections to QFT on the usual Minkowski space will be at least quadratic   in
. Linear terms in  might appear only if we introduce gravitational interactions 
explicitly in the theory.

Finally we discuss the -valued weight analogous to the classical space integral at fixed time, defined by

This expression is easily obtained from (5.14), (5.13) evaluating the state  over  .
A similar comment applies to the explicit formula (5.22) for . Note that, for , we have
. For this holds when , 
, and  is a single orbit under the improper rotation group. A standard computation
gives





Thus replacing the exponential in (5.22) by  we get the desired explicit expression for (5.23)  in the
case .

6. Towards Quantum Field Theory on the Quantum Spacetime 

In this section we will lay down our basic philosophy and take the first steps towards QFT on QST.  A more thorough
analysis will be deferred to a subsequent paper.

As required from the outset, the Poincare group acts as a symmetry group on our QST (cf. Sect. 3 and 4).  This
fact allows us to retain Wigner's notion of elementary particles as being described by irreducible representations
of the covering group of the Poincare group.

In accordance with one of our principles, the large scale limit of our QST agrees with its classical limit  and
yields the classical Minkowski space times an unobserved ghost manifold. This asymptotic behaviour is expected to
allow one to describe causality for QFT over QST as an asymptotic property  corresponding to the locality principle
[17] in the large scale limit.

The usual construction of asymptotic scattering states, which also involves a large scale limit, should  likewise
carry over.

When attempting a perturbative study of the -matrix for QFT over QST, the first steps are to define  free
fields and interaction Hamiltonians.

Starting from Wigner's definition of particles, the usual Fock space construction yields a free field  associated
with an irreducible representation of the covering group of the Poincare group.

There is no difficulty in evaluating this field on the QST, at least formally, as a function with values  in the
algebra spanned by the creation and destruction operators. For simplicity we consider a neutral scalar free field
. Evaluating on  according to the rule (5.1) gives


where  is the usual invariant measure over the  positive
energy hyperboloid of mass :

In order to give a precise mathematical meaning to the formal expression (6.1) we may think of  a quantum field
over QST acting on a Hilbert space  as a linear map, continuous in the appropriate topology, assigning to
test functions  linear operators affiliated to the -tensor product  and
formally denoted by


It would be possible, and perhaps even natural, to define a different notion of free field over QST,  by letting
 depend of  and  .

This would amount to choosing the creation and annihilation operators  in the CCR algebra over  
, where  is equipped with the Lorentz invariant measure  induced by a Haar
measure on . Thus

where  is a reference point in . This approach would be closer in spirit to quantizing  wave
functions over QST and will be pursued elsewhere.

As a first simpler choice we will ignore here the possible -dependence of free fields.

From the expression (6.1) for our free field over QST and from the definition (5.3) of derivatives,  it is clear
that the Klein-Gordon equation holds

Let  be the unitary representation of the Poincare group over  defined  by the Fock
construction and  the induced action on linear operators acting on . The
relativistic covariance of our free field takes the form

as a consequence of (4.19) and (6.1). In order to define "local obsevables" in this model, we will  consider
states  over the -algebra  of QST as the analogues of test functions defining localization
data in spacetime. Pure states (with good localization properties) should play a role analogous to points in
classical space.

The free field defines a map from states  to operators on  by

Introducing the test function  associated to  by

we can write the field operator  evaluated at  as the usual free  field
smeared out with  :

Relations (6.5), (6.6) allow us to explore the locality properties of the free field over QST.  The commutator of
two "values" (6.4) of the field takes the form

If we specialize ,  to translates of a given pure state with optimal localization of  the form
(4.20), say , , we can compute the commutator (6.7) and study its asymptotic
properties. In this case, one easily sees that , takes the form

The computation for the case  can be carried out explicitly and exhibits those aspects of  causality which are
essential in the massive case, too.

We get, in generic units,




There are two important features of the expression (6.9). In spacelike directions it falls off  like a Gaussian,
hence faster than an exponential. If ,  are kept fixed and we look at the limit , the
expression (6.9) converges in the sense of distributions to the usual commutator function of the massless free
field, as expected.

We next discuss interaction Hamiltonians, briefly. It is important to note before-hand that the  free 
Hamiltonian of a scalar free field of mass  over QST can be written as the space integral of a "quantum
density" using the calculus of Sect. 5,

To this end, note that the Hamiltonian of the ordinary neutral scalar free field can be written as




where the double dots indicate Wick ordering. Here the Klein Gordon equation and integration by parts  have been
used. The relation (5.17), applied to the last integral, shows that (6.10) holds.

Consider now a more than bilinear interaction Hamiltonian density

where  are free field multiplets and summation over spin and internal degrees of  freedom is
implicit,  being a matrix of coupling constants.

It is natural to define an interaction Hamiltonian for QFT over QST associated with the interction (6.11)  by the
integral defined in Sect. 5 of the expression (6.11) evaluated
over the variables :

By the results in Sect. 5 the expression (6.12) can be calculated and agrees with an effective  nonlocal
Hamiltonian  defined by


where the kernel  is given by (5.15). In the important case of a trilinear interaction,  we get (cf.
(5.22))


where the kernel  has been calculated in (5.24) and we have used generic units. Leaving out  the
integration over  in Eq. (6.14) we get, of course, the effective nonlocal Hamiltonian density .

Interacting fields can be tentatively defined in the following way: since  is a solution of the 
Klein-Gordon equation, the form


is independent of  for any solution  of the Klein-Gordon equation. If   is the
unitary evolution operator with



we define the interacting field  by

Since  is not a solution of the wave equation, in general, the lefthand side depends on .

By choosing suitable solutions of the wave equation for every  and integrating over  we determine 
 on the whole state space of .

Finally, we may follow the usual procedure and postulate LSZ asymptotic conditions which then lead to  the ordinary
perturbation expansion of the -matrix.

As usual the  order contribution can be calculated from the  order  contribution to
the time-ordered function obtained substituting  in the formula


where the ordering now refers to the ,  variables rather than  to the
integration variables in (6.13). This modifies the usual Feynmann rules. Due to the non-local character of our
effective interaction, for renormalizable theories, the renormalized perturbative expansion should agree with the
classical one for  and contain corrections of order  due to the quantum nature of
spacetime. We intend to give a more thorough discussion of these points elsewhere.

7. Outlook 

The choice of our QST was motivated by our principle that spacetime should have an operational meaning;  we
observed that this meaning would be destroyed by the gravitational collapse caused by preparing a very sharply
localized state.

We wish to point out that our uncertainty relations (2.8) and (2.9) appear as necessary but not a priori 
sufficient conditions to prevent gravitational collapse in such a process. Hence the Quantum Structure of our
spacetime might reflect only part of the necessary restrictions.

The very first steps to QFT  over QST outlined in Sect. 6 show that the quantum structure of our model  of
spacetime does lead to a smoothing of ultraviolet divergences. A more thorough analysis of the surviving
divergences and their renormalization in specific models is required (see [23] for related results).

Properties of the resulting theory which can be tested at a perturbative level (cluster properties,  convergence of
asymptotic states) can be a guide to explore properties of QFT over QST.

We wish to point out several other open problems.

Causality in QST has been mentioned here as an asymptotic property in the limit of vanishing Planck  length.
However, there might be an exact form, related to the causality properties of the free field over QST, expressing
the propagation of wave functions over QST. But even if such a tighter condition existed, it is not obvious whether
we can expect any stability under interactions.

We note that the -dependence of interactions has been removed by a procedure which is not  Lorentz
invariant. Other approaches are possible, of course, e.g. one could treat the variables  as random
variables. Or one could adopt a dynamical treatment introducing -dependent fields. We believe that a
satisfactory understanding of the role of  should be possible if one were to incorporate gravitation in the
theory. Our QST ought to offer a more suitable basis for the formulation of Quantum Gravity, as it embodies part of
the limitations on the structure of spacetime determined by gravity, at least at a semiclassical level.

More generally, we could use the gauge principle as a natural way of introducing interactions between  fields over
the QST and Connes' non-commutative geometry [8] should provide the right framework here. The quantum nature of
spacetime has the effect of making QED into a non-commutative gauge theory, so that even the theory of
electro-magnetic fields without matter should become an interacting theory.

The large scale structure of the univese and the microstructure of spacetime relate to quite distinct  asymptotic
regimes. Yet it would be interesting and instructive to generalize our quantization procedure to a general curved
spacetime. The methods of deformation and geometric quantization could well apply here [24-26]. In this context,
it is quite clear that our formalism is not at all intended to exclude black hole formation at scales which are
larger than the Planck length.

Finally, it would be important to investigate whether a version of the Euclidean approach to QFT  is possible for
QFT over QST.

We hope to come back to these and related questions in a continuation of the present paper.

Appendix A 

Let A  be a -algebra with unit I. A selfajdoint operator  affiliated to   A  is defined
by a -homomorphism (with unbounded support if  is unbounded) of  into A , denoted

whose support projection  is central. Equivalently, if 
 is a sequence in the unit ball converging pointwise to , then, for each ,

We will refer to  as the support of definition  of  (or just support, if no confusion is possible).

If A  has no unit,  is said to be affiliated to  A  if it is affiliated to  the multiplier
algebra  .

A state  (a representation ) of A  is in the support  of  if  
(resp. ), where ,  denote the normal extensions to A .

The normal extension of  to bounded Borel functions   on  will be 
also denoted . If ,
,  is the strong limit of  as  and 
 is a spectral family  for each  in the support of . For such ,
 will denote the selfadjoint operator with spectral resolution .

We will say that the selfadjoint operator  affiliated to A  is
central  if  is in the  centre
of A  (or of , if A  has no unit) for each , i.e. if, for
each representation in the doman of ,

Since  is anyway affiliated to , 
 would suffice.

A state  will be said to be in the domain of   if it is in  the support
of  and



In this case we may and will write

We can now state some easy facts.I. A state  is in the support of definition of  if and only  if if the same
applies to the GNS representation .

Furthermore,  is in the domain of  if and only if  is in the domain of  , in
which case we have

If  is in the domain of  we may define

Of course we will say that  is definite  on  if , i.e.  if
.

II. Let  be a regular probability measure on  with barycentre  
. Then  is in the support  of  iff  is carried by the states in the
support of .

Moreover,  is in the domain  of  if and only if  is carried by the states  in the domain of
 and  is -integrable. This implies that  is -square
integrable since , hence  is integrable and
 is square integrable.

If  is also in the domain of another selfadjoint operator  affiliated to A ,  we have as in
Proposition 3.3,



III. If  is an automorphism of A  and  a selfadjoint operator affiliated to A ,  we can
define  affiliated to A  by the homomorphism

s.t. , where  is the extension of
 defined by


IV. If  are selfadjoint operators affiliated to A , we say that they commute if  the
 commute with one another for each , . In this case, the map
 extends to a
-homomorphisms  into  whose support is called the joint
spectrum  of .

V. If  is a selfadjoint operator affiliated to a -algebra A  and  is a state on  A  in
the domain of , the state of A  induced by the vector  in the
representation  will be denoted by . If ,  are selfadjoint operators affiliated to
A , we will say that  is in the domain of their commutator if  is in the domain of  and
 in the domain of , i.e. if  is in the domain of . If ,
,  are selfadjoint operators affiliated to A  with the same support  such that, for each
representation  in that support , the commutator  has closure , we
will write


Appendix B 

I. The manifold  is homeomorphic to , the tangent bundle to the two-dimensional sphere .

Let  denote the generic point in , where  is a unit vector  in 
and  is s.t. .

For each  let  be the parametrization by electric and  magnetic
components, so that , . Hence  and we can define

If ,  with , let  be defined by

If , let , and let   be
the boost along  with speed  s.t.

Then  takes  to :

Choose  s.t. , i.e. .  We can
define a homeomorphism  by setting


II. For each point  there is a Borel section for the action of   on
:


where , , s.t.



 

We let  be defined as in I; it suffices to choose a continuous map 
 from the 2-sphere minus one point to the rotation group such that .
We can take  to be an arbitrary rotation taking  to  and set

If , the map  can be defined as the identity if   or as the
rotation around  which takes  to  if . If 
is arbitrary, replacing  by  in the above construction yields a map  and, for any
fixed choice of a rotation  which takes  to ,  meets the desired
requirements.

If  denotes the space reflection,  if 
; we can define , , thus extending
our section to  and letting it take values in the full Lorentz group.

Finally we point out yet another picture of  which might turn out to be useful.  Associate to
, , the vector . Then
, so that the image of  is the manifold 
. The action of  on  corresponds to the action of  on
that manifold, the space or time reflection to complex conjugation, and the Euclidean norm ,
 to the norm .

Appendix C 

The goal of this appendix is to calculate the kernel  and we begin by calculating the kernels 
describing the multiplication in .

Let . The function  is called the symbol  of
. We formulate the multiplication in  in terms of these symbols. The symbol of a product is

where the distribution  is given by


The quadratic form in the exponential can be written in the form

where  and  is an -matrix with entries 
, , , , , . If  is even, the matrix  has an inverse ,
with entries . Hence in this case we obtain

where we have used the fact that  and  have determinant one.

For later convenience we introduce coordinates . In these coordinates the quadratic 
form in the exponential assumes the simple form

If  is odd the matrix  is not invertible. In this case we set  with 
.

Since the symbol of the unit is the function  we obtain  from  by integrating over the
last variable. Hence






If we replace  by  the coordinates  with  even remain unchanged whereas for  odd   is
replaced by . We have

hence this expression will remain invariant.

Therefore we find


and




The integral over a spatial hyperplane  can now be easily performed. We obtain

 in the odd case and







in the even case. Using (C.7) and the formulas


we obtain the kernels

in the form


and




where  is the quadratic form on  given by
Acknowledgements . It is our pleasure to thank D. Buchholz, A. Connes and  R. Haag for discussions.

We gratefully acknowledge the support given by the Graduiertenkolleg "Theoretische Elementarteilchenphysik"  for
a visit of S.D. to Hamburg and by the CNR and the Dipartimento di Matematica, University of Rome I for visits of
K.F. to Rome thus making our collaboration possible.

S.D. takes pleasure in thanking Colin Sutherland for the warm hospitality and ideal working  conditions offered to
him at the Department of Pure Mathematics, University of New South Wales, in a stage of this research.Note added in proof : The model of QST proposed here is the simplest but not the unique  one implementing our
Uncertainty Relations (2.8), (2.9). In other models with this property the commutators of the q's are no longer
central, the associated algebras admit representations where the stronger uncertainty relations deduced in Section
2 are satisfied, namely ;  holds too
in these representations, however, translation invariance at the
Planck scale is spontaneously broken [27].

We are grateful to A. Kempf for pointing out to us references [28,29].

References 

1.  Amati, D., Ciafaloni, M., Veneziano, G.: Nucl. Phys. B347 , 551 (1990);  Amati, D.: On Spacetime at
Small Distances. In: Sakharov Memorial Lectures, Kladysh, L.V., Fainberg, V.Ya., eds., Nova Science P. Inc., 1992
2.  Ellis, J., Mavromatos, N.E., Nanopoulos, D.V.: A Liouville String Approach to  Microscopic Time in
Cosmology. Preprint CERN-TH. 7000/93
3.  Ashtekar, A.: Quantum Gravity: A Mathematical Physics Perspective. Preprint CGPG-93/12-2
4.  Kempf, A.: Uncertainty Relations in Quantum Mechanics with Quantum Group Symmetry. Preprint DAMT/93-65
5.  Woronowicz, S.L.: Compact Matrix Pseudogroups. Commun. Math. Phys. 111 , 613-665 (1987)
6.  Wheeler, J.A.: Geometrodynamics and the Issue of the Final State. In: Relativity,  Groups and Topology.
De Witt, C., De Witt, B., (eds.) Gordon and Breach 1965. Hawking, S.W., Spacetime Foam. Nucl. Phys. B144 ,
349, (1978)
7.  Madore, J.: Fuzzy Physics. Ann. Phys. 219 , 187-198 (1992)
8.  Connes, A.: Non-Commutative Geometry. Academic Press, 1994
9.  Connes, A., Lott, J.: Particle Models and Non Commutative Geometry. Nucl. Phys. B. (Proc. Suppl.) 
11B , 19-47 (1990); Kastler, D.: A detailed account of Alain Connes' version of the standard model in
non-commutative geometry, I, II. Rev. Math. Phys. 5 , 477-532 (1993); III, Preprint CPT-92/P. 2814; IV
(with Th. Schucker), Preprint CPT-94/P.3092
10.  Schrader, R.: The Maxwell Group and the Quantum Theory of Particles in Classical  Homogeneous Elecric
Fields. Forts. der Phys. 20 , 701-734 (1972)
11.  Filk, T.: Field Theory on the Quantum Plane. Preprint, University of Freiburg, August 1990, THEP 90/12
12.  Grosse, H., Madore, J.: A Noncommutative Version of the Schwinger Model. Phys. Lett.  B283 , 218
(1992)
13.  Mack, G., Schomerus, V.: Models of Quantum Space Time: Quantum Field Planes. Preprint,  Harvard
University HUTMP 93-B335. Lukierski, J., Ruegg, H.: Quantum -Poincare in any Dimension. Phys. Lett. B,
to appear
14.  Doplicher, S., Fredenhagen, K., Roberts, J.E.: Spacetime Quantization Induced by  Classical Gravity.
Phys. Lett. B 331 , 33-44 (1994)
15.  Hawking, S.W., Ellis, G.F.R.: The large scale structure of spacetime. Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1973
16.  Knight, J.M.: Strict localization in Quantum Field Theory. J. Math. Phys. 2 ,  439-471 (1961);
Licht, A.L.: Strict localization. J. Math. Phys. 4 , 1443 (1963)
17.  Haag, R.: Local Quantum Physics. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer TMP, 1993
18.  Straumann, N.: General Relativity and Relativistic Astrophysics. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: 
Springer, 1984
19.  Woronowicz, S.L.: Unbounded elements affiliated with -algebras and non-compact  Quantum Groups.
Commun. Math. Phys. 136 , 399-432 (1991). Woronowicz, S.L.: -Algebras Generated by Unbounded Elements.
Preprint 1994; Baaj, S.: Multiplicateur non borne. These, Universite Paris VII 1980
20.  Pedersen, G.K.: -Algebras and their Automorphism Groups. New York: Acad. Press, 1979
21.  Dixmier, J.: -Algebras. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1980
22.  Von Neumann, J.: Uber die Eindeutigkeit der Schrodingerschen Operatoren.  Math. Annalen 104 ,
570-578 (1931)
23.  Filk, T.: Renormalizability of Field Theories on Quantum Spaces,  Preprint University of Freiburg, THEP
94/15, 1994
24.  Didonato P. et al. eds.: Sympletic Geometry and Mathematical Physics. Actes du Colloque en Honneur de
J.M. Souriau, Basel, Boston: Birkhauser, 1991
25.  Rieffel, M.A.: Deformation Quantization of Heisenberg Manifolds. Commun.  Math. Phys. 122 ,
531-562 (1989)
26.  Landsman, N.P.: Strict Deformation Quantization of a Particle in External  Gravitational and Yang Mills
Fields. J. Geom. Phys. 12 , 93-132 (1993)
27.  Doplicher, S., Fredenhagen, K.: in preparation
28.  Maggiore, M.: Quantum Groups, Gravity, and the generalized uncertainty  principle, Phys. Rev. D49 ,
5182-5187 (1994); Phys. Lett. B 304 , 65-69 and 319 , 83-86 (1993)
29.  Garay, L.J.: Quantum Gravity and minimum Length. Preprint Imperial/TP/93-94/20, gr-qc/9403008
