








































On Penrose limit of elliptic branes 


Stanislav Kuperstein (kupers@post.tau.ac.il)  

School of Physics and Astronomy

  The Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

  Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel
 

Stanislav Kuperstein

School of Physics and Astronomy

The Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel

E-mail:
kupers@post.tau.ac.il 
 



We discuss a Penrose limit of an elliptic brane configuration with 
NS5 and  D4 branes. This background is T-dual to  D3 branes
at a fixed point of a  singularity and
the T-duality survives the Penrose limit. The triple scaling limit of
 and  gives rise to IIA pp-wave solution with a space-like
compact direction. We identify the quiver gauge theory operators and
argue that upon exchange of the momentum along the compact direction 
and the winding number these operators coincide with the operators derived
in the dual type IIB description. We also find a new Penrose limit of the type
IIB background and the corresponding limit in the type IIA picture. In the
coordinate system we use there are two manifest space-like
isometries. The quiver gauge theory operator duals of
the string states are built of three bosonic fields.
 


March 2003 
Penrose limit, quiver, moose 
TAUP-2723-03
hep-th/0303042  

Introduction 



Recently, new insight into the AdS/CFT correspondence has been achieved by
considering a Penrose limit of the AdS background of type IIB string theory  . 
The limit for the  background provides
 a maximally supersymmetric solvable pp-wave background
   with
string states related to a special subset of operators in the dual
 gauge theory. These results were extended to other
conformal and non-conformal backgrounds 
 

. 
In particular, the Penrose
limits of  quiver gauge theories were studied
 
. 
These theories correspond to type IIB  -branes at the fixed point of a 
 singularity   (see   for more complicated
orbifolds leading to  theories).  Under the Penrose limit
(around a geodesic lying away from the fixed point)
the orbifolding of the original background gives rise to a compact
null   or a space-like direction   
and the related momenta has discrete values.
The BMN operators on the gauge theory side are gauge invariant combinations
made out of bi-fundamental and/or adjoint fields. There is a simple moose/quiver
diagram representation of these operators. 
It turns out that this construction reveals an interesting feature  : 
the discrete momentum along a compact dimension is related to the 
winding number that the "string" of the fields winds around the
moose diagram. Conversely, the gauge theory operators that describe
 string states with a non-zero winding number look very much like
momentum states. 
Similarly to the BMN construction higher states of the supergravity
are realized in the gauge theory by various insertion  into
the "string" of fields.


The maximally supersymmetric pp-wave solution has two null-like and
28 space-like Killing vectors.
Remarkably, the aforementioned Penrose limits
 
 of
the   background are the same as the usual pp-wave 
background, except that a circle generated by one of the isometries is compactified.
Moreover, the scaling limit of  and  depends on the isometry,
we are using  . In order to get a null-like circle  with a finite radius 
like in   one
needs to scale  as  
(the double scaling limit),
while the space-like circle compactified in   has 
a finite radius if  scales as  (the triple scaling limit).

Performing T-duality along one of the space-like circles   we get
a type IIA pp-wave configuration. 
The string theory on this background was studied in
  and  .
In fact, it was shown in  , 
that the T-duality is consistent also quantum mechanically
and the two light-cone Hamiltonians have the same spectra. 


In this paper we argue that the type IIA pp-wave background of  
  arises
in the Penrose limit of the type IIA elliptic brane configuration  .
This configuration describes  -branes and  -branes and is T-dual
to the   background.
The fact that the T-duality survives the Penrose limit is not surprising.
The commutation of T-duality and Penrose limit was pointed out in  . 

[b]
   
The T-duality of the type IIB and the type IIA solutions
  commutes with the Penrose limit. In the type IIB pp-wave background string
  states are characterized by the discrete momentum along the compact
  direction  and the winding number  and in the type IIA
  background the roles of  and  are being exchanged.
  In the quiver gauge theory the BMN operator dual to the ground state
  has the same "momentum" and winding number as those of the type IIA
  ground state. 
 



Since the gauge theory dual is the same for these two supergravity solutions, one may expect that
the BMN operators constructed by using the type IIA description of the supergravity are 
"dual" to the related operators in the type IIB theory. Namely, the 
operator corresponding to a string state with a non-zero discrete momentum 
will look like a momentum operator, while the winding number of the state
will be the winding number that the BMN operator winds around the
moose diagram.
The web of Penrose limits and T-dualities is shown on figure .

We verify this proposal by taking a Penrose limit of the elliptic brane configuration.
As we already noted the Penrose limit yields the type IIA pp-wave background discussed in
 .
We calculate the string spectrum including the winding modes around the space-like compact dimension.
 Both the bosonic and the fermionic light-cone 
Hamiltonians appear to be the same as in the T-dual type IIB background  .
Identifying the -symmetry generators of the gauge theory with the related isometries
of the supergravity solution  
we build the BMN operators related to various string states.
 These operators are essentially the same  
as in   once we exchange the momentum the the winding number.
One can determine the anomalous dimensions of these operators
using the light-cone Hamiltonian on the supergravity side. The equivalence of the Hamiltonian 
in the type IIA and the type IIB descriptions becomes, therefore, an important consistency check.

We also find a new Penrose limit of the type IIB background and its type IIA counterpart.
The later is distinct from the Penrose limit of
  in that the geodesic does not lie 
along the equator of . Due to the shift of the geodesic the pp-wave solution we find
is not the same as in   . 
In particular, the radius of the compact dimension is different
and there are two "magnetic" terms in the metric.
Each term gives rise to a massless mode along an appropriate direction
and one of the momenta is quantized.
These magnetic terms also give rise to non-trivial components of the spin connection.
Plugging it together with the RR forms into the Green-Schwarz action
we find a fermionic spectrum with two zero massless modes.
The identification of the BMN operators is also modified.
The operators related to the string ground states are constructed out of three
gauge theory fields with one of them being the adjoint field .   
Again, the duality between the string states and the BMN operators found in   for the
type IIB description does not exist in the T-dual type IIA picture.


In the next section we briefly review the results of
 .
Section 3 is devoted to the Penrose limit of the elliptic branes.
The quantum spectrum of the resulting pp-wave background, 
the number of supercharges preserved by it, the compactness of 
various directions and other issues are  discussed.  
In section 4 we construct the field theory operators describing the
string states and compare them to the operators in  .
In section 5 we introduce a new "pair" of Penrose limits and discuss the 
pp-wave/gauge theory duality. 







Brief review of the Penrose limits 
 of  


Let us briefly review the results of 
 .
In global coordinates the metric of  
can be written as:

 
where  and
the second line is the metric of a  embedded in
a  space orbifolded with a  ALE singularity  .
The  RR five form  is the only non-vanishing background field 
in this configuration. The orbifolding of  is achieved 
by requiring a combined periodicity under

 
The  coordinates are related to the angles in the following way:

 
To obtain this background one places  D3-branes at the fixed point of the singular space 
. 

There are two distinguishable Penrose limits in the problem with a null geodesic 
being based at the fixed point ()  
or away from it ().
In the first case one obtains a pp-wave metric with the 
singularity in its transverse space, while the second case 
leads to the maximally supersymmetric pp-wave solution with eight equal
world-sheet masses and constant RR five form, like in the regular 
 case with one important difference: the light-like direction
 is compact:

   
The radius  remains finite 
provided the large  limit is a double scaling limit:

 
As a consequence there are states with a non-zero winding number 
in the string spectrum and the light cone momentum  
is quantized in units of .
On other hand, the light-cone Hamiltonian  is
not affected by the compactness of .
 
The corresponding gauge theory is the   
quiver gauge theory (QGT) with
 R-symmetry. The ,  and   
directions of the 
are related to the fields ,  and  with the former in the adjoint
of  and the other two fields in the bi-fundamental representations 
 and .
Identifying the global charges one finds that among these fields only  has 
a zero  value, therefore the simplest gauge-invariant QGT operator related  
to the string theory ground state with  and one unit of the light-cone momenta
is proportional to:

 
For arbitrary light-cone momentum one plugs   of these string "bits" into the trace.
In the moose diagram representation this corresponds to the total string of 's  
wrapping the moose exactly  times. Other string modes with  are obtained 
by an appropriate insertion of the various fields along the string of 's. 




In   the null geodesic lies at , 
the equator of the  part in the  metric.
On the contrary, the authors of   expanded the metric around 
.
Taking  together with:

 
they obtained the following pp-wave solution:

 
where  and  and the RR five-form is:

 
The combined periodicity of  and  implies that:

 
Recalling the definition of  we see that in the triple scaling limit  
 
the direction  is compact. 
As we already noted, this background is the same as the usual pp-wave
solution,
though one of the directions is compact. 
To make this statement clear it is useful to change the coordinates:

 
and

 
The light-cone Hamiltonian, the light-cone momentum 
and the momentum along the compact direction are

 
where

 
In particular, the Hamiltonian vanishes for the  and the  field, 
therefore the BMN operators related to the  ground state are constructed out of both the
's  and the 's. The difference between the number of 's
and 's  in string bits is fixed by the quantized momentum along the compact dimension. 
Given that the 's transform in the bi-fundamental representations  and 
the 's - in the , we conclude again that the value of 
the quantized momentum on the supergravity side is related 
to the wrapping of the moose diagram on the dual QGT side. 
We will come back to these operators, while discussing the BMN operators 
in the type IIA description.



Before proceeding it is worth reviewing the string theory quantization 
in the background ().
In the light-cone gauge  the bosonic part of the light-cone action is:

 
The solution of the equations of motion of 
() 
are the usual expressions one obtain in the case of the maximally supersymmetric pp-wave:

 
where

 
The equations of motion of  read:

 
where . Solving this equation
and allowing winding
modes around the compact direction  we get:

 

The conjugate momenta of 's are:

 
Imposing the commutation relations between 's and 's we
obtain the following relations for the oscillators:

 
and the bosonic part of the Hamiltonian reads:

 
where

 
The fermionic part of the Hamiltonian is:

 
and we refer the reader to  for a detailed derivation of the fermionic spectrum. We will perform similar calculations, 
while deriving the fermionic spectrum of the IIA theory in the next section.

An important comment is in order. We see that there is no quantized momenta
in the expression for the compact boson . Notice, however, 
that the first commutation relation in () and the compactness of 
impose that  is quantized in units of . 
The corresponding quantum number  amounts to the momentum quantization condition
along the compact direction:

 
As expected the Hamiltonian
does not depend on  and there is an infinite degeneracy related to
these modes. 
Finally, the constraint coming from 
the world-sheet energy momentum tensor assumes the form:

 









The Penrose limit of elliptic branes 


An elliptic branes system consists of  NS5 branes periodically arranged
in a compact direction and  D4 branes stretched between them.
Its near horizon limit    is: 


 
with (our RR 4-form differs by the factor of 2 from  ) 
 
 
where in our notations the period of  is 
.
This supergravity solution can be trusted only away from , 
where the dilaton is small.


Following  BMN we search for a geodesic at . Moreover, we restrict 
ourself to a geodesic with  leaving other possibilities 
to the upcoming sections.
Taking the  limit we use the following coordinates:

 
In the PL the metric takes the form:


 
and the background fields are:


 
This background is exactly the T-dual of the type IIB
solution () we discussed in the previous section. 
This is just as well, since 
the elliptic brane configuration at hand and the background considered by  are T-dual and according to   the 
Penrose limit is expected to commute with the T-duality. 
Note, however, that this expectation fails to be true once we consider a T-duality along
a null-like circle. In particular, it is not clear to us what is the T-dual counterpart
of the Penrose limit presented in  .

The following comments are in order:


 
[]
In order to keep both the dilaton and the 4-form finite as 
we have to impose the same triple scaling limit as in the PL of type IIB background:

 
We will return to this limit in the next section discussing the QGT coupling constant.
[]
We easily verify that the only non-trivial equation of motion:

 
is satisfied. Indeed, the 3-form and the 4-form contributions are  and 
respectively, therefore 
 
matches perfectly with the forms.



[]
The only massless space like direction  is compact
in the triple scaling limit with the compactification radius

 
This is exactly the value predicted by the T-duality transformation.


[]
This background preserves 24 supercharges  . 
To see that consider the dilatino variation.
Since the only non-vanishing fields are  and  we
have:

 
We see that there are two projection
operators acting on . Therefore, there are  preserved supercharges
(see   for a related discussion). 














The string spectrum of the pp-wave background 
Bosonic sector 

Now we will work out the spectrum of strings in the background (,).
In the light cone gauge  the bosonic part of the Lagrangian is:

 
where the last term is the contribution of the constant magnetic field. 

The solution of the equations of motion of  for   
and the related quantization is the same as in the type IIB theory
and we will skip it here. 
The equations of motion of  read:

 
To solve these equations we use the following expansions:

 
Thus the equations for  and  assume the form:

 
The last identity is valid only for  and the correct expression
 for  is:

 
We look for a solution in a form:

 
From the equation for  one obtains the expression for 

 
while the equation for  leads to a quadratic equation for 
with roots given by:


 
Notice, that  vanishes for . This is a remnant of the translational invariance
along . 
 The expression for 
 takes the following form:

 
In order to write the result for  we have to solve ():

 
Therefore:

 
The conjugate momenta of  and  are:

 
and the quantum commutators are

 
Plugging the results for  and  one obtains the following 
relations for the oscillators:

 
The bosonic part of the Hamiltonian is:

 
or using the mode expansions and the commutators:

 
where

 
Remarkably, this Hamiltonian is exactly the same as the light-cone Hamiltonian 
of the type IIB background. Indeed, the commutation relation between  and 
and the compactness of the direction  imply the following quantum values of :

  
Identifying  with the winding number  arising in the type IIB pp-wave solution and 
recalling the relation between the radii of the compact direction 
in the type IIA and the type IIB description we obtain that:

 




Fermionic sector 
In the light cone gauge 

 
the Green-Schwarz fermionic action is given by:

 
where ,  are two 10 dimensional spinors with different chiralities and 
 are the Pauli's matrices. The generalized covariant derivative, , 
in the type IIA supergravity reads:

 
The four and the three-form have the components  and  turned on and all the 
components of the spin connection  vanish for the metric ().
This reduces the light cone action to:

 

Following   we use the light-cone condition  
to rewrite the action in terms of the canonical eight-component spinors
, , which are defined by the relation 
. Now the action reads:

    
where 's are  gamma-matrices. The equations of motion are:

  
To solve these equations we define .
The fields  obey the equations of motion in the usual pp-wave background
  :

  
Thus the mode expansion of 's is:

 
where .
In terms of  and  the fermionic part of the light-cone Hamiltonian is:

 
and under the quantization we end up with

 
This Hamiltonian is exactly the same as the fermionic Hamiltonian in the type IIB background 
 . In particular, using the fact that the eigenvalues of 
are , each with multiplicity four, one can re-write the Hamiltonian  
in the form (). 











The BMN operators in the dual QGT 




We now want to relate the string spectrum to states in the dual gauge theory.
At energies below , where  is the radius of the compact dimension,
the gauge theory on the stack of  of D4-branes 
is a  dimensional  quiver  gauge theory (QGT) with a
 -symmetry group. Notice that the radius  is kept fixed 
in the triple scaling limit and we may use the four dimensional description.
In 11 dimensions the elliptic branes system we discuss is realized as a M5-M5' branes configuration.
One has  M5-branes with world-volume coordinates  and 
 M5-branes with world-volume coordinates . 
In this background the -symmetry corresponds to the  rotational
invariance.
In ten dimensions the  part of the -symmetry is realized by the
 term in the metric and the 
part is related to the rotational invariance along  direction. Therefore,
we identify the  Cartan current with  and the generator of 
 with .
The bosonic part of the gauge theory hyper-multiplets consists of two bi-fundamentals 
 in the  of the  and
 in the . Moreover,  as well as 
are doublets of  and have zero charges under . The third bosonic field 
 comes from the vector multiplet  and transforms 
in the adjoint of . This field is a singlet of  and 
the  factor acts on it as phase rotations.
The adjoint fields  can be thought of as describing fluctuations of the D4 branes along 
the NS5 branes. The bi-fundamental fields are realized in the brane description as open strings
stretched along the compact dimension between two adjacent NS5 branes.
Thus, a shift by one period along the comact direction acts on the fields as:

 
In terms of the currents the world-sheet Hamiltonian and the momentum are:

 
In particular, the triple scaling limit translates into:

 
Following these observations we can summarize the quantum numbers of various bosonic
fields:


 
 
The dictionary between the gauge theory and the string theory
is much similar to the type IIB description  . 
The only difference is the identification of
the momentum along the compact direction. In the type IIB picture  is related
to a generator of a  symmetry, which rotates  and  in opposite directions.
In the type IIA picture the discrete values of  are realized in the gauge theory 
as eigenvalues of the shift operator (). 


We can write the  prediction of the energy eigenvalues from free string
theory using that:

  
where  is the QGT coupling constant in each gauge group factor.
The expression for the frequencies 's is:

 
where . Plugging this result into the light-cone Hamiltonian
 one obtains  and  completely in terms
of the gauge theory parameters  .

Notice, that the coupling constant  diverges in the triple scaling limit.
As explained in   in a slightly different context, due 
to various supersymmetry cancellations the relevant quantity that should be 
kept fixed is precisely . It is straightforward to check
that this value is indeed finite under our scaling and the prediction for the energy
eigenvalues does make sense.  
 

The ground state in the gauge theory is parameterized by the winding number
 and the momentum  along the compact direction. We will denote it
by . According to the level matching condition there is no ground state 
with . For the later convenience we adopt the following notations:

 
and

 
where the blocks  are  matrices. We also need 
the shift and the clock matrices:


 
In this notation the shift operator () acts as:

 
We propose that the BMN operator describing a momentum state of the type IIA 
supergravity is exactly the operator which is related to the winding string state
 in the type IIB description. Namely:

 
where  and

 
Indeed, under () the operator transforms as:

 
where we used cyclicity invariance of the trace, 
the basic properties of the clock and the shift matrices and the definition of .
We further write the ground state with a non-zero winding number:

 
In the type IIB description this operator describes the momentum state 
.

The reader can find in   the full set of the 
BMN operators reproducing the string spectrum as well as the proof of the level matching,
the normalization and the anomalous dimension calculation. Replacing the momentum number 
and the winding number  one gets all of the BMN operators corresponding to the string states
in the type IIA background. 













A new pair of Penrose limits 
IIB 

We start the background () and take the Penrose limit around the geodesic
at . We use the following coordinate transformation


 
In the  limit we end up with a pp-wave metric which has two
"magnetic" terms:

 
where . Similarly to the  case
the combined periodicity of  and  leads to:

 
and the compactification radius remains finite 
in the triple scaling limit ().
One might use the coordinate transformation discussed in section 2 to re-write the metric in 
the conventional pp-wave form. 
One obtains this way eight world-sheet bosonic masses equal to .
We will not apply this transformation since in new coordinates the isometry along the compact
direction  is not manifest. Moreover, we want to keep the "magnetic" term 
, because the identification of BMN operators 
simplifies in these coordinates as we will see in the next section.

The calculation of the bosonic spectrum follows the steps of section 2.
The equations of motion of  are: 

 
where   
and .
The solutions are:

 
and 
 
where

 
The bosonic part of the light-cone Hamiltonian is:

 
where

 
As expected the Hamiltonian does not depend on  and , 
with the former being quantized because of the compactness of . There is an infinite
degeneracy related to these quantum momenta. In particular, the ground state is characterized by

 
where  is defined by  and  is the winding number.
In order to write down the fermionic part of the Hamiltonian we 
recall that the generalized covariant derivative in the type IIB background is
given by:

 
and the non-vanishing components of the spin connection and the RR five-form are:

 
Using the definition of the eight-component spinor  given previously we get the
fermionic part of the light-cone action:

 
Finding the mode expansions of  and using it to re-write 
the fermionic part of the Hamiltonian we obtain:

 
Since the eigenvalues of both  and  are , each with
multiplicity four, and the two matrices commute, we may choose a suitable basis to arrive at:

 
Recalling that , we see that 
there are two fermionic zero-modes () with vanishing energy.
It means that the ground state () has an additional degeneracy due to the
fermionic degrees of freedom.









IIA 


Similarly to the type IIB metric we take the Penrose limit around the geodesic
at . The following coordinate transformation does the job:


 
In the  limit we find a pp-wave metric with one
"magnetic" term:

) 
where  and the other fields are 

 
and this background also preserves 24 supercharges.
Again, the   direction obeys

 
and this background is a T-dual of the type IIB solution ().

The calculation of the string spectrum in this background is straightforward. 
The part of the Hamiltonian related to the bosons  and  is the same as in
the T-dual case, while the part consisting of  and  appears in  
the type IIA  case. The bosonic part of the Hamiltonian is
equal to:

 
where

 
To find the fermionic spectrum note, that the forms depending part 
of the type IIA covariant derivative is not modified. There is, however, 
a non-vanishing component of the spin connection:

 
After some algebra one verifies that 
the fermionic part of the Hamiltonian matches the type IIB result ().
To summarize, the string spectra in the type IIA and the type IIB backgrounds are the same.









The BMN operators 

In our Penrose limit the type IIA dictionary ()
between the string theory and the QGT is modified according to ():

 
Again, the shift along the compact directions acts on the fields according to ().
In the type IIB background the dictionary follows from ():


 
and

 
We recall that the fields , and  are respectively identified with the coordinates
, and  defined in (). One can easily find 
the corresponding eigenvalues of  using these relations.
In particular,  the following identification hold:

  
We summarize the quantum numbers of the bosonic fields in the following table:

 
 
As we already mentioned  and  are generators of the   
supersymmetry group. On other hand,  is a generator of an additional  symmetry, 
which is not an -symmetry. It rotates  and 
 in opposite directions:  and  . 
Because of the orbifolding, having  brings us back to the same point.
This agrees with an identification made in ():

 
The fermionic sector of the  QGT consists of four different four-dimensional spinors:
 are the gauginos,  and   are the fermionic superpartners of
 and  in the  hyper-multiplets and   
are the fermionic partners of .
The fermionic quantum numbers are:

 
 
We construct further the BMN operator related to the string theory vacuum state.  
To this end the generalization of () is required:

 
Using this notation a momentum state in the type IIB pp-wave background is related to:
  
 
and we remind that .
In the type IIA picture this operator describes a winding state:
 
Similarly, the type IIB winding mode is given by:

 
One can act on these ground states with two massless fermionic zero-modes 
(see the discussion following ()).
In view of the fermionic quantum numbers we find that  is the only fermionic field with
. Inserting one of the components of  into the trace we reproduce an appropriate
 string zero mode state.  

We turn now to the massive zero mode states in the string theory. In the bosonic sector there are
eight massive zero modes: two states created by  and  with  and 
four states with  created by  ().
The later are given by:

 
where 

 
and  is understood to act on ,  or  to the right of it.
The fifth zero mode is obtained by the insertion of  into the trace and there is
a perfect agreement between the zero mode energy  and the 
 eigenvalue of the field. 
The last sixth zero mode is realized by acting on the ground state with
an operator  :

 
Namely, one inserts the operator 
into the ground state in a totally symmetric way. Again, the energy  matches the 
dimensions of the  and .


The construction of various non-zero string state by proper insertion of "impurities"
into the ground state as well as the check of the level matching condition, 
the normalization of the operators and other related issues are quite similar 
to   and we will not perform it here. Note that provided any operator in
the type IIB description one obtains the type IIA operator by simple replacement of the 
momentum number  and the winding number . 
The string theory prediction of the energy eigenvalues of these operators is given
by () or ():


 










We would like to thank Jacob Sonnenschein, Yaron Oz, Tadakatsu Sakai 
and Khasanov Oleg for fruitful discussions.
This work was supported in part by the German-Israeli Foundation for
Scientific Research and by the Israel Science Foundation.



















 

 



#1#2#3#4#5
  #1 #2pt 
  #3 #4 #5 
   

 
