










Fractional spin through quantum affine algebras  
*M. Mansour and E.H. Zakkari Emails: *mansour70@mailcity.com,
hzakkari@hotmail.com 


Laboratory of Theoretical Physics

University Mohamed V

PO BOX 1014

Rabat, Morocco. 
 
 
In this paper, we study the fractional decomposition of the quantum
enveloping affine algebras  and  in the
 limit. This decomposition is based on the
bosonic representation and can be related to the fractional supersymmetry
and -fermionic spin. The equivalence between the quantum affine algebras
and the classical ones in the fermionic realization is also established.



Introduction 

The concept of quantum group and algebras , have enriched the arena
of mathematics and theoretical physics. Quantum groups were appeared in
studying Yang-Baxter equations  as well as scattering method . In 
 the quantum analogous of Lie superalgebras was constructed. The
quantized enveloping algebras associated to affine algebras and
superalgebras are given in . It is well known that the boson
realization is a very powerful and elegant method for studying quantum
algebras representations. Based on this method, the representation theory of
quantum affine algebras has been an object of intensive studies, namely, the
results for the oscillator representations of affine algebras. There are
obtained  through consistent realizations involving deformed Bose
and Fermi operators .

To make a connection with the quantum group theory, a new geometric
interpretation of fractional supersymmetry has been introduced in .
In these latters, the authors show that the one-dimensional superspace is
isomorphic to the braided line when the deformation parameter goes to a root
of unity. The similar technics are used, in , to show how internal
spin arises naturally in certain limit of the -deformed momentum algebras
.

Indeed, using -Schwinger realization, it is proved that the decomposition
of the  into a direct product  and the deformed 
  note that   at  . The property
of splitting quantum algebras    and  and quantum
superalgebras    and  in the limit 
 limit is investigated in .

We also notice that the case of deformed Virasoro algebras and some other
particular quantum (Super) algebras is given in .

The aim of this paper is to investigate the decomposition property of the
quantum affine algebras  and  in the 
 limit. We start in section  by defining -fermionic
algebra. In section , we discuss the decomposition property of -boson
oscillator in the  limit. We introduce the way in which one
obtains two independent objects, an ordinary boson and a -fermion, from
one deformed boson when . We establish also the
equivalence between a -deformed fermion and conventional (ordinary) one.
Using these results, we analyze the  limit of the quantum
affine algebra  (section 4) and the quantum affine algebra 
 (section 5). Some concluding remarks are given in
section 

Preliminaries about k-fermionic algebra. 

The q-deformed bosonic algebra  generated by ,  and
number operator  is given by:

 

 

 

 
where the deformation parameter:

 

is a root of unity.

The annihilation operator  is hermetic conjugated to creation
operator  and  is hermetic also. From , it is
easy to have the following relations:

 

 
where the notation   is defined by:

 

We introduce a new variable  defined by:
 

 
such that for odd  (resp. even  ), we have  resp. 
In the particular case ,   permit us to have:

 

 
and the eqs  yield to:

 

 
One can show that the elements  and  are the elements
of the centre of  algebra (odd values for ); and the irreducible
representations are -dimensional. These two properties allows to:
 

 

The extra possibilities parameterized by:












are not relevant for the considerations of this paper. In the two cases 
and  we have the so-called semi-periodic (semi-cyclic) representation
and the case  correspond to the periodic one. In what follows, we are
interested to a representation of the algebra  such that the
following:




is satisfied. We note that the algebra  obtained for ,
correspond to ordinary fermion operators with  and 
which reflects the exclusion's Pauli principle. In the limit case where 
, the algebra  correspond to the ordinary
bosons. For other values of , the -fermions operators interpolate
between fermions and bosons, these are also called anyons with fractional
spin in the sense of Majid .

Fractional spin through Q-boson. 

In the previous section, we have worked with  at root of unity. In this
case, quantum oscillator -fermionic algebra exhibit a rich
representation with very special properties different from the case where 
is generic. So, in the first case the Hilbert space is finite dimensional.
In contrast, where  is generic, the Fock space is infinite dimensional.
In order to investigate the decomposition of -deformed boson in the limit
 we start by recalling the -deformed
algebra .

The algebra  generated by an annihilation operator , a
creation operator  and a number operator :

 

 

 

 

 

From the above equations, we obtain:
 
where the -deformed factorial is given by:

 
and:









The -commutator, in , of two operators  and  is defined by:





The aim of this section is to determine the limit of  algebra
when  goes to the root of unity . The starting point is the limit 
 of the 






 

This equation can be reduced to:

 

Since  is a root of unity, it is possible to change the sign on the
exponent of  terms in the above equation.

We define the operators as in :

 
which lead to an ordinary boson algebra noted , generated by:

 

The number operator of this new bosonic algebra defined as the usual case, 
. At this stage we are in position to discuss the splitting
of -deformed boson in the  limit. Let us introduce the
new set of generators given by:

 

 

 
which define a -fermionic algebra:

 

 

 
It is easy to verify that the two algebras generated by the set of operators
 and  are mutually commutative. We
conclude that in the  limit, the -deformed bosonic
algebra oscillator decomposes into two independent oscillators, an ordinary
boson and -fermion; formally one can write:




where  is the classical bosonic algebra generated by the
operators  

Similarly, we want to study the -fermion algebra at root of unity. To do
this, we start by considering the - deformed fermionic algebra, noted 
:

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the case   we define the new fermionic operators as follow:

 

 

By a direct calculus, we obtain the following anti-commutation relation:

 

Moreover, we have the nilpotency condition:

 

Thus, we see that the -deformed fermion reproduce the conventional
(ordinary) fermion. The same convention notation permits us to write:





Quantum affine algebra  at  a root of unity 

We apply the above results to derive the property of decomposition of
quantum affine algebra  in the  limit.
Recalling that the  algebra is generated by the set of
generators     
 satisfying the following relations:

 

 

 

The quantum affine algebra  admits two -oscillators
representations: bosonic and fermionic ones; in the bosonic realization, the
generators of  can be constructed by introducing  
-deformed bosons as follows:

























The fermionic realization of  is given by:

























At this stage, our aim is to investigate the limit  of the
affine algebra . As it is already mentioned in the
introduction, our analysis is based on the -oscillator representation
based on -Schwinger realization. In the , the splitting
of -deformed bosons leads to classical bosons 
 given by the   and -fermionic algebra 
 given by . From the
classical bosons, we define for  the operators:

 

 

 

 

 

 
the set  generate the classical algebra 
 From the remaining generators  
, we can realize , generated by  
  and  where:

 

 

 

 

 

 
The algebra  is the same version of 
 obtained by simply taking  and  Due to
the commutativity of elements of  and 
 we obtain the following decomposition of the quantum affine
algebra  in the bosonic realization





We discuss now the equivalence between  and 
algebras in the fermionic realization. Indeed, we have discussed in section 
, how one can identify the conventional fermions with -deformed
fermions. Consequently, due to this equivalence, it is possible to construct
-deformed affine algebras  using ordinary fermions. It is
also possible to construct the affine algebra  by considering 
-deformed fermions. So, in the fermionic realization we have equivalence
between  and  To be more clear, we consider the
 in the -fermionic representation. Where the generators
are given by:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Due to the equivalence fermion -fermion, the operators , 
 are defined as a constant multiple of conventional fermion operators:

 

 
from which we can realize the generators:

 

 

 

 

 

 

The set    generate the classical affine
algebra  in the fermionic representation and we have





Quantum affine algebra  at a root of unity. 

Let  be the deformation parameter. We shall use also 
 with  are numbers that symmetries the Cartan matrix 
. The quantum affine algebra  is described in
the Serre-Chevalley basis in terms of the simple root ,  and
Cartan generators , where , satisfy the following commutation
relations:

 

 
 

Introducing the quantities  which permit to rewrite the 
 as follows:

 

 

Explicitly the generators of the quantum algebra 
 are given in the bosonic case by:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Due to the property of -boson decomposition in the 
limit, each -boson  reproduce an ordinary
bosonic algebra  and -fermion operators 


From the set 
 we can construct the classical affine algebra 
 as follow:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

From the -fermionic operators 
, one can construct as in  the 
-deformed affine algebra . It is easy to verify that 
 and  are mutually commutative. As a
result, we have the following decomposition of quantum algebra 
 in the  limit:





The equivalence between  and 
algebras in the fermionic representation can be easily deduced; in fact we
can construct the affine deformed algebra  using the
ordinary fermions and conversely, the classical affine algebra 
 can be realized in terms of deformed fermions. Indeed, we consider the
 in the -fermionic representation, where the
generators are given by:

 

 

 

) 

 

 

 

 

 

The elements  are the non zero integers such that 
 and  is the -elements of  
generalized Cartan matrix.

As in the case of , the deformed fermions  can be
identified to classical ones.

So, we can deduced that in the fermionic representation the deformed
algebra  is equivalent to the classical affine algebra 
, one can write:





Conclusion 

We have presented the general method leading to the investigation of the 
limit of the quantum affine algebras 
 and  We note that the -oscillator
representation is crucial in this manner of splitting in this paper. The
technics and formulae used in this paper, will be useful to extend this
study to the infinite deformed algebras , and quantum affine
superalgebras 



References 

 V.G Drinfeld, Quantum groups , Proc. Int. Cong. Math.
(Berkley,1986), Vol 1. p. 798.

 M. Jimbo, Lett. Math. Phys. 11 (1986) 247.

 P. Kulish and E. Sklyanin, Lecture Notes in Physics, VoL 151
(Springer,1981), p. 61.

 L. D. Fadeev, Integrable Models i (1+1) dimensional Quantum
field theory , les Houches Lectures, 1982(Elsivier, 1982), p. 563.

 R.Floreanini, P. Spridinov and L. Vinet, Phys. Lett. B 242 (1990).

 R. Floreanini, P. Spiridinov and L.Vinet, Commun. Math. 137 (1991) 149.

 H. Yamane, Quantized enveloping algebras associated to simple
Lie  superalgebras . Proceedings of the XX th IGGTMP, Toyonaka
(1994) ; World Scientific Singapore (1995).

 L. Frappat, A. Sciarrino, S. Sciuto and Sorba, Phys. Lett. B 369
(1996).

 L. Frappat, A. Sciarrino, S. Sciuto and Sorba qalgeb/9609033.

 A. J. Feingold, I. B. frenkel. Ad. Math. 56 (1985) 117.

 L. C. Biedenharn, J. Phys. A 22 (1998) L 873.

 A. J. Macfarlane, J. Phys. A 22 (1988) 4581.

 R. S. Dunne, A. J. Macfarlane, J. A. de Azcarraga, and J.C. Perez
Bueno, Phys. Lett B 387 (1996) 294.

] R. S. Dunne, A. J. Macfarlane, J. A. de Azcarraga, and J.C. Perez
Bueno, hep-th/960087.

 R. S. Dunne, A. J. Macfarlane, J. A. de Azcarraga, and J.C. Perez
Bueno, Czech. J. P. Phys. 46, (1996) 1145.

 J. A. Azcarraga R. S. Dunne, A. J. Macfarlane and J.C. Perez Bueno,
Czech. J. P. Phys. 46, (1996) 1235.

 R. S. Dunne, hep-th/9703111.

 R. S. Dunne, hep-th/9703137.

 M. Mansour, M. Daoud and Y. Hassouni, Phys. Lett. B 454 (1999).

 M. Mansour, M. Daoud and Y. Hassouni, Rep. Math. Phys. Vol. 44
(1999), 435.

 S. Majid, Anyonic Quantum groups in spinors , 
Twistors, Clifford algebras and  quantum deformations  (proc. Of 2nd
Max Born Symposium, Wroclam, Poland, 1992), z.Oziewicz et al. Khluwwer.

 S. Majid, hep-th/9410241.

 M. Daoud and Y. Hassouni M.Kibler, The k-fermions as objects
interpolating  between fermions and bosons , Symmetries in Science
X, eds B Gruber and M. Ramek (1998, New York: plenum press )

 V. G. Kac, Commun. Phys 53 (1977).

 M. Rosso, Commun. Math. Phys 124 (1989) 307.

 M. Mansour, E. H. Zakkari, Q-Fractional spin through some
infinite deformed  algebra , to be submitted.

 M. Mansour, work in progress.

