






Elliptic solutions of the Skyrme Model
 

Minoru Hirayama 
 hirayama@sci.toyama-u.ac.jp 
Chang-Guang Shi 
 shicg@jodo.sci.toyama-u.ac.jp 
Jun Yamashita 
fxjun@jodo.sci.toyama-u.ac.jp 
Department of Physics, Toyama University, Gofuku 3190, Toyama 930-8555, Japan 
 





March, 17, 2003 

 
A class of exact solutions of the Skyrme model are obtained. They are described by the Weierstrass -function or the Jacobi elliptic function. They are not solitonic but of wave character. They supply us with examples of the superposition of three plane waves in the Skyrme model.





11.10.Lm,02.30.Ik,12.39.Dc 





Introduction
 

The Skyrme model has been discussed for more than 40 years. It is an effective field theory describing hadrons. It is defined by the Lagrangan density
 
where  is an element of (2) and  and  are coupling constants. If we define  and  by
 
 is expressed as
 
where,  are Pauli matrices. The field equation is given as the conservation law
 
where   are defined by
 
The field  is proportional to the isospin current of the model. Another important conserved current is the baryon number current 
The conservation law  follows solely from the definition of  irrespective of the field equation for .

By definition,  satisfies the condition
 
It was discussed that the Skyrme model is intimately related to the Faddeev model defined by
 
where  is a three-component scalar field satisfying
 
and  is given by
 
The field equation for  is given by
 
The Faddeev model is expected to describe the low energy gluonic dynamics of QCD. If we define  and  by  with
 
Eqs. (), () and () become 
From the definition (), we have the condition
  
for . The parallelism of  to  is evident. Of course, the two models are different from each other because the degree of freedom of the Skyrme model is 3 while that of the Faddeev model is 2. It can be seen, however, that the configuration  yields a restricted class of the configuration .

The soliton solutions of the Skyrme model is classified by the baryon number  and are identified with baryons. On the other hand, the soliton solutions of the Faddeev model are classified by the topological number  called the Hopf charge and are identified with glueballs. The numerical analysis of these models revealed rich spectra of solitons : knot solitons for the Faddeev model and polyhedral solitons for the Skyrme model. For example, the solution of the Faddeev model with  is the soliton of the trefoil knot structure.

As for the analytic solutions for these models, only a few simple examples are known. Skyrme found that the configuration 
 
with  leading to the field  of the form  satisfies the field equation if  is light-like: . In a recent paper, two of the present authors (M.H. and J.Y.) obtained the solution of the form
 
with . Although the solution () is independent of the coupling constants  and  in , the solution () depends on them through the dimensionless combination
 
In this paper, we seek the solution of the form
 
with
 
It turns out that the solution can be described with the help of the function
 
where  is the Weierstrass -function satisfying the differential equation
 
Here  and  are real constants satisfying , sn is the Jacobi elliptic function of  with the modulus ,  is the second fundamental period of , and  is a linear combination of  and . We note that  is equal to  multiplied by a constant independent of the momenta ,  and . In contrast with the solution () and () with the vanishing baryon number density, our solution () possesses the nonvanishing baryon number density
 
where  is a constant independent of  and . 

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec., we seek a convenient set of variables and fields and write the field equation in a compact way. In Sec.III, we introduce a set of ansatzs for  compatible with the field equation. By the above ansatzs, the non-linear partial differential equations for  are reduced to some algebraic constraints for parameters specifying solutions. Some examples of the solutions of the above algebraic constraints are given. Sec.V is devoted to a summary and discussions.





Formulation of the problem
 

In order to discuss the case of , we introduce the parameters 
 
where the triplet  should be (1,2,3) or (2,3,1) or (3,1,2) and , , .
Then we have
 
We now introduce
 
and write ,  and . For ,  in () can be written as
  
If we define ,  and  by 
  
 can be rewritten as
 
We find that the integrability condition () becomes
 
which yields
 
The second term on the right hand side of () is
expressed as
 
where , ,  and  are given by 
 
Therefore, the field equation () becomes
     
It is a vector nonlinear differential equation. It is difficult to discuss it generally, so we will introduce some ansatzs in the next section.





Ansatzs
 

Parameters specifying the solution
 

In order to obtain the solutions of Eqs. () and (), we first assume
 
with  and . Here  are constants. Since the condition () can be written as
 
we are led to the parametrization
  
It is interesting to note that the three conditions
 
for  and  are satisfied if  and  satisfy the single relation
 
In addition to (), we assume
 
where  and  are constants. Then, the conditions () yield
 
It can be seen that the eight conditions () and () for nine parameters are equivalent to five conditions
 
We now regard that the independent parameters are  and . The other parameters  and  are given as
 

Consequences of the ansatzs
 

Our ansatzs proposed in the previous subsection readily lead us to the consequence that  and   are constant. We also find the relations
 
From the consistency conditions
 
we obtain
 
With the aid of the relations () and (), we conclude that  and  are given in the following way:
 
where  is a function of  to be determined and ,  and  are arbitrary constants. The function  is fixed as follows. From the formula
 
and Eqs. () and (), we observe that  defined by
 
should satisfy the equation of the form
 
where constants  and  are complicated functions of  and  and satisfy the relations
 
This equation indicates that  is given by the Weierstrass -function as . We hereafter assume that the constants  and  are chosen so that the inequality
 
holds. Then the constants  and  are real and can be assumed to satisfy .
To remove the poles for the real values of , we adopt  given by (). The explicit formula for  is given by
 
We find that  is a purely imaginary number. Other choices of the integral constant leads to the complex-valued . From () and (),  is calculated as
 
As was noted below (),  is a constant multiple of :
 
If we define the differential operator  by
 
 and  satisfy
 
Since there exists another independent variable  satisfying , e.g.
 
 and  are represented as
 
We have thus seen that the general solution of our ansatz are given by (), () and (). We note that we have not yet made use of the field equation (). In the next section, we shall see that the field equation can be used to constrain the allowed values of the independent parameters  and .

Baryon number density
 

The baryon number current  in the Skyrme model was defined by Eq.(). Substituting () into () , we obtain the baryon number density () with  given by
 
 

 
 
 

solving the field equation
 

To discuss the field equation, it is convenient to intorduce  and  by
 
Then the field equation () becomes
  
With the help of the ansatzs () and (),  and  can be expressed solely by ,  and  without their derivatives. After some manipulations, we obtain
 
where , , , ,  and  are given by
 
Assuming that  is nonvanishing, () is equivalent to the condition 
 
 where , ,  are defined by
 
By making use of (), we see that ,  and  take the following form:
 
where , , , , ,  are constant. we now find that the field equation has been reduced to the equations 
 


Solving 
 


We first discuss the equations . The constants ,  and  in () are expressed as
  
where  ,  and  are given by 
 
To make ,  and  vanishing, we have only to choose the arbitrary constants ,  and  as 
 

Solving  
 


We next consider the three equations . It can be seen that they are equivalent to the following algebraic equations for  and : 
  
where  , , ,  and  are given by  and  as follows:
             
The parameters  and  must be chosen so that the simultaneous equations () of second order for  and  possess a common root . To obtain the condition that  and  must satisfy, assuming , , , we rewrite the equation   as follows:
 
where , ,  and   are defined by
 
If we eliminate  from () and (), we obtain
 
with
 
If we eliminate  from () and (), we obtain 
 
with
 
The condition for the two equations () and () to have a common root  is that the resultant for these equations vanishes:
 
We note that the condition () is necessary but not sufficient for the original equations () to have a common root .  In general, the condition () is a very complicated relation between  and . It is clear, however, that there exist infinite number of pairs  that satisfy (). 

For simplicity, let us consider the case . Then () becomes
 
where  and  are defined by
  
We here exclude the case , in which our above formulation should be modified. We find two real roots 
 
of  and two real roots 
 
of . We see, however, that only the roots  and  give rise to the common root  for (). For both  and , the common root  is given by (1, -1). As was stated below (), this is because () is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for () to possess a common root .



Constraints for ,  and 
 


In order to obtain ,  and , we must keep up the inequalities
 
where ,  and  denote ,  and , respectively. With the help of the inequality , which is valid in the case noted arround (), we easily obtain the maxima and the minima of ,  and . They depend on the signatures of ,  and . For the above example , , , we have ,  and obtain the condition
 
where , , , ,  and  are given by 
 
A sufficient conditions for () to hold valid are 
 
where  and  are defined by
 
and 
, satisfying . It can be numerically checked that, e.g. , ,  satisfy (). Thus we realize that there indeed exist solutions that we intended to obtain.  

As for the case , , , we have , . We then find that
 
should be satisfied. In this case, we obtain sufficient conditions
 
We find that, e.g. ,  and  are the case.


The expressions for , , 
 


We finally discuss how to obtain ,  ,  from given , , , ,  and . Expressing  ,  and  as
 
we introduce the unit vectors  and  as
  
Comparing () with (), we can regard  and  as given by . The angles  and  can be chosen so as to satisfy
 
We also introduce unit vectors ,  and . They can be assumed to satisfy 
 
Then we set
 
It is clear that the above  ,  and  satisfy (). We find that  is calculated to be . The relationship among , , , , , ,  and  can be depcted as FIG.1. We note that we still have the freedom in choosing  and .


 
Relationship among , , , , , , , . 

 
 
 

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS 
 

We have obtained the solutions of the Skyrme model of the form  with the momenta  satisfying . We found that the variables  and  defined by () and the fields  and  defined by () are convenient to describe the problem. The existency condition for  and the field equation were expressed in compact forms as seen in () and (). To solve these equations, we introduced the ansatzs () and () for the derivatives of  and  with respect to  and . The ansatzs contained nine parameters  and . It was observed that the consistency of the ansatzs yield five constraints () for the parameters, leaving  and  independent. Through the ansatzs, we found that  and  are constants,  and  are given by the Weierstrass -function, and  is given by the derivative of the -function.

With the help of the ansatzs, the field equation was reduced to six algebraic constraints for the parameters  and , where  and  are arbitrary constants contained in  and , respectively. Three of the six constraints were used to fix  and . The structure of the remained three constraints for  and  were discussed. It was confirmed numerically that there indeed exist solutions of the field equation.

From the solutions  and , we can construct  by (). The matrix field  is obtained as
 
where  parametrizes a path from  to , and  is the anti- ordering operator. The value of  is independent of the choice of the path thanks to Eq. (). The above expression for  is rather symbolical because the path-ordered quantity is not easy to carry out explicitly. Some important physical quantities, however, can be calculated in terms of . One example is the baryon number current discussed in Sec.I and Sec.III. The isospin current touched upon in Sec.I is also calculated through . Another physical quantity which can be calculated from  is the energy-momentum tensor  defined by
 
It is straightforward to obtain the result such as
) 
For the solution of this paper, we see that  is given as a linear function of . We can also obtain
 
and find that it contains . Up to now, we have been considering lightlike momenta  and . We note that  should be non-negative for all pairs of future directed timelike vectors  and . 

The solutions obtained in this paper are of wave character. They are regarded as the superpositions of three plane waves. We end this paper with asking what the ansatz leading to the exact solitonic solutions of the Skyrme model is.

 
 
 

 
The authors thank Shinji Hamamoto, Takeshi Kurimoto, Hitoshi Yamakoshi, Hiroshi Kakuhata, Kouichi Toda, Masataka Ueno, Makoto Nakamura, Hideaki Hayakawa for discussions. One of the authors (M.H) is grateful Noriaki Setoh and Takashi Sugatani for valuable comments. This work was supported in part by the Japanese Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (No.13135211).

 99 
T. H. R. Skyrme,
Nucl. Phys.  31 , 556 (1961).
G. S. Adkins, C. R. Nappi and E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys.  B 228 , 552  (1983).
A. D. Jackson and M. Rho,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  51 , 751 (1983).
Y. M. Cho,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  87 , 252001 (2001).
L. Faddeev and A. J. Niemi,
Nature (London)  387 , 58 (1997).
M. Hirayama and J. Yamashita,
Phys. Rev.  D 66 , 105019 (2002).
J. Gladikowski and M. Hellmund,
Phys. Rev.  D 56 , 5194  (1997).
J. Hietarinta and P. Salo,
Phys. Lett.  B 451 , 60  (1999).


R. A. Battye and P. M. Sutcliffe,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  81 , 4798  (1998).
R. A. Battye and P. M. Sutcliffe,
Phys. Rev. Lett.  79 , 363 (1997).
G. W. Gibbons,
hep-th/0302149.



