

Li e nard-Wiechert Potentials in Even Dimensions 
 Metin G u rses email: gurses@fen.bilkent.edu.tr 
and  O zg u r Sariog lu email: sarioglu@metu.edu.tr  

 Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences,
Bilkent University, 06800, Ankara - Turkey

 Department of Physics, Faculty of Arts and  Sciences,
Middle East Technical University, 06531 Ankara Turkey 

 
The motion of point charged  particles is considered in an even dimensional 
Minkowski space-time. The potential functions corresponding to the massless 
scalar and the Maxwell fields are derived algorithmically. It is
shown that in all even  dimensions particles lose energy due
to  acceleration. 



Introduction 

Recently Gal'tsov and Kazinski et al have considered
the Lorentz-Dirac equation for a radiating point charge in a Minkowski 
space-time of arbitrary dimension. They showed that the mass 
renormalization is possible only in three and four dimensions.
Motivated by these works, we are interested in the radiation problem
of accelerated point charges in all even dimensions
(For the reason why we did not consider odd dimensions, please see
Appendix B.) .
Here we find the Li e nard-Wiechert potentials corresponding to the
massless scalar and the Maxwell fields in all even dimensions. We then use 
these potentials to relate the radiation from an accelerated point particle
to its motion and the geometry of its trajectory. We derive the energy flux 
for this radiation and show that accelerating point charged particles lose 
energy in all even dimensions.

In the next Section, we develop the kinematics of a curve  in a -
dimensional Minkowski manifold . In Section 3 we find the 
Li e nard-Wiechert potentials of massless free scalar fields in an even 
dimensional Minkowski space. We calculate the energy radiated due to the 
acceleration. We show that in all even dimensions such particles lose 
energy, as can be expected. In Section 4, we determine the 
Li e nard-Wiechert potentials 
for the Maxwell theory. We give a recursion relation between 
the vector potentials
of the theory in two consecutive even dimensions. In Section 4, we also show 
that particles carrying electric charges lose energy in all even dimensions.  
We construct explicit solutions of the
electromagnetic vector field due to the acceleration of charged particles
in 4,6,8,10 dimensions.
We then find the energy fluxes in 4,6,8 dimensions due to  acceleration. 
In  Appendix A, we give the Serret-Frenet equations in an arbitrary 
Minkowski 
space-time and  also some auxiliary tools used in the calculation
of the energy flux integrals. In  Appendix B, we give a proof of the 
recursion relation introduced in Section 4.

Curves in D-Dimensional Minkowski Space 

In our previous works,,we have developed a curve kinematics to be utilized in finding new solutions
and in calculating energy fluxes due to the acceleration in the framework of
Einstein's general theory of relativity. Here we use the same approach
to solve the scalar and Maxwell field equations in all even dimensions. 
For this purpose, we shall now give a summary of the geometry of a regular 
curve in , Minkowski space-time manifold of dimension .
 
Let  describe a smooth curve  in ,
where  is the arclength parameter of the curve.
From an arbitrary
point  outside the curve, there are two null lines intersecting the
curve . These points are called the retarded and the advanced times. Let
 be the distance (world function) between the points 
 and , then by definition it is given  by

 

Hence  vanishes at the retarded, , and advanced,
, times. In this work we shall
focus ourselves to the retarded case only. 
The Green's function for the vector potential chooses this point on the
curve ,.
By differentiating  with respect to  and letting
, we get

 

where  is the retarded distance,  is a null vector and
a dot over a letter denotes differentiation with respect to .
The derivatives  of  and  are given by

 

where 

 

Here  for null and time-like curves, respectively.
Furthermore, we have

 

Letting , it is easy to prove that 

 

Similarly, other scalars satisfying the same property ()
obeyed by  can be defined  

 

Moreover one has

 

for all . For a more detailed discussion, please refer to.
Here  is a positive integer which depends on the dimension  of the 
manifold . An analysis using Serret-Frenet frames shows that
the scalars , are related to the  curvature scalars of the curve 
 in . The
number of such scalars is . Hence we let . 

Massless Scalar Field  

 Let  describe a massless
scalar field satisfying the free field equation

 

Let  be a positive even integer, and
  and  denote
 the retarded solutions (Li e nard-Wiechert
potentials) of the massless scalar field in  and  dimensions, 
respectively. Then

 

In this recursion relation we emphasize that the expressions on the 
right hand side are those of -dimensions. Take the solution  in 
-dimensions, take its  derivative and divide this
by the  of -dimensions.
The  result is the solution  of -dimensions.
For the proof of  relation () see Appendix B.
Below we explicitly give these solutions for :


 




where  and . 

 The flux of massless scalar field energy is then given by 

 

where 

 
is the energy momentum tensor of the massless scalar field .
 The surface element  on  is given by

 

where   is orthogonal to the velocity vector field 
 which is defined through

 

Here .
For the remaining part of this work we shall assume 
( is a time-like curve).
One can consider  in the rest frame as a sphere of radius . Here
 is the solid angle. Letting , 
 we have

 

At very large values of  
the energy flux is given by






It turns out that the energy flux expression has a fixed sign for all .
The energy flux of the massless scalar field 
as  is given by





where









The explicit expressions of   are as follows:

 


Hence we have (assuming  constant)

 

Electromagnetic Field 


In the Lorentz gauge (), the Maxwell equations
reduce to the wave equation for the vector potential ,
 .
By using the  curve ,  we can construct divergence
free (Lorentz gauge) vector fields  satisfying the 
wave equation outside the curve  in any even dimension . 
Similar to the case of the massless scalar field,  such vectors obey
 the following recursion relation

 

In the recursion relation above  is the electromagnetic vector 
potential in even -dimensions, with . On the 
right hand side of the  recursion relation all operations are done in
-dimensions, just like the scalar case. However the result is to be 
considered as the electromagnetic vector potential of -dimensions, with
 on the left hand side. 
As an example we have 
 as the electromagnetic vector potential of four 
dimensions. Here  is the four velocity,  and 
are, respectively, the retarded distance  and time in four dimensions. Using
the recursion relation () the right hand side becomes



We then regard this expression as the solution  
of the Maxwell field equations in
-dimensions. Indeed it satisfies both the Lorentz condition and the field 
equations of -dimensions, as can be verified separately. Starting from
, we can generate all even dimensional vector 
potentials satisfying the Maxwell equations. For instance,
the vector potentials for  are explicitly given by


 

The flux of electromagnetic energy is then given by
 

where 
 is the Maxwell energy momentum tensor, 
 is the  electromagnetic field tensor
 and .
 
Letting  , we have

 

At very large values of , for all even , we get

 

where 

 

so that  for all . 

Here we have two remarks. First one is on the gauge dependence of 
(). The only gauge freedom  left in 
our solutions is ,
where  satisfies the scalar wave equation (). However
we have already found the 
solutions of the scalar wave equation for all even dimensions. It can be shown
that the contribution of such scalar functions to the norm of 
 
is zero in the limit .  
 Our second remark is on the sign of  in ().
The vectors  in all even 
dimensions are orthogonal to the null vector
, hence they must be  either i) space-like vectors, 
ii) proportional to , or iii) zero vectors. 
They are zero only when
the curve  is a straight line which leads to no radiation. They cannot be 
proportional to the null vector  either, 
because this again leads to the trivial case of
zero radiation. In the first three cases (, ,  dimensions)
it can be easily observed that
 zero radiation  implies that  is a zero vector.
Hence  is a space-like vector in all even
dimensions. Therefore the sign of the right hand side of () is the
same in all dimensions. These vectors are explicitly given as follows:

 

These lead to the following energy flux expressions

 



To be compatible with the classical results,
, one should take . 

Conclusion 

In this work we have considered radiation of scalar and vector fields
due to  acceleration of point charged particles. We first examined the geometric properties 
of their paths in an even dimensional Minkowski space .
By using the curve kinematics we developed, 
we have first found the retarded solutions of the scalar field equations in 
. These solutions describe
the potentials of the accelerated scalar charges and
we have examined the energy loss due to such a radiation. We have shown
that in all even dimensions such scalar point particles lose energy.
We have given explicit examples for . We then found the retarded
solutions of the Maxwell field equations that describe
the point particles carrying electric charges. Again,
using the curve kinematics we  developed
an algorithm to calculate the vector potential  in -dimensions
from the one in -dimensions. We have given explicit examples for
. We have calculated the energy flux in each case, and  we have shown
that particles lose energy due to acceleration in all even dimensions.




This work is partially supported by the Scientific and Technical Research
Council of Turkey and by the Turkish Academy of Sciences.

Appendix A: Serret-Frenet Frames. 

In this Appendix, we first give the Serret-Frenet frame in  dimensions.
Here we shall assume that the 
curve  described in Section 2 is time-like and has the tangent vector
 .
Starting from this unit tangent vector, by repeated differentiation 
with respect to
the arclength parameter , one can generate an orthonormal frame 
 ,the 
Serret-Frenet frame :

 

Here  are the curvatures of the curve 
 at the point 
. The normal vectors  are 
space-like unit vectors.
Hence at the point  on the curve we have an orthonormal
 frame which
can be used  as a basis of the tangent space (of ) at this point. 
In Section 2, 
we have defined some scalars 

where 



Here  is a space-like
vector orthogonal to . It can be expressed as a linear combination 
of the unit vectors 's as


where . 
One can choose the spherical angles 
 such that

 

Hence we can calculate the scalars  in terms of the curvatures of the
curve  and 
the angles  at the point 
. We need these
expressions in the evaluation of energy flux formulae. As an example we give
 and :

 

The rest of the scalars can be determined similarly.
It is clear that these scalars, ,
depend on the curvatures and the spherical angles, for all . 



Appendix B: The proof of the Recursion relations (11) and (29) 

Here we give the proof for the vector potential case. The same type of 
proof applies also for the scalar case.
Using the recursion relation () successively we get

 

On the other hand, from and, we have

 

where  is the retarded Green function given by

 

Here  is the world function given by (),  is the 
Heaviside
step function and . 
Here we assume that  is an even integer (When  is an odd integer,
the expression for the Green function in () contains the step 
function instead of the -function. Hence the potentials in all 
odd dimensions remain non-local (integral expressions). This makes our 
curve kinematics ineffective). The zeros of   denote the advanced 
and retarded
proper times on the curve , but the step function  chooses
the retarded one. Since the integration is over the curve parameter
 in (), it is  better to transform the derivative of
 the delta function with respect to  to the derivative with respect 
to . As a simple example consider the D=6 case

 

It is easy to show that . The delta function
 can be expressed as follows






The second term will vanish identically due to the step function
in (). Hence





or simply . This verifies 
our relation ().
In the general case, for all  we obtain (when )

 

Using this expression in the Green's function () for 
, inserting it in the integral equation () 
and  integrating by parts, we obtain (). 



 99 
 D. V. Gal'tsov, Phys. Rev. , D 66 , 025016 (2002).
 P. O. Kazinski, S. L. Lyakhovich, and A. A. Shaparov, Phys.Rev. , D 66 , 025017 (2002).
 M. G u rses and  O . Sariog lu, 
Class. Quantum Grav. , 19 , 4249 (2002).
  O . Sariog lu, Phys. Rev. , 
D 66  085005 (2002).
 M. G u rses and  O . Sariog lu, 
Class. Quantum Grav. , 20 , 351 (2003).
 A. O. Barut, Electrodynamics and Classical Theory of
Fields and Particles , (Dover Publications, New York, 1980).
 J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics , (John Wiley
and Sons, New York, 1975).
 M. Spivak, A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential 
Geometry , (Publish or Perish Inc., Boston, 1979).
 J.L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory ,
(North Holland Publishing, Amsterdam, 1966). (Third Edition)
 J.L. Synge, Relativity: The Special Theory ,
(North Holland Publishing, Amsterdam, 1965). (See page 29) , (Second Edition)










