










 
 Differential calculus and gauge theory on a reduced
quantum plane.  






M. EL BAZ(moreagl@yahoo.co.uk ) , A. EL HASSOUNI
(lhassoun@fsr.ac.ma ) , Y. HASSOUNI(
y-hassou@fsr.ac.ma ) 
  and E.H. ZAKKARI(
hzakkari@hotmail.com ) . 


Laboratory of Theoretical Physics
PO BOX 1014, University Mohammed V 

Rabat, Morocco.



Abstract:  We discuss the algebra of  matrices as a
reduced quantum plane.  A nilpotent deformed differential calculus
involving a complex parameter  is constructed. The two cases,  
and  root of unity are completely treated. As application, a gauge 
field theory for the particular cases  and  is established.



Keywords:  reduced quantum plane, non-commutative differential
calculus n=3, gauge theory.



Introduction: 

An adequate way leading to generalizations of the ordinary exterior
differential calculus arises from the graded differential algebra 
. These generalizations are not universal as far as we know, and
many technics have been used to introduce differential calculus that
corresponds to non commutative calculi. The latters involve a complex
parameter that satisfies some conditions allowing the obtention of a
consistent generalized differential calculus. It is usually called 
-differential calculus. In ref  , it is seen
as a graded  -differential algebra which is the sum of 
graded subspaces, where 
The relevent differential operator is an endomorphism  
satisfying  and the -Leibniz rule:




The most important property of this calculus is that it contains not only
first differentials   but also it involves the higher-order
differentials .

On the other hand, the differential calculi  on noncommutative
spaces was also studied by different authors, see for exemple  The
common property of these calculi is the covariance of these latters under
some symmetry quantum group.

In this paper, we construct a  covariant differential calculus   on
the algebra  of  matrices considered as a quantum plane. We
will show that our differential calculus is covariant under the algebra of
transformations with a quantum group structure. The complex deformation
parameter  (root of unity) will play an important role in
constructing the differential calculus that we introduce. As it is done in
the litterature of deformed differential calculus , this
case implies a non trivial study. As application, we treat the gauge field
theory.

The paper is organized as follows:

We start in section  by defining the algebra of  matrix  as a
reduced quantum plane, where the deformation parameter  is -th root of
unity. We also give a matrix realization in the case . In section 
we construct the covariant differential calculus  on two dimensional
reduced quantum plane as in ref . The new objects, 
and  appearing in this construction are seen as the analogous of the
differential elements  and  in the ordinary differential calculus.
In section  we generalize this result by considering a complex
deformation parameter   root of unity.

In section , we study the application of this new differential calculus 
 to the gauge field theory on  We recall in section  the
differential calculus  , and we apply it to the
gauge theory on .

Preliminaries about the algebra  M(C) of NN matrices
as a reduced quantum plane. 

The associative algebra of   matrices is generated by two
elements  and    satisfying the relations:

 

and

 

where  is the unit matrix and   is a complex parameter 
 root of unity.

In the case , an explicit matrix realization of generators  and  
  is given by:

 

 

and  satisfies the relation:

 

The associative algebra, noted by   of formal
power series defined over the two dimentional quantum plane is generated by 
 and  with a single quadratic relation  . it is clear that 
  coincides with the algebra of polynomials over
commuting variables  

Note that if the generators   do not satisfy any additional
relations, then  is infinite dimensional. In the case of the algebra 
 of  matrices over complex numbers, the generators  
satisfy the above quadratic relation and the cubic ones . Thus it
is generated by the following set:       
  . In this case, the algebra  appears as the
associative quotient algebra  by the bilateral ideal generated by 
- and . Here  is the unital extension of 
That is, in the sense of , the  matrices
over  are seen as a reduced quantum plane. 

We note that the functions of  and  are seen as formal power series
with a maximum degree  this property will be extremely useful in what
follows. In fact, the set of those functions is an associative algebra that
is used to introduce a gauge field theory on the reduced quantum plane. This
idea will be developed in sections  and .

Differential calculus with nilpotency  on reduced quantum
plane, case  

The aim of this section is to construct a covariant  nilpotent
differential calculus by mixing two approaches; namely we adapt to the
reduced quantum plane an idea originally proposed by Kerner , and we
use Couquereaux's technics  to ensure covariance. We denote by 
the differential algebra generated by , , , ,  and 
, where the "2- forms"  and  are the second differentials
of the basic variables  and .

Let us introduce the differential operator  that satisfies the following
conditions:

Nilpotency,

 

Leibniz rule,

 

where  is a form of degree  and  is  root of unity.

By applying the Leibniz rule on the -form we obtain:

 
 are the form in the algebra . The notion of covariance
is necessary for the consistency of every differential calculus. The set of
transformations leaving covariant our differential calculus is 
 and the covariance is described by the left coaction. We
start by explaining this coaction 

The left coaction of the group  on the reduced quantum plane is the
linear transformation of coordinates given by:



















We introduce also the line vectors with coordinate functions:









where the matrix elements    and  do not commute with each
others.We require that the quantities     
obtained in  the above relations satisfy the same relations as  and 
The two constraints  and  lead to the
relations:



















The algebra generated by  and  is usually denoted 
 The -determinant  is in the center of 
 If we set it to be equal to  we define the algebra 
 Assuming that the supplementary conditions  and 
 are also verified by the coordinates ,  and ,
,  ,  implies  
  . These new cubic relations on 
yields a new algebra that we denote . It is also a Hopf algebra. Indeed,
it has a coalgebra structure (coproduct) which is compatible with the
algebra one (product), this defines a bialgebra structure. An antipode and a
co-unit are  also defined . For further details on such structures on ,
see, for example .

The mixture of Kerner's idea and Coquereaux's technics allows us to
construct the left covariant differential algebra    
   see appendix The commutation relations between the
generators of  are as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As in the standard way, we define the partial derivatives in directions 
and  through:

 

Consistency conditions as in  yield:

 

 

 

 

 

 

The last equality  can be related to the nilpotency relation
encountered  in the description of the fractional statistics. More
precisely, we recover the description of physical systems that generalize
fermions. In a forthcoming paper , we reintroduce these
systems using this new differential calculus by establishing an adequate
correspondence between our differential calculus and some deformed
Heinsenberg algebras, as it is done in  for the
particular case .

Now, we generalize our differential calculus by considering the case .

Differential calculus on a reduced quantum
plane, case 
. 

A two dimensional reduced quantum plane is an associative algebra generated
by  and  with relations  and  One can always define the
differential operator "" satisfying   and the
Leibniz rule:

 

 and , where  and  are
the spaces of  and  forms on reduced quantum plane respectively.

Note that in contrast to  one have to distinguish between the
deformation parameter  and the  parameter, , , in  
.

Following the same method of section  we get the covariant differential
calculus:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We recover the differential calculus obtained in section  if . As
an application of this new differential calculus   on the reduced
quantum plane, we construct in the section below a gauge field theory on 


Gauge theory on  as a reduced quantum plane with  

In this section, we use the  differential calculus constructed in
section  to establish a gauge theory on the reduced quantum plane.

As in the ordinary case, the covariant differential is defined by:

 
where the field  is a function on  and the gauge field 
 is a -form valued in the associative algebra of functions on the
reduced quantum plane .

We have assumed that the algebra of functions on  is a bimodule over
the differential algebra 

As usual, the covariant differential  must satisfy:

 

where  is an endomorphism defined on  .

This leads to the following gauge field transformation:

 

In general, the 1-form gauge field  can be written as:

 

The differential calculus  allows to define the curvature  as
follows :

 

Direct computations show that  is a "three-form" given by:

 

One has to express the curvature written above in terms of -forms
constructed from basic generators    and   of the
differential algebra  Since we are dealing with a non-commutative
space (reduced quantum plane), this task is not straightforward. In fact,
the non-commutativity prevents us from rearanging the different terms in 
 adequately. To overcome this technical difficulty we require that
the components of the gauge field  and  are expressed as
formal power series of the space coordinates  and  
. The condition  in section  is extremely
useful, in the sense that it limits the power series to finite ones rather
than infinite:

 

 

Using the formulae  and after technical computations, the
desired expression of the curvature arises as:






















where:




















 






















 

 

The expression of the curvature components  and the deformed field
strength  are formally the same as those obtained by Kerner 
 The functions   can be interpreted as a
direct consequence of the non-commutativity property of the space.

The covariant  differential calculus constructed in section  and 
respectively for   and root of unity can be seen as a
genralization of the case . However, one cannot see  as a
certain limit of  case. In the next section, we remind the
differential calculus .

Differential calculus with nilpotency   on a reduced quantum
plane. 

We recall that the exterior differential  on the reduced quantum plane
satisfies usual properties , namely

   linearity,

   Nilpotency,

 

   /Leibniz rule,

 

where

 

The deformed differential calculus satisfies:

 

 

 

 

 

 

So, the differential algebra  is generated by    and 
, 

Using the standard realization of the differential :

 

one can prove that:

 

 

 

 

We apply this covariant differential calculus to study the related gauge
field theory on 

 Gauge field theory on M(C) as reduced quantum plane with d
=0 

Similarly, the covariant differential is defined as in section :

 

The expression of the curvature is:

 

The differential realization of   allows to rewrite the
expression of the curvature :

 

Using the differential calculus   on the reduced quantum plane
and the expressions of ,   as formal power
series, it is easy to establish:






 
this permit us to define
 
which is the -deformed  antisymetric field strengh.

The comparison of the two expressions of curvature  section  and 
 will be given in the following section.

Discussions and concluding remarks 

In this paper, we have constructed a differential calculus  nilpotent
on the reduced quantum plane by mixing Kerner's idea and Coquereaux's
technics. The notion of covariance for this differential calculus is also
given and we show that there is a quantum group structure behind this
covariance. As an application, we have constructed a gauge theory based on
this calculus.

In the case  the expressions of curvature contain additionnal terms 
 compared with  These terms can be interpreted as a
generic consequence of the extension of the differential calculus  to
the higher order 

We can also compare our results with those of    
In fact,  are formally the same as in , they differ only
by the appearance of the deformation parameter . However, there is no
analogous of  in . It is a direct consequence of the
noncommutativity of the space considered here.

In a forthcoming paper, we shall treat in a mathematical way  the
correspondance between this calculus and the Heisenberg algebra. This
correpondance is based on the bargman Fock reprensentation and will give a
new oscillator algebra. To study the minimization of incertitude principal
in this case, we will try to find the eigenvectors of the annihilation
operator in the way to construct the corresponding  Klauder s coherent
states .



Acknowledgments 

The authors Y. Hassouni and E. H. Zakkari wish to thank the Abdus Salam
International Centre for Theoretical Physics for financial and scientific
support, where a great part of this work has been done. This work was done
within the framework of Associateship and Federation Arrangement  Schemes of
the Abdus Salam ICTP.  

Appendix: 

We start by writting a priori    and  in terms of 
  and  ie:

 

 

 

 

Differentiating the commutation relation and replacing  and 
 by their expressions in the formulae above, permit us to fix three
unknown coeficients. Actually, we have  independant parameters.

The left coaction of   on a quantum plane is defined by:









Hence









We impose that the relations between   and    be
the same as the relations betwen   and   these conditions
yields to:







So, the unknown coeficients    and  can be expressed
in the terms of one unknown coeficient . Indeed:











Differentiating the relations  and noticing that , , 
 and  are independant, we find  . The left covariant
differential calculus on a reduced quantum plane is hence constructed 


References: 

- V. Abramov and R. Kerner, J. Math. Phys, 41 ,
(2000) 5598.

 - V. Abramov and R. Kerner, hep-th/9607143 (1996).

 - R. Kerner, Math-ph/0011023 (2000).

- M. Daoud and Y. Hassouni, Int. Jour. Theor. Phys.
36 , (1996) 37.

- A. Elhassouni, Y. Hassouni and E. H. Tahri, Int. Jour.
Theor. Phys. 35   (1996) 2517.

-R.Coquereaux, A. O. Garcia and R. Trinchero,
Math-ph/9807012 (1998).

- R. Coquereaux, A. O. Garcia and R. Trinchero, Phys.
Lett. B. 443  (1998) 221.

- T. Brezinski and J. Rembielinski, J. Phys. A25 
(1992) 1945.

-J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc Suppl) 
18  B (1990) 302.

- H. Weyl, The thory of groups and quantum mechanics  (Dover
Publications, 1931).

- R. Coquereaux, A. O. Garcia and R. Trinchero,
math-hep/9811017 (1998).

- R. Coquereaux and G. E. Schieber, Action of
finite quantum group on the algebra of complex   matrices
 . A.I.P Conference Proceedings.45 .

-  Y. Hassouni and E. H . Zakkari, in preparation.

- A. K. Mishra and G. Rajasekaran, J. Math. Phys. 
38  (1997) 1.

-R. Kerner,  math-ph/0004031 (2000).

- J. Madore, S. Schraml and J. Wess, Eur. phys. J . C
16  (2000) 161.

-B. Jurcco, P. Schupp and J. Wess, Nucl. phys. B. 
584 . (2000). 784.

-B. Jurcco, S. Schraml, P. Schupp and J. Wess, Eur. phys.
J C 17  (2000) 521.

-B. Jurcco, P. Schupp and J. Wess, Mod. Phys. Lett. A.
16 . (2001) 343.

