





Th Theorem 
lem Lemma 
Lem Lemma 
Prop Proposition 
Cor Corollary 

Ex Example 
Def Definition 
Rem Remark 

 


  

_D   
  
O  
F  
 C   
 C   
 C  [z] 
  
M_ 
K  
 
M  
T  
L  



 
 
ITEP-TH-76/02 Hitchin system on singular curves I
  



A. Chervov (E-mail:
chervov@gate.itep.ru)  , D. Talalaev (E-mail:
talalaev@gate.itep.ru)  (The work of the both authors
has been partially supported by the RFBR grant 01-01-00546,
the work of A.C. was partially supported by the
Russian President's grant 00-15-99296)  


Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics
(ITEP, 25 B. Cheremushkinskaya, Moscow, 117259, Russia.)  

Abstract. 

In this paper we study Hitchin system on singular curves.
Some examples of such system were first considered by
N. Nekrasov  ( hep-th/9503157 ), but our methods are different.
We consider the curves which can be obtained from the projective line
by gluing several points together or by taking
cusp singularities.
(More general cases of gluing
subschemas will be considered in the next paper).
It appears that on such curves all ingredients  of Hitchin integrable system
(moduli space of vector bundles, dualizing sheaf, Higgs field etc.)
can be explicitly described,
which may deserve independent interest. As a main result we find explicit
formulas for the Hitchin hamiltonians.
We also show how to obtain the Hitchin integrable system on such a
curve as a hamiltonian reduction from a more simple system on
some finite-dimensional space.
In this paper we also work out the case of a degenerate
curve of genus
two and find the analogue of the Narasimhan-Ramanan parameterization
of SL(2)-bundles. We describe the Hitchin system in such coordinates.
As a demonstration of the efficiency of our approach
we also rederive the rational
and trigonometric Calogero systems from the Hitchin system on
cusp and node with a marked point.







Introduction 
Hitchin system was introduced in as an integrable
system on the cotangent bundle of the moduli space
 of stable
holomorphic bundles on an algebraic curve . This phase
space can be obtained by the Hamiltonian reduction by
the gauge group action from the space of
pairs , where  is the operator defining
the holomorphic structure on the bundle  and  is an
endomorphism of this bundle, more precisely 
 where the gauge group is the
group of -valued
functions on . The invariant symplectic structure on the
"big" space can be written as:
 Tr d_A^" . The zero level of the moment map
is described by the condition  which means that
 is holomorphic with respect to the induced holomorphic
structure on the bundle . It turns out that the system of
quantities , treated as vector functions on the phase
space, Poisson-commute and their number is exactly half the
dimension of the phase space.

The importance of Hitchin system and its generalizationsin modern mathematical physics cannot be overestimated.
Many well-known systems can be obtained as
particular cases. Automatically they inherit the universal construction of
a family of commuting hamiltonians as well as the geometric
description of the hamiltonian flows, the Lax representation, and the
"action-angle" variables.

This domain is also connected with important questions
in mathematical physics like the
geometric Langlands correspondence, conformal field theory
(in a sense Hitchin system is a
Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov-Bernard equation on the
critical level), non-linear partial differential equations
such as KP, Davey-Stewartson equation,
Nahm's equations describing monopoles,
and other problems (see for example,).

Despite its importance Hitchin system is far from being fully
investigated.
One of the reasons for such a situation is that the  moduli space
of vector bundles is a complicated manifold and
it is difficult to choose "good" coordinates on it to
write down the Hamiltonians explicitly.
Several attempts have been done in and in.
Nevertheless such descriptions appear to be complicated
and do not answer many questions
(at least yet).
So it is important to work out some examples of
Hitchin system which on the one hand are sufficiently simple and
on the other hand are rich enough to find out general methods
for solving Hitchin system
and to understand such phenomena as the separation of variables
and the geometric Langlands correspondence.

The approach elaborated in this paper can be applied in rather specific
cases,
namely when the base algebraic
curve is singular and its normalization is a rational curve.
Its richness is proved by the number of nontrivial examples.
For such curves all ingredients of Hitchin systems
(vector bundles, their endomorphisms, the moduli space of vector bundles,
the dualizing
sheaf, Higgs fields)
can be described very explicitly and in a quite  simple way.
So we  hope that the understanding
of such systems will
shed light on the general case.

We proceed by formulating the main results of this paper.
Constructing Hitchin system 
Consider the curve
 which results from gluing  distinct points  on 
 to one point (i.e. the curve which is obtained by adding the smooth
point  to the curve 
.

 
  A rank  vector bundle on such a curve
corresponds to a rank
  module  over the affine part given by the subset of vector-valued
functions  on 
i.e.  which satisfy the conditions: 
. The moduli space of vector bundles on  is the
factor by  of the set of invertible matrices  where
 acts by conjugation.
(See section , theorem ).
  The basis of global
sections of the dualizing sheaf on  can be described as
meromorphic
differentials on  given by  
 (see  section , example ).
  The
endomorphisms of the module  are matrix valued polynomials
 such that 
(see section , proposition ).
The action of  on  is: .
The space  can be described as the space  of matrix valued
polynomials factorized by the subspaces:

 and 
. The elements of  are the
tangent vectors to ,
the element  gives the following tangent vector to :
_(z)  _i = (P_1)_i-_i(P_i)
  The global sections of  ("Higgs fields")
are described as
(z)=
 _i=2,...,N  -_i _i_i^-1   z-P_1 dz
+_i=2,...,N  _i z-P_i dz, where 
(see section , proposition ).
Let us mention that precisely this condition arises as the zero moment
level condition
(see section , formula ).
The symplectic form on the cotangent bundle to the moduli space
can be described as the reduction of the form on the space 
 given by
- _i=2,...,N  Tr d(_i _i^-1 )   d _i (see section , proposition ).

Result 1:  The Hitchin system on the curve 
can be described as the system with a phase space which is the hamiltonian
reduction of the space  with the symplectic form
; the
reduction is taken by the group , which acts by conjugation,
the Lax operator is given by .
Remarks: 
For the case of gluing two points the same Lax operator
has been
proposed by N. Nekrasov (), though his methods are different from
ours, and the explicit description of bundles, dualizing sheaf,
endomorphisms etc is absent in his approach.
When one glues several groups of points: ,  ...
it is obvious how to modify all propositions above,
for example the Lax operator becomes:







Actually one can easily guess the Lax operator above from
the case of gluing two points: one must first consider the gluing
of  pairs of points together , ..., then take .

Analogously we obtain all propositions for the case of a curve with several
cusps at points  on .
 
  The curve: 
.
  The modules: .
  The basis of global
sections of the dualizing sheaf:  . The
endomorphisms of the module :
 satisfying the condition 
  The global sections of  ("Higgs fields"):
(z)=_i (_i dz (z-P_i)^2  + [_i,_i]dz z-P_i ),
where .
  The symplectic form:
- _i=1,...,N  Tr d_i    d _i .

Narasimhan-Ramanan parameterization 
It is known since that the moduli space of   vector bundles
on a curve of genus 2 is . In this paper we introduce some
analogs of the Narasimhan-Ramanan parameters for the   vector bundles
on a singular curve of genus 2 - the curve with two cusps at points .
On such curves the vector bundles can be described as bundles corresponding
to the modules  defined as ,
where .
Our goal is to express
analogs of the Narasimhan-Ramanan parameters via the .
Result 2:  The Narasimhan-Ramanan coordinates over a
 singular curve are:
_1 = Tr _1^2 ,     _3 = Tr _3^2 ,     _2 = Tr
(_1_2)+ _1_3(P_1-P_2)^2 4 . The Hitchin Hamiltonians in
this case are 


 
where  and  are
the corresponding conjugated variables.
This paper is organized as follows: the first section contains all
algebraic-geometric preliminaries. In the second section we work out the
case of a rational curve with double point and cusp and show that the
arising systems are the trigonometric and rational Calogero-Moser
system with spin.
In the third section we treat
the case of a rational curve
with two cusps, which is a curve of algebraic genus 2. We consider the
moduli space of holomorphic -bundles on it and
construct the
analog of the Narasimhan-Ramanan parameterization in the singular case.
In conclusion we state some open problems for future work.

Acknowledgements.  The authors are grateful for their friends
and colleagues for useful and stimulating discussions:
N. Amburg, Yu. Chernyakov, V. Dolgushev, V. Kisunko, A. Kotov, D. Osipov,
 S. Shadrin, G. Sharygin, A. Zheglov, A. Zotov. The authors are thankful to
B. Machet for careful reading of the manuscript.


Algebraic-geometric background 

Curves defined by gluing points with multiplicities. 

Let us consider a curve  and some effective divisor
 () such that . One defines a new
curve  by, roughly speaking,  gluing all points 
with multiplicities  to one point ; formally speaking we
define the structure sheaf  to be a subsheaf
of  with the properties: 
. In Serre's terminology this is "the
curve defined by the module D" (see ch. 4 sect. 4).
The new curve  obviously has one more singular point
, the normalization of  is  (of course, if
 is a smooth curve).

Main example to keep in mind. 
If we consider  and 
we obtain the curve 
which is called node (or double point in another terminology),
it is an affine curve which can be defined by the equation ,
.

   If we consider  and  we obtain
the curve 
which is called cusp, it is an
affine curve which can be defined by the equation ,
.

Consider  and the effective divisor  on it.
Consider the curve  which is obtained by
gluing points  with multiplicities  to one point
as was explained above.
Then the genus (i.e.  ) of such a curve
equals
.
 

The proposition above is obvious: it is enough to cover the curve by
two charts: the first contains the singular point and does not contain
infinity,
the other does not contain the singular point, and to calculate
the C ech cohomology
of . (On the curve such a covering is acyclic because the chosen
charts are affine manifolds).

   One sees that the genus of the node and cusp curves
is equal to ,
the same as for an elliptic curve. It is not surprising due to
the fact that these curves
are degenerations of  elliptic curves and the genus does not change under
deformation.

Canonical (dualizing) sheaf on curves defined by gluing points.
 

Description of the dualizing sheaf. 

Recall that the dualizing sheaf on a curve  is, roughly speaking,
a sheaf  such that for an arbitrary coherent sheaf  there
is a canonical isomorphism .
On a nonsingular curve the dualizing sheaf is the sheaf of 1-forms,
but for a singular curve the notion of "1-form" must be clarified
and the naive definition of the Kahler differentials (ch. 2 sect. 8 ) is not the right object.
The general receipt (see) for the description
of the dualizing sheaf on a singular curve is the following:
Let  be the normalization of  and
 the corresponding projection.
The dualizing sheaf  on the singular curve  can be described
as the sheaf of meromorphic 1-forms   on 
such that  and  it is true that:
_P_i  _norm : (P_i)=P  Res_P_i  f =0,
 where 
 is the pullback of the function
  on the singular curve to its normalization,  are
points on the
normalization such that they map to the point  on the singular curve
by the normalization map .
 

Let us describe explicitly the canonical (dualizing)
sheaf on a singular curve defined by gluing the
points  (of the smooth curve )
with multiplicities
 to one point. Denote by  the divisor of the
points with multiplicities .

The dualizing sheaf   is defined as
the subsheaf of differential forms    on 
with possible poles in  with orders 
(i.e. the subsheaf of  )
with the condition .
 

Our convention is .
Obviously  is a coherent sheaf
on .
Moreover one can see directly (or look at ch. 4 sect. 11)
that it is a locally free sheaf (i.e. a line bundle on a
singular curve).
The dualizing sheaf is not always locally free. It is true
for complete intersections and arbitrary plane curves (see for
the discussion ).

     Consider the node curve , i.e.,
 with two points 
glued together, so  the affine part of this curve is
.
The sections of the sheaf  on the chart without infinity
are described as ,
where  is holomorphic.
On the other charts
one obtains the sections of  by the usual localization procedure:
on the charts, which
do not contain the singular point, the sections of  are
the usual holomorphic -forms.
So the only global section of  is 


One can easily guess
what is going on for the case when we glue  points  on 
together: for example the basis of global holomorphic differentials can
be given by  , for  .

    Consider the cusp curve , i.e.,  with the point 
glued with multiplicity 2, so  the affine part of this curve is
.
The sections of the sheaf  on the chart without infinity
are described by ,
where  is holomorphic. So obviously 
is the only global section of .

The description of the canonical class on an -cusp curve
when we glue one point  on  with
multiplicity  is analogous.
For example the basis of global holomorphic differentials can
be given by  , for .

    One can see that the Serre's description of a dualizing sheaf is quite
consistent with the naive arguments for the node and cusp curve. Consider the node
curves:  and  - is the coordinate on the
normalization of this curve. The holomorphic differential on an elliptic curve
is given by the formula: 
 so we obtain a differential which satisfies
Serre's conditions: the orders of the poles are 1 and the sum of its
residues is equal to zero.
If one puts  which corresponds to the cusp curve
we obtain as a limit the differential  It has a
pole of order 2 and residue zero. This is also in accordance with Serre's rule.

Serre's pairing in the C ech description of 
on a singular curve. 

Let us describe the pairing (Serre's duality)
between  and
,
where  is a flat coherent sheaf on the curve .
Recall that  is a smooth curve and  is a singular
curve obtained by gluing the points  with multiplicities 
together, .
In, the duality is presented in the most general case
by using the language of distributions (adels). So for the sake on
convenience
we write it down explicitly in our simple case.

For smooth curves, the elements of 
in Dolbeault's representation are " forms with values in ".
The elements of  can be represented as holomorphic 1-forms,
so the pairing can be given by .
For singular curves Dolbeault's approach does not work, at least
naively, so we prefer the C ech description of , which
works perfectly even for singular curves.

Let us cover the curve  by the
two charts  and
,
where we denote by  an arbitrary point in
, distinct from  (recall that  is
the only singular point obtained by gluing the points  together).
This choice of covering is the most convenient for our
calculation and will be used throughout the paper.
One knows that a curve minus
any point is an affine curve, so this covering is sufficient to calculate
the cohomology of the coherent sheaves: 
.

  The Serre's pairing between
 and
 can be described as follows:
consider  the representative
of the element , then the pairing is given by:
<f,hw>=_i Res_P_i  <f, h> w
This pairing is well-defined (i.e. it does not depend on the choice of the
representative
) and non-degenerate.
 


So one obviously
obtains  

Let us sketch why the pairing is well-defined and nondegenerate.
In order to see that the pairing is well-defined one needs to check
that it is zero for  and for 
.
Indeed,
if  then
 belongs to  and hence its pullback
 has the same values at the preimages of the point 
 and satisfies
the conditions 
Hence:


where we used the fact that the sum of the residues of a
meromorphic differential is zero.

For an element  one has


because both  and  are regular
at 

To show that this paring is nondegenerate it is sufficient to prove that
there is no meromorphic differential  of the prescribed type such that
 
We can present  functions  on the normalization
with their only pole of sufficiently high order at  and
with nondegenerate matrix
 of their derivatives up to  order at the points  The
condition of orthogonality 
is a system of linear homogeneous equations on the negative coefficients of
 at the points  The only solution of this system is zero vector and
one obtains that the pairing is nondegenerate due to the absence of
holomorphic differentials on 


Holomorphic bundles on singular curves 

Projective modules over an affine part 
Holomorphic bundles on a non-singular manifold can be described by sheaves
of its sections. Such sheaves are locally free or equivalently (by a general theory)
they are
sheaves of projective modules over the structure sheaf.
The geometric description of a holomorphic
bundle on a singular manifold is problematic in contrast with the algebraic side
which is unambiguous.
The holomorphic bundle on a singular curve  is the sheaf
of projective modules over  


(It is known that a
projective module is locally free (in Zariski's topology) also for singular
manifolds, so it is equivalent to speak about projective
or locally free modules).
First let us describe the projective modules over the
affine curve  which is obtained by gluing the
points  on  with multiplicities  to one point.
As usual we denote by  the effective divisor .
We will describe such modules as submodules of the trivial module
on the normalization.

Consider the curve  given by 
.
Consider the following set of matrices:
invertible matrices

and arbitrary matrices , where ;
.  The subset of vector-valued polynomials  on  i.e.
 such that they satisfy the conditions:
;

is a projective module of rank  over the algebra


All projective modules can
be obtained in this way. 


Notation   Let us denote the module and the
bundle described above by . (We will use the
same notation  for the vector bundles on
the projectivization  of the curve ,
we hope that it will not be confusing).

    One can easily show (calculating the divisor for example)
that in the
case of rank  all these modules are non isomorphic for different
's. For the  it is certainly not true,
but we will see below that the vector bundles
on the projectivization  of the curve 
corresponding to these modules are isomorphic iff
all 's are conjugated by the same constant matrix
.

    Let us mention that even in the case 
if one considers the analytic topology then all bundles
 become isomorphic, because from the exponential
sequence one can easily see that  and
 on any affine curve.
But, for projective curves
the GAGA principle guarantees the same  results for
 both the algebraic and analytic setups.
We will be interested in projective curves
so one must not pay too much attention to the remarks above.


Sketch of Proof.  This proposition is quite simple so let us
only sketch out
its proof. Let  be the normalization map.
Consider any torsion free module  of rank .
So  is a torsion free rank  module,
but all such modules over  are trivial,
so .
Consider  It is isomorphic to
 considered as a module over 
,
it is a torsion free, but not a  projective module (the fiber
at the singular point  jumps).
We have the exact sequence ,
where  is a skyscraper sheaf at the point ,
 is the rank, and .

So we see that any torsion free module 
can be described as the kernel of  the map
.
Such maps   bijectively correspond to
the maps
.
The finite dimensional linear space
 in our case
is the space .
So in general the kernel
of such a map can be described by the maps:

and .
One can easily see that if we are not in the general
case or if 's are not invertible
the modules will not be projective.


Let us recall that the fiber at a point  of a module 
over a ring  is defined as ,
where  is the  maximal ideal of the point 
and  means "localization at point ".


    
Consider the node (or double point) curve:
.
Then  the rank  modules
(line bundles or rank one torsion free sheaf) are parameterized by one complex
number
. They are given by the condition
.
Obviously  is a
torsion free module. For  one can see that it is not a
projective module, because the fiber at the point zero jumps and becomes
two-dimensional,  which is impossible for locally free modules.
It is a nice
exercise to calculate the divisor of the line bundle . For 
one can see that this module is locally free (hence projective).
(A rank  projective module  becomes free on any open set which does not
contain any representative of its divisor).  This example illustrates also that
the moduli space of line bundles (the so called generalized Jacobian) on
a singular curve is non compact. In this case  and it is
also an isomorphism of groups, where as usually one considers the
tensor product
as a group operation on line bundles.  can be compactified by the torsion
free modules. In this case one should add one module corresponding to
, (it coincides with the module , i.e.  the
module ). It can be shown that if one
constructs properly the algebraic structure on the set of torsion free
sheaves of rank  as a manifold it coincides with the curve 
itself. This result is related to the fact that the Jacobian
of an elliptic curve is isomorphic to this curve. This can be done by
constructing the Poincare line bundle on the product of the curve with
itself.

Given the divisor  one obtains the curve

 by gluing the points  together.
The rank  modules can be described as
subsets of vector-valued polynomials  on  i.e.
 such that they satisfy the conditions:
, , where  are arbitrary invertible
matrices.

     Consider the cusp curve:
,
recall that it means that we glued the point  with
itself with multiplicity . The modules
can be described by 
.
In this example for all  these modules are
projective. So  is the moduli space of line bundles. It can
be compactified by adding one point  (i.e.
the module
, which is the same as the maximal
ideal of the
singular point , and the same as the direct image of 
and the same as just  considered as a module over our algebra).
A properly introduced algebraic structure will show that this
moduli space is the curve  itself, not  as one might
think from a naive point of view.

Analogously, for the curve

 corresponding to the divisor 
the rank  modules can be described as
subsets of the vector-valued polynomials  on  i.e.
 such that they satisfy the conditions:
,
,
where  are arbitrary matrices.


Vector bundles over the projectivization  
The modules  and  are equivalent, if there exists an
invertible map of modules .

Recall that we denoted by  the projective curve
which we obtain from the affine  curve

  by adding one smooth
point at infinity.  The modules  give a
vector bundle over
 in an obvious way: we define the sheaf
which is a trivial rank  module over the chart containing infinity
and not containing the singular point and which is the
 module  (
or more precisely its localization) over the chart which contains
the singular point.
Let us denote these bundles by  (we hope that it will not
be too confusing to denote by the same  the projective module
over the affine chart and the corresponding vector bundle on the
projectivization).
The degree of such bundles equals zero.
The vector bundles are equivalent if there exists
an invertible map of modules 
over each chart. So we see that  is a matrix polynomial which
must be regular both at infinity and on the affine part 
The only such function  is a constant.
So we obtain:

The vector bundles   over 
are isomorphic if there exist
a constant matrix  such that

.
 


We obtain the following corollary:
The open subset in the space of semistable vector bundles of degree zero
and rank  over the curve 
 can be described as
 where  is the set of
matrices 
, with 
invertible and  arbitrary, and the -action
is defined by the common conjugation by constant matrices.
 
   Let us also note that for the bundle 
the pullback  is the trivial bundle
on , where  is the normalization map.
Obviously there are lots of bundles  of degree zero on
 such that  are not trivial bundles but
some bundles of the type  such
that .
So by no means we obtain all bundles on
 as bundles  for some .
But nevertheless the general stable and possibly semistable
bundles satisfy the property that
 is a trivial bundle on ,
and so it is easy to see from our previous description
of projective modules that the general semistable bundles
can be obtained as the bundles  for some .


Endomorphisms of  

Endomorphisms of the module  over an
 affine chart  

In this section we will describe endomorphisms
of the bundles over the curves obtained by gluing
distinct points  together and for the cusp
curve; the case of gluing points with multiplicities
is more complicated and will be treated in  .


Recall that the module  over the algebra 
,
is defined as the subset of the vector-valued polynomials  on  i.e.
 which satisfy the conditions:
.
It is natural to look for endomorphisms of 
as endomorphisms of  which preserve the submodule .

An endomorphism of the module  can be described as
a matrix polynomial
 which satisfy the condition
(P_1)=_i(P_i )_i^-1   


The condition above implies that
 satisfies: ,
so  is again an element of  and
 is an endomorphism of .


      In the abelian case
(i.e. rank 1 modules over any manifold) the condition above is
empty and any element  defines an endomorphism i.e. the sheaf of
endomorphisms of any rank 1 coherent sheaf is just  as in the
regular case.

     
Consider the node (or double point) curve 
. An endomorphisms of the module  (which is defined
as , for some matrix )
is given by a matrix-valued polynomial
 such that
.
Hence 
, where  is arbitrary.
When one considers the projectivization of our curve and the bundle
corresponding to  on it,
we see that in order to be regular at infinity one
must only consider constant endomorphisms .
So in order to satisfy the condition 
one must request
that the matrix  commutes with .
As a corollary we see that there is only -dimensional space
of global endomorphisms for a general module 

     
Consider the node (or double point) curve 
. An endomorphism of the module 
is given by a matrix-valued polynomial
 such that
.
Hence 

where  must satisfy
 and
 is arbitrary.
It is more convenient to rewrite this expression as follows:


where  is an arbitrary constant matrix.
So global endomorphisms are given by  
with  commuting with .

     
Consider the triple point curve 
. So an endomorphism of module 
is given by a matrix-valued polynomial
 such that


Hence 





Let us consider the cusp curve

,
recall that the module

is defined as the subset of vector-valued polynomials  on  i.e.
  which satisfy the conditions:
.


An endomorphism of the module  on a cusp can be
described as a matrix polynomial
, which satisfy the condition
(P)]  

The condition above is obviously equivalent to
  which means that  is really
an endomorphism.



Endomorphisms of the bundle  over the
projectivization 

Consider the projective curve 
which is  obtained by adding one smooth point 
to the curve

.
An endomorphism of the bundle 
is given by endomorphisms of the corresponding
modules over each chart.
So an endomorphism of the bundle 
is an endomorphisms of the module  over the affine chart
which is regular at infinity.
In order to be regular at infinity
an endomorphism  must be constant 
on the other hand an endomorphism must satisfy
the conditions , ,
so we see that:

A global endomorphism of the bundle 
over 
is given by a constant matrix 
which commute with all .
 

    We see that, if the genus of the curve is greater
than , for the general bundle the endomorphisms
are only scalar matrices; this fact reflects the stability of
general bundles. In the case when the genus equals
one
(node and cusp curves), the general bundle has an -dimensional
space of endomorphisms, which corresponds to the fact that
on genus one curves
the general bundle is a sum of linear bundles.

Description of   


Examples of node and cusp curves 

    
 Consider the node curve 
.
An endomorphism of the module   is given (see example )
by




where  are arbitrary. The sections of the dualizing module
are given by 
So the sections of  can be described as
 
Hence the global sections   over the projectivization
are 's which are regular at infinity.
The condition that
 has no pole of order greater than  gives that there is no
holomorphic term in the expression ().
The condition that the
residue at infinity is zero is equivalent to

 Hence the global sections are:

 where . We can see in this
case that 

    
 Consider the cusp curve 
.
An endomorphisms of the module   is given
by 
where  are arbitrary. The sections of the canonical module
are given by 
where  is holomorphic.
So the sections of  can be described as


The global sections 
are 's
which are regular at infinity. Hence ,
and the global sections are:
 where .
Here we have the same observation as in the node case


Curves obtained by gluing points without multiplicities
 

Consider the curve  which is the result of gluing  distinct
points on , (we consider the case of gluing without multiplicities).
Recall that the affine part of  is given by

The bundle  corresponds to the module 
 over the affine
part.

A sections of  over
the chart without infinity can be described
as a matrix polynomial:
(z)=
 _i=2,...,N  -_i _i_i^-1   z-P_1 dz
+_i=2,...,N  _i z-P_i dz+
holomorphic in z terms ,
where  are arbitrary matrices.


The global sections 
are described by the formula
 
imposing the conditions
 
 


Proof. 
The claim about the section over the affine chart is trivial. Indeed, over
the affine part
 It is the
straightforward consequence of the triviality of  over the affine chart
even in the algebraic setup. So we can represent the section as
 
where

provide the basis of holomorphic
differentials on  and  are the sections
of  over the affine part, which means that
 Calculating the residues of the
expression for  one obtains formula ()
where 

To prove the second part of the proposition we must realize that global
sections correspond to sections over the affine chart which can be
continued to regular functions at infinity. The
expression () is regular at infinity if it
has no term holomorphic in  and if
its residue at infinity is zero. This
imposes the additional condition 
Conversely,
for every  subject to the conditions ()
there exist a module  endomorphism  such that


To prove it let us take local endomorphisms  such that
 The residue at  of
 is
 The difference
 is regular at the affine chart so it has no
 residue at 
Consider now the expression


which is also the section of  over the affine chart for
an arbitrary matrix function  It has arbitrary poles at
 of order greater then  and has no residue. One can find
a function  such that 
 but the latter is also an expression of the type (),
which ends the proof 

Description of   

Curves obtained by gluing points without multiplicities 

Consider the curve  which is the result of gluing  distinct
points on  (we consider the case of gluing without multiplicities).
Recall that the affine part of  is given by
,
the bundle  corresponds to the module which,  over the affine
part, is described as 
.

The space of matrix polynomials
 maps surjectively to .
The kernel of this map is the sum of two linear subspaces
in the space of matrix polynomials :
the first space is the space of constant polynomials 
and the second space is made of matrix polynomials
which satisfy the condition:
, for .
(Let us mention that the intersection of these two subspaces is
precisely 
and that the second subspace consists of  which
gives endomorphism of the module  over the affine chart without
infinity.)
 


Proof.  The proposition is quite obvious from the
point of view of the C ech's description of
. Let us cover our singular curve
by the charts ,
 where  is the singular point.
Then 
.
As we know from  proposition  are precisely polynomials
 which satisfy

.  So we obviously come
to the desired conclusion 

  From the  proposition above we see that
the Riemann-Roch theorem for the bundle 
becomes obvious. The description of  given above
shares similarities with the description done in
Krichever's and adelic approaches (see e.g.).
These descriptions hypothetically
can be used for the proof of the general Riemann-Roch theorem.

  In the abelian case (i.e. when  is a
rank
 module) for any  it is known that  is just .
So in the abelian case the proposition claims that
 is the factor space of the space of all polynomials
 by the space of polynomials
 which satisfy the conditions .
For example this can be seen from the
exact sequence: 
which gives: .

It is well-known that the vector space
 is the tangent space to deformations
of  as an algebraic vector bundle, on the other hand we know that all
vector bundles are given by
 Our goal is to determine
 corresponding to the element 

The matrix polynomial ,
(which is considered as an element
of  due to the proposition above), gives the following
deformation of :
_(z)  _i=
(P_1)_i- _i(P_i).
 

  One knows that  for the case
of curves and so by the general theory
the map from  to the tangent space of deformations of
the bundle  is a bijection. So the formula above can be taken
as a definition
of the map from the space of matrix polynomials 
to the space . It means that we can
(by definition) associate with the matrix polynomial 
an element of  which deforms the bundle 
by the formula

.
What must be  proved after such a definition is how to describe
the Serre's pairing between  and
.
We describe Serre's pairing in  proposition
.

The matrix polynomial ,
which for  satisfies the condition

does not change . This fact is in full
agreement with proposition  which
says that such a polynomial gives a zero element
in .
 
The matrix polynomial ,
changes  to its conjugated by a constant matrix, so
it gives the same vector bundle. This fact is in
full agreement with proposition  which says that such a
polynomial
gives a zero element in .   


Proof. 
This proposition can be demonstrated as follows:
consider an element , where ,
it is an infinitesimal automorphism of the module  corresponding
to the endomorphism .
Having such an automorphism it is clear how to deform the
module :  the new module is the set of elements
, where  is an element of .
The elements of the type 
satisfy the condition:


 for  Hence


We see that the new module
is the  module 
. 

Our reasoning
has been the following: the module 
is embedded in the module , this module cannot be deformed,
so the deformations of  are governed only by the deformations of the
embedding . The elements of 
have been identified with some elements of 
due to the fact that   is a resolution
of . The elements of  act on the embeddings
of .
But the formulas in the paragraph above
are more convincing than any words.

There exists another way to demonstrate the proposition above.
It is more transparent at the level of ideas but much
longer at the level of formulas. Let us use the C ech's description
of cohomologies of sheaves. We consider the covering
of our projective curve consisting of two charts:
the first is everything except the singular point, the second
is not really an open set but a limit
of the open sets - infinitesimal neighborhood of the singular point
i.e. 
 is regular at  and  .
It is convenient to consider such an infinitesimal neighborhood.
Only in such a neighborhood of the singular point all modules
become trivial because it is the spectrum of a local ring.
So any module on a singular curve can be given by gluing
two trivial modules by the gluing function on the intersection
of two charts. In this case the intersection is the "general point"
i.e. .
So the first task is to describe the module  by the
gluing function.
After that it is obvious how to calculate which
deformation corresponds to an element of 
We represent an element of  as an element
 on the intersection of the two charts and
one must simply multiply the gluing function by the
element . So we obtain a new gluing function. The
new bundle can be again represented in the form ,
so we obtain the deformation of  and this construction
gives the same results as above.

Let us give examples  illustrating
propositions  and  .

   
Consider the node curve with the affine part
, where .
Consider the matrix polynomial

According to proposition it acts on  by the formula

The part 
does not act on 
So we can consider only the linear part .
According to proposition  the
 is the factor of the space 
by the sum of the spaces  and 
 where ,  are
arbitrary matrices. (It would be nice
to have an explicit parameterization of the orthogonal
complement with respect to the  Killing form
to the sum of these two  subspaces and to generalize it to the case of
schematic points). The intersection of these two subspaces
is the subspace  of  such that 
commutes with  This intersection is
. So we see that
.
This observation coincides with the calculation done from the Riemann-Roch
theorem: 


The Serre's pairing between  and

can be written in terms of the
matrix polynomials  
and   as follows:
 
_i=1,...,N   Rez_P_i   Tr (z) (z) dz.
 

Consider the matrix polynomial 
which satisfies the conditions
 for .
The Serre's pairing (given by formula
)  between  and an
arbitrary 
is identically zero.
This fact is in full
agreement with proposition  which
says that such a polynomial gives a zero element
in .
 


Consider the matrix polynomial 
The Serre's pairing given by formula
 between  and an
arbitrary 
 is identically zero.
This fact is in full agreement with proposition
 which says that such a polynomial
gives a zero element in .   


This proposition follows immediately from the general
description of Serre's pairing given in proposition
.
To prove the corollaries we use  proposition
 in order to  represent  as
a matrix polynomial:


for some 

  
To prove the second corollary we must  also use the condition

The first corollary does not use this condition for 
and is true for all  represented in the form


with arbitrary .


The cusp curve 

Consider the cusp curve .
Recall that the affine part of  is given by
,
the bundle  corresponds to the module which is described as
 over the affine part.

The space of matrix polynomials
 maps surjectively to .
The kernel of this map consists of the sum of two linear subspaces
in the space of matrix polynomials :
the first space is the space of constant polynomials 
and the second space consists of matrix polynomials
which satisfy the condition:
 for .
(Let us mention that the intersection of the two subspaces is
precisely  and the second subspace consists of  which
gives endomorphisms of the module  over the affine chart without infinity.)
 


Proof.   This proposition is quite obvious and can be
demonstrated
in the C ech approach in the same way as proposition .


The matrix polynomial  which is
considered as an element
of  due to the proposition above gives the following
deformation of :
_(z)  _1+[_0,].
 


Proof.   This proposition can be demonstrated
 in the same way as  proposition .
Let us only comment on the key step.
Consider an element , where ,
it is an infinitesimal automorphism of the module  corresponding
to the endomorphism .
Having such an automorphism it is clear how to deform the
module :  the new module is the set of elements
 where  is an element of .
The elements of the type 
satisfy the condition:






Hence one can see that the new module
is the module  


The Serre's pairing can be described exactly in the same way as
in subsection above.

Canonical 1-form on the cotangent bundle to the moduli space of
vector bundles in terms of   

Curves obtained by gluing points without multiplicities  

Consider the curve  which is result of gluing  distinct
points on  without multiplicities.
Recall that the affine part of  is given by

the bundle  over the affine
part corresponds to the module 

.

It is well-known that  is the tangent space to the moduli space
of  vector bundles at the point  and   is the dual
space to  so it is the cotangent space to
the moduli space of vector bundles at the same point.
According to proposition  the sections of
 can be described as:
(z)=
 _i=2,...,N  _i _i_i^-1   z-P_1 dz
-_i=2,...,N  _i z-P_i dz
where the matrices   satisfy
.

This section is devoted to proving the claim which, in expert
language, can be formulated as follows:


Claim: 
The canonical 1-form on the cotangent bundle to the
moduli space of vector bundles on the curve 
in terms of  can be written in the form:
- _i=2,...,N  Tr _i _i^-1  d _i
 
  
In the abelian case (the case of moduli space of line bundles)
the claim above is an exact proposition -
 are  "honest" coordinates on the cotangent to the
moduli space of line bundles, and the expression above has a clear
meaning.
In the nonabelian case
there is a subtlety due to the fact that the moduli space of vector bundles
is the factor of the space of matrices  by conjugation,
but the -form above is written
on the space of  without factorization. So one must
explain what the expression  means,
if  are defined only up to conjugation.
It is obvious for the expert, nevertheless,
despite it is a bit long. Let us give a correct formulation of the proposition,
do not claiming that everybody can translate from
the expert's slang to the precise formulation.

Consider the space of matrices  with the -form
. Consider the subspace defined by the
equation .
Consider the map  of this subspace  to the cotangent to the moduli space
of bundles given by ,
where  is defined by formula ().
Let us define the -form on the cotangent to the moduli space
as follows: restrict the 1-form
 to the submanifold
; check that the -form equals zero
on the tangent vectors to the fiber of the map ;
hence the -form  can be
pushed down to the image of  i.e. to
the  cotangent to the moduli space
of vector bundles. We claim that the result of the push-down of
 under the map  coincides with
the canonical -form on the cotangent bundle to the moduli space.  
The procedure above is actually a hamiltonian reduction.
Now we proceed with formulating the exact result.

Let us consider the cotangent space to the space of matrices  which is
 with the canonical
invariant symplectic form on it 

where  are coordinates on 
that   are coordinates on 
canonically conjugated to the coordinates
 on 
(When we say that the matrix  is a "coordinate"
we mean that each of its matrix elements is a coordinate).
This symplectic form is invariant by the natural action of
:

The moment map of this action 
can be calculated by using the -form
 due to
its invariance as follows:

where  and we use
the identification of the vector spaces  and   by means
of 
Here  is the vector field
corresponding to the infinitesimal action of 
which can be written as:

Finally one obtains 
 such that the moment map as an
element of  coincides with
 

   We see that the holomorphity condition for  (see proposition
) coincides with the condition that the moment map equals
zero.

Let us consider the hamiltonian reduction for the action above corresponding
to the zero moment level

This space is endowed with the canonical symplectic structure which
coincides
with the symplectic structure on the cotangent bundle

For pedagogical reasons we recall here the proof of the following well known
result:
Let the group  act on the manifold ; then there is an induced
action of  on  which is the pullback of differential forms. Then
the canonical -form  on  is invariant for this action and
the symplectic manifold obtained by the hamiltonian reduction   with
zero moment level is
canonically
isomorphic to the symplectic space  with the canonical symplectic
form. 


Proof.  Let us describe the cotangent space to  We denote by
 the factorization map 
The tangent space
at the point  is by definition



where  is the subspace in  which corresponds
to the generators  of the action of .
Hence cotangent vectors to   are described by -forms such
that they vanishes on
vector fields coming from the action of the group ,
but these are precisely  -forms  such
that the pair  lies in the zero moment level
because 
, where
 is the canonical lifting of  from  to ,
 is the
vector field on  generating the infinitesimal action of the group 

The fact that the canonical symplectic form and the canonical
-form on  reduce to the
canonical symplectic form and the canonical 1-form on  is
quite tautological.
It is enough to note that the
-form  reduced to the zero moment level is correctly defined on
the factor space  Indeed, its value on the vector field 
at the point  is defined by  and does not
depend on the choice of the representative of an element of

0,5cm
Returning to our specific case we denote the
corresponding symplectic form on 
by 
Due to proposition  we have the identification of spaces

 constructed as follows: for the set of matrices  one
constructs the bundle  and the cotangent vector , which
can be
expressed
from the matrices
 by the usual formula (). This
identification is correct by virtue of formula () for the
moment map.
Different
choices for the representative  correspond to conjugated matrices

  
In fact the map  is not only the identification of spaces, it is also
a
symplectomorphism considering the canonical symplectic structures on these
spaces.
Moreover, we will show below that this map  coincides with
the composition of the canonical identification of the spaces
  with 
, described in the lemma above
and of the identification  of 
  with 
 The significance of this claim is the following: we reduce the
problem of describing the symplectic form on  to the much more
simple question - the symplectic form on the cotangent bundle to the group
(in our case the group is ). This non trivial claim in our
description is the definition of the symplectic structure
in Beauville's construction, here
we deduce it from the canonical symplectic form on the cotangent bundle.
The map  is a symplectomorphism, i.e. 
where  is the canonical symplectic form on 
 
As a corollary we see the way to calculate the value of the
canonical -form on the given tangent vector in terms of :
Let  be the canonical -form on .
Its  value on the vector

equals to :
- _i=2,...,N  Tr _i _i^-1  _i,
where the point  in the moduli space of vector bundles
is given by the vector bundle , corresponding to the set of matrices
; the covector   corresponds to
 given by formula ().
The matrices  considered as a tangent vector
to the   at the point
 are defined by the condition
that the projection of such a vector onto the space of vector
bundles corresponding to the map 
coincides with , where 
is the canonical projection from the cotangent bundle to the moduli
space to the moduli space itself.
 


Proof.  The most simple way to prove this proposition
consists in calculating the
pullback of  on  to the space
 Let us denote by  the map
 which is the composition of the
factorization map and the identification  Due to the invariance of the
-form  it is sufficient to consider its pullback.  By definition
the value of the "pullbacked" -form on a vector  is
 Let us take the vector field
 and the deformation  Further we find 
satisfying the equations:
 
and chose some  such that  There
is an ambiguity in equation (), for every  one
can
find . In fact the choice of  does not matter: 
constructed with different  lie in the same class
in  (recall that describing  in
proposition  we
have factorized the space of matrix polynomials 
by constant matrices). This map is
really the differential of  because the tangent vector 
constructed as said defines the same deformation of  due to proposition
() as the expression (). Now
 where 
is constructed from  due to the identification 
In virtue of  Serre's pairing



On the other hand the canonical -form on  can be
calculated on the vector 





Curves with many cusps 

According to section ,
consider the curve  which is a
 curve with  cusps.
Recall that the affine part of  is given by
,
the bundle  corresponds to the module which over the affine
part is described as 
.
In section  we have considered the case of one cusp,
but everything can be obviously generalized to the case of many cusps.
So the
sections of  can be described as:
(z)= _i (_i (z-P_i)^2  + [_i,_i]  z-P_i 
)
where the matrices  satisfy
.


Claim: 
The canonical -form on the cotangent bundle to the
 moduli space of vector bundles on the curve 
in the coordinates  can be written as follows:
 _i=1,...,N   Tr _i d _i
 
One should slightly correct this formulation as was done in the previous subsection,
which can be done along the same lines; so, we omit all details.

Hitchin system 
Let us summarize the results obtained up to now.

The Hitchin system on a curve  which is the result of gluing
 distinct points  on  is the system with phase space
obtained by
hamiltonian reduction from the space of matrices 
where  are invertible
with the symplectic form 
where  acts by conjugation.
The Lax operator is given by:



 
Its hamiltonians can be obtained by expanding 
under the basis of holomorphic differentials.
We will give the direct  proof of their commutativity on the nonreduced
phase space
in the more general case in our
next paper, so here we omit the details.

Analogously, the Hitchin system on the curve with many cusps
can be described according to:
The Hitchin system on a curve  which is the curve 
with  cusps at distinct points 
 is the system with phase space obtained by
hamiltonian reduction from the space of matrices ,
with the symplectic form 
where  acts by conjugation.
The Lax operator is given by:




 

Trigonometric and rational Calogero-Moser systems 

Node 
As was shown in section  the dualizing sheaf in this case has
one global section 
 Consider the moduli space  of holomorphic
bundles  of rank  on  with a fixed
trivialization at the point  It means that

  We restrict to the principal cell of this
moduli space which corresponds to the space of equivalence classes
of matrices  with different eigenvalues. The cotangent
space is the space of holomorphic sections of 
 Such sections are
matrix-valued functions of  of the form 

such that
 
This function is parameterized by ,
the eigenvalues  of the matrix  (all calculations are
in the diagonal base for this matrix) and the diagonal elements of
the matrix  All other quantities can be
expressed in these terms.

We now investigate the symplectic structure. The moduli space is
parameterized by the matrix  and the matrix  which fixes
the trivialization at the point  The
variables  define the cotangent vector.
 The canonical symplectic form on the cotangent bundle
 can be represented as
 

     It is a slightly incorrect formulation:
 we mean that
the canonical symplectic form on the cotangent bundle
  can be obtained from that form
after the reduction by conjugation (see section  for
the precise formulation).


Proof.  The canonical symplectic form  on the
cotangent bundle  to the manifold  is defined
as follows: the point of the cotangent bundle is the pair 
where  and  We
start by defining the -form  on the cotangent bundle
by the formula
 
 where

  is the projection  and
 is its differential. On the cotangent bundle to
 with coordinates  and with the
corresponding coordinates  on the cotangent space
this form reads  The canonical symplectic
form on the cotangent bundle is  We have to
prove that the form 
 is the canonical -form.

Let us describe explicitly the deformation of the vector bundle 
defined by an element 
 The finite form of this element acts on the
vector bundle data as follows: 

 The infinitesimal form of these
deformations 
 and 
 define vector fields  on the moduli
space and they can be lifted canonically to the vector fields on
the total space of the cotangent bundle. We call this lifting

and evidently  Another type of canonical vector
fields on the total space of the cotangent bundle is the vertical
vector fields . They act only on the coordinates on
the space of sections  and  So we
have to verify that  and
 The first is trivial because
 and  As for the second
condition, one has:





 where we have used the paring
() and the relation 


To obtain the Calogero-Moser system one needs to perform an additional
hamiltonian reduction.
The form () is invariant by the -group
action  The moment map of this action is 
 We fix it to be diagonal and factorize the level manifold by
the stabilizer which is -dimensional. This procedure subtracts
 degrees of freedom, corresponding to the auxiliary
variable  Finally the reduced nonsingular manifold is
 with a canonical nonsingular structure and
the coadjoint orbits of  generically of rank .
This can be
expressed in terms of Poisson brackets as follows:
 
This expression for the symplectic form can be interpreted
 within
a general approach in terms of coordinates on the nonreduced phase space of
connections. For the constant connection  it is proportional to 
and () gives us 
 which is equal to the
sum of the residues with  the  appropriate signs, i.e. 
 


Let us proceed with the construction of integrals. The general scheme gives
the quantities  or more precisely all non
trivial negative coefficients of the Laurent expansion of this
expression at the poles. They are in involution by
construction and  by the fact that our symplectic form is obtained
from the canonical one on the cotangent bundle by hamiltonian
reduction. The trace of  is a rational function of 
the coefficients of which are linear functions of 
and   A straightforward calculation shows
 that:
 
 
The difference  is equal to the second Casimir element of
, i.e.  Notice that
 is the Hamiltonian of the trigonometric Calogero-Moser
system with spin.

Cusp 
As in the nodal case we consider the principal cell of the moduli
space which is parameterized by diagonal matrices  and
introduce the moduli space with fixed trivialization  at the
point  The section of 
 in this case can be
represented by 
 subject to the conditions
 
The coordinates on the phase
space are -the diagonal elements of the matrix , the variables
 which are the diagonal elements of the matrix ,
the nondiagonal elements of the matrix  which we denote by
 and the matrix elements of  Then solving
the conditions
() one obtains
 The infinitesimal
action of the element 
 is the following

 The paring () realizing Serre's duality
in this case
specializes to the form

 where we
used (). Substituting the explicit form of the action and
using the arguments from the previous paragraph we obtain:
 The canonical symplectic form on the cotangent bundle
 can be represented by
 
   see remark .

As in the previous paragraph we continue by the Hamiltonian
reduction on the variable  and obtain the symplectic variety
corresponding to the brackets (). The coefficients of the
function  are linear functions of the expressions
 The first is the
Hamiltonian of the rational Calogero-Moser system with spin
 
 
Let us note that  is the second Casimir element for the matrix
 and 


Curves with two cusps 
For smooth curves of genus 2 the moduli space of -bundles
has been identified in with .
In the papers the Hitchin Hamiltonians
have been written explicitly as functions on .
In our paper we consider singular curves of genus 2
(we consider the example of a rational curve
with only two cusps).
We will describe below the analog of the Narasimhan-Ramanan
parameterization of  bundles on such a curve
and we will write down the Hitchin hamiltonians.

Construction 
In this section we examine the moduli space of  holomorphic
bundles on the curve , defined by the equation
 of algebraic genus  with two
singularities which can be realized by contracting all
cycles on a genus two Riemann surface. On the normalization
which is the rational curve  obtained
by the following blowup:  the inverse image of
the structure sheaf can be realized as the subsheaf
 
The holomorphic bundles  on
 are parameterized by the pairs of matrices 
with zero trace up to common conjugation and can be described in
terms of their section sheaf as follows:
 
For constructing the cotangent bundle 
to the moduli space of holomorphic bundles  we again exploit
the Kodaira-Spenser correspondence.

Using the same arguments as in previous paragraphs we choose the
realization of the canonical bundle on our singular curve
  to be
 on
the normalization. The typical section of
 in  this case is the matrix-valued
function 

 subject to the
relations:
 

By analogy with the previous section we obtain the following:
 The canonical symplectic form on the cotangent bundle
of  bundles on  can be represented in the form:
 
   see remark .

As mentioned previously the open subset in the space of holomorphic 
bundles in consideration is the space of equivalence classes of
pairs of -matrices  up to common conjugation.
The natural coordinates on this space are the invariant functions


Some technical preliminaries are convenient at this point.
Due to the conditions () we have 
 

Using the fact that the Killing form on  is not degenerate
we conclude that for common  the matrices 
are linear combinations of them:
 
Also notice that  It comes from

Finally we introduce new coordinates:

In these coordinates the linear condition () takes  a more convenient
form

 

  The conjugated variables to  subject to
the symplectic form () are   such that

Proof.  We proceed by comparing the corresponding one-forms
 and 
 The infinitesimal deformation is defined as follows:

 We have to verify
that  where  is
some lifting of the vector field on  to the vector
field on  such that 



 where we have used ().



 

 Due to the relations () one obtains
 which
shows that  The fact
that these -forms coincide on the vertical vector fields is
trivial and this ends the demonstration of the lemma 

Hitchin Hamiltonians 
To obtain the Hamiltonians we use the natural mapping



 where the first arrow is the diagonal,
the second is
given by the multiplication in  The composition of these mappings
induces the mapping on cohomologies
 
Any choice of global sections in  gives us a set of
functions on our phase space.

We focus our attention on the
quadratic Hamiltonians which are defined for 
Due to the Riemann-Roch theorem
 and  We can take as a basis of
global sections of  the following
 Their
tensor quadratic monomials
 
form a basis in the space
of global sections for 
Now consider the Higgs field



We calculate the image of ()




Decomposing  on the basis () we obtain the coefficients:




 which are the
functions on the original phase space.
The quantities  are in involution, so one obtains an integrable system. 
The proof is straightforward.
Here we have a
one-parameter family of a priori non-equivalent integrable systems on
. However the identification of this family with
the Neumann model remains unclear. 


Degenerated Narasimhan-Ramanan parameterization 
Here we recall the classical construction fromwhich identifies the moduli space of the stable bundle on a regular
curve  of genus  with 

With the bundle  one associates  such
that for any line bundles  the dimension of
 equals  Due to the
divisor  lies in the linear system  and this
correspondence is an isomorphism.  is given by the equation

 The coefficients  are projective coordinates
on the moduli space.


The degenerate case shares similar considerations.
Let us take
the -bundle  given by the pair of matrices  on
 and the linear bundle  of degree  given
by the pair of complex numbers  Their tensor product
 is the  and  holomorphic
bundle. At the singular points this bundle is characterized by the
pair of matrices  We
have to calculate the dimension of  To
describe the space of global sections we use the following covering
 and
-small neighborhood of  The
fact that the bundle  is of degree  means that the
transition function associated to this covering can be chosen in
the scalar form  which is invertible in  So,
the global sections of  are linear vector functions  on
 such that 
. Notice that these holomorphic vector functions can be
continued to the chart  because they are linear and  is
regular at 

We rewrite linear defining conditions () using that the
section  is linear, i.e.  as follows:

 The consistency condition
for this linear system is 



A straightforward calculation gives the following expression for
the determinant:



 
In terms of the variables  we rewrite () as:
 
Now we interpret the functions 


 as the basis of -functions of second
  order for our singular curve and the expressions
  
as affine analogs of Narasimhan-Ramanan parameters.


Conclusion  We have shown that the invariant description of
Hitchin system on singular curves is consistent and
provides an explicit
parameterization in all considered cases. However, the problem of constructing
nonreduced coordinates remains tricky. We outline below
 several principal directions in which to continue the study of
 Hitchin system:
 
  Explicit parameterization.  Even in nonsingular cases
there are
some manners to explicitly parameterize the moduli space of (semi-)stable
holomorphic bundles. The Hecke-Turin parameterization is one of the most
universal and the problem here is to reexpress the explicit formulas
obtained above
for the Hamiltonians in terms of the Hecke-Turin parameters
(see for the case of nonsingular curves).
For singular curves it will be done in.
A related question is the
construction of separated variables and the understanding of its algebraic
nature.
  General description of Hitchin system on singular curves.  The
considered examples show the homogeneity of the analysis in such cases as
cusp and node singularities. The subject of the subsequent paper is the
universal treatment of a wide class of singular curves.
 Compactification of moduli space of vector bundles on singular
curves.  For the curves considered in this paper (curves with cusps and
nodes) the vector bundles can be described very explicitly - so one hopes
that one can explicitly describe the compactification of the  moduli space of vector
bundles.  The moduli space of linear bundles on  a singular curve
 must be
compactified by torsion free sheaves. So for the case of vector bundles
it is most  likely that it must be compactified by some
"semistable torsion-free sheaves".
  Lax Pair Representation.  All integrable
systems  have a Lax pair representation. It is not unique and for almost all
known integrable systems the Lax
representation arises naturally, as, for example, the auxiliary linear
problem for nonlinear PDE's.
It is important to obtain a Lax pair representation for our system and
to understand its intrinsic meaning.

(The Lax representation of Calogero-Moser system was discussed in the framework
of Hitchin systems in).
  Classical Solutions.  There is a general prescription
to obtain "action-angle" variables for Hitchin system
- they are related to the Jacobians of spectral curves.
Another way to solve the classical system is the so-called
projection method which can be specially effective in our description.
It would be interesting to
compare these methods and to obtain explicit solutions of  the classical
equations of motion.
Relation to hierarchies of isomonodromic
deformations and to the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov-Bernard equations. 
It is known (see for example) that  by changing the complex structure
on  a curve one goes from a Hitchin
system to  hierarchies of isomonodromic deformations and from a
quantum Hitchin system to the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov-Bernard equations.
It would be tempting to consider the movement of double points and cusps
and to obtain such equations explicitly in our case.
  Quantization. 
Another  interesting goal is
to find explicitly the quantum commuting hamiltonians
related to  the classical ones presented here.
One hopes to fully explore the Hitchin system: to find the
wave-functions, the spectrum,  the statistical sum,  the correlators, to explore
the so-called duality for Hitchin system.
Also it would be interesting to  explore  the properties of wave-functions:
their integral representations, asymptotics, different relations
among them and so on.
The quantization of Hitchin
system goes back to and was discussed later
for some particular
cases in.  The rather general approach of
 provides
the quantization of  an analog of the Hitchin system, namely a system over the
space of rational matrices (the Beauville system),
in terms of separated variables.
The quantization of the Hitchin and related Beauville-Mukai
systems was discussed recently in.
Another approach  to quantization
is built on the notion of quantum R-matrix and its generalization
  (let us note that the classical r-matrices
for the Hitchin system were found in).
It would be very interesting to understand the analogs of all  these
constructions for Hitchin systems on singular curves.

  Separation of variables and geometric Langlands correspondence. 
One of the most interesting goals is to work out explicitly the separation
of variables () for the integrable systems
considered in our paper and to understand its
relation to the geometric Langlands correspondence ().
It seems that the integrable systems considered here are quite simple and
explicit so one can try to explicitly understand some complicated
constructions of in these cases and to shed some light on the
miracle of the Langlands correspondence.
One  must also note that the curves considered in this paper
have been considered in for the
construction of ramified geometric class field theories;
one can hope that these singular curves  will play  an analogous role
for the ramified version of the geometric Langlands correspondence.





 50 

N. Hitchin, Stable bundles and integrable systems.  Duke
Math. Journal 1987 V 54  N1  91-114.

N. Nekrasov, Holomorphic bundles and many-body systems. 
PUPT-1534, Comm. Math. Phys.,180  (1996) 587-604;
hep-th/9503157.

B. Enriquez, V. Rubtsov, Hitchin systems, higher Gaudin
operators and -matrices.  Math. Res. Lett. 3  (1996)
343-357; alg-geom/9503010.

 E. Markman,
 Spectral curves and integrable systems.  Composito Math. 93:225-290,1994

 A. Beilinson, V. Drinfeld,
 Quantization of Hitchin Integrable System and Hecke Eigensheaves.  preprint

 B. Feigin, E. Frenkel, N. Reshetikhin,
 Gaudin Model, Bethe Ansatz and Critical Level.  Commun.Math.Phys. 166 (1994) 27-62
e-print: hep-th/9402022

 E. Frenkel,
 Affine Algebras, Langlands Duality and Bethe Ansatz.  e-print: q-alg/9506003

 A. Levin, M. Olshanetsky,
 Painleve  - Calogero correpondence.  e-print alg-geom/9706010

I. Krichever, Nonlinear equations and elliptic curves. 
Modern problems in mathematics, Itogi nauki i tekhniki, VINITI AN
USSR 23  (1983).

 D. Talalaev
The elliptic Gaudin system with spin.  Theor.Math.Phys. 130 
(2002) 361-374

 P. Saksida,
 Nahm's equations and generalizations of Neumann system. 
Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., III. Ser. 78, No.3, 701-720 (1999).

 A. Gorsky, N. Nekrasov, V. Rubtsov,
 Hilbert Schemes, Separated Variables, and D-Branes.  e-print: hep-th/9901089

R. Donagi, E. Witten, Supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory and
integrable systems,  Nucl. Phys. B  460 (1996) 299-334.


B. Enriquez, V. Rubtsov, Hecke-Tyurin parametrization
of the Hitchin and KZB systems.  e-print: math.AG/9911087

 M.S. Narasimhan, S. Ramanan, Moduli of vector
bundles on a compact Riemann surface.  Ann. of Math. 89 
(1969), pp. 19-51.

 J.P. Serre,
Algebraic groups and class fields.  Transl. of the French edition. (English)
Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 117. New York etc.: Springer-Verlag. ix,  p.
207.

 R. Hartshorne,
Algebraic geometry.  Corr. 3rd printing. (English)
Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 52. New York-Heidelberg-Berlin:
Springer- Verlag. XVI,  p. 496.

 J. Harris, I.  Morrison,
Moduli of curves.  (English)
Graduate Texts in Mathematics. 187. New York, NY: Springer. xiii, 366 p.


 A. Beauville,
Jacobiennes des courbes spectrales et systemes hamiltoniens
completement integrables. 
Acta Math. 164, No.3/4, 211-235 (1990).

 A. Chervov, D. Talalaev,
Hitchin systems and singular curves II. Gluing subshemes  to appear

D. Osipov,  Krichever correspondence for algebraic varieties. 
e-print: math.AG/0003188

 M.S. Narasimhan, S. Ramanan,  linear
systems on Abelian varieties.  in Vector Bundles on algebraic
varieties, Oxford Univ. Press, 1987, pp. 415-427.


B. van Geemen, E. Previato, On the Hitchin System.  Duke
Math. J. 85  (1996) 659-684.

K. Gawedzki, P. Tran-Ngoc-Bich, Hitchin Systems at
Low Genera.  J.Math.Phys. 41  (2000) 4695-4712.


 A. Chervov, A. Samohin, D. Talalaev,
Hecke-Tyurin parametrization of vector bundles on singular curves  to
appear

 J.C. Hurtubise, E. Markman,
 Calogero-Moser systems and Hitchin systems.  Commun.Math.Phys. 223 (2001)
533-552; e-print math.AG/9912161

 V. Fock, A. Gorsky, N. Nekrasov, V. Rubtsov,
 Duality in Integrable Systems and Gauge Theories.  e-print: hep-th/9906235

 A. Gorsky, V. Rubtsov,
 Dualities in integrable systems: geometrical aspects.  e-print: hep-th/0103004

 O. Babelon, M. Talon, Riemann surfaces, separation of
variables and classical and quantum integrability.  hep-th/0209071.

 B. Enriquez, V. Rubtsov,
 Commuting families in skew fields and quantization of Beauville's fibration. 
e-print math.AG/0112276

 B. Enriquez, V. Rubtsov,
 Quantizations of Hitchin and Beauville-Mukai integrable systems. 
e-print math.AG/0209294


 J. Avan, O. Babelon, E. Billey, The Gervais-Neveu-Felder
equation and the quantum Calogero-Moser systems.  Comm. Math. Phys. 178 
(1996), 281-299.

 V. Dolgushev, R-Matrix Structure of Hitchin System in Tyurin Parameterization. 
e-print: math.AG/0209145

 E. Sklyanin, Separation of variables.  Prog. Theor. Phys.
(suppl.), 185  (1995) p.35.

 B. Enriquez, B. Feigin, V. Rubtsov,
 Separation of variables for Gaudin-Calogero systems.  e-print: q-alg/9605030





