







-1cm
16cm
22cm
0pt
-5mm


 
	YITP-03-11 

	hep-th/0303240



 
Unitary-Matrix Integration on 2D Yang-Mills Action 


Yoshinobu H ABARA (e-mail: habara@yukawa.kyoto-u.ac.jp) 


Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics, 

Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan 



 
Using the idea of Itzykson-Zuber integral, unitary-matrix integration of 2D Yang-Mills action is presented. The uniqueness of the solution of heat equation enables us to integrate out the unitary-matrix parts of hermite matrices and to obtain the expression of integration over vectors, also in this case. 




Introduction 

In 1980, C. Itzykson and J.-B. Zuber presented the method of integration over angular variables on a simplest model coupling two hermite matrices . Here, the angular variable means the unitary matrix which diagonalizes physical quantitiy, i.e.  hermite matrix. Their work had a great impact and enabled developments especially on the theories of random matrix and  gravity (  etc.). While, until then, there was Creutz's unitary-matrix integration  well known in lattice gauge theory which integrate unitary matrices order by order in high temperature expansion, Itzykson-Zuber integral is epoch-making in the sense that they obtained the expression only using the eigenvalues of hermite matrices, after exactly integrating out angular variables, to all orders of exponential. In practice, since it is too complicated to integrate in usual ways, they evaluate the integral with the partial differential equation known as heat equation whose uniqueness of its solution is completely understood. They showed that the expression after integration is equivalent to that before integration using the uniqueness of the solution. After the unitary-matrix integration, the number of variables is reduced to , i.e. vector, from  matrix, and therefore, the analyses such as  planar limit becomes very easy.

In this paper, using their idea, we present a similar expression after integrating out unitary matrices on 2-dimensional Yang-Mills action with intent to prepare to apply this, in future, to 10-dimensional Yang-Mills theory, i.e. IIB Matrix Model  which is known to be convergent . On our model, if we introduce an external field as  hermite matrix, the same heat equation as Itzykson-Zuber integral is also found to be satisfied, and therefore, we can evaluate our integral on the basis of the uniqueness of its solution. However, unlike Itzykson-Zuber integral, since a number of coefficients which cannot be determined only from the uniqueness remain, we derive them from the structure of the commutator characteristic of Yang-Mills action. As a result, in case  is even, after integrating out angular variables, we find that the partition function of 2-dimensional Yang-Mills action can be expressed in terms of the remaining eivenvalues.


Unitary-Matrix Integration of 2D Yang-Mills Action 

The integral we investigate is the Yang-Mills action in 2 "space-time" dimensions 

 

which exists in the "external field" . Here,  and  are  hermitian matrices, and  is also hermitian.  (and ) is the measure 

 

which is invariant under the adjoint operation of  matrices 

* 

This measure can be written in the diagonalized form as follows: 

 

where  is diagonalized by unitary matrix  such as , and  is the normalized  Haar measure, .  is the Vandermonde determinant 

 

As we can check easily, the Itzykson-Zuber integral , 

 

obeys the following partial differenial equation, 

 

Essentially, this equation is the heat equation, and has an unique solution (5) under the boundary condition .

Similarly, the integral (1) satisfies the same equation 

 

and must have an unique solution under the boundary condition . After integrating over  matrices, we expect that (1) becomes the integral which only contains the integration over two eigenvalues of hermite matrices  and . Then, we suppose the integral (1) to become like the following form: 

 

Here, the coefficients  and  are independent of . Since this integral must obey the partial differential equation 

 

 is determined from : 

 

Therefore, it is sufficient we obtain , and, from the equation 

 

where  only depends on , the integral (1) becomes 

 

owing to the uniqueness of the solution of (7). Here,  is the undetermined function of  and . Furthermore, though  is exactly the eigenvalue of hermite matrix , we cannot certain that both  and  are those of  and , yet. However, with  in (12), the integral 

 

enables us to derive  and make sure that both  and  are the eigenvalues of  and , because all  and  stand on the same ground. And, also from the facts that  and , the index of  has cyclic symmetry:  and anti-symmetry under the interchange of its indices: . Therefore, we obtain 

 

The remaining task we must do is to determine the coefficients . Since to have the matrices  and  multiplied by the constants  is equivalent to make the eigenvalues  and  respectively,  are also independent of  and . Then, we can evaluate  through the structure peculiar to the commutator . We can easily check the integral 

 

follows from (14), and (15) satisfies the differential equation due to the characteristic structure of the commutator: 

 

therefore, from (16), we obtain the algebraic equation which  must obey: 

 

This is the identity about  and . By introducing , this reduces to the identity 

 

about  and , and we obtain conditions for : 

 

When , these equations become 

* 

then, except overall factor, all s are determined exactly as 

 

When  and ,  for all . When , from the symmetry of its indices,  has  independent components, but (20) are  equations at most. So, we cannot determine all  from (20) in general. However, as is obvious from (14), all  and  are contained in the same weight. That is, except the overall factor which can be absorbed into the integration measure, we can set . Then, for even , we can find the solution of (20): 

 

When  is odd, the solution such as  does not exist, because odd numbers of  cannot add up to zero. In fact, when , 

* 

the solution does not exist. This strange feature that we can use the expression (14) only for even  seems to come from the following characteristic of the commutator . The algebra of hermite matrices has the subalgebra which consists of real symmetric matrices , and, in this subalgebra, the commutator  always becomes the anti-symmetric matrix  which has even rank. That is, the commutator  essentially contains the structure of even rank which is hidden by larger  symmetry before the integration, and then, the integration of  matrices may reveal this structure. However, since we need the integral after taking the limit , it is sufficient for our purpose to have the result that  is even number.

Lastly, let us line up the result we obtain in this paper.

* 


Discussions 

Using the uniqueness of the solution for heat equation which plays a crucial role on Itzykson-Zuber integral, we derive an expression which contains eigenvalues of hermite matrices only as integration variables after integrationg out angular variables on 2-dimensional Yang-Mills action. Then, characteristic structures of the commutator are important and needed to determine coefficients in the expression. And the expression is possible only for even , reflecting the structures.

Our expression can be applied to various problems. For example, as the model of Itzykson-Zuber integral which can be solved exactly in  planar limit, we can evaluate similarly on 2-dimensional Yang-Mills model. And, as refered in introduction, by extending our result to larger dimensions, for example IIB Matrix Model, we may be able to treat the phenomenon of the phase-transition of space-time, i.e. inflation. However, when we extend to higher dimensions than three, we cannot probably use the uniqueness of the solution of heat equation, so must introduce other methods.

Furthermore, since Vandermonde determinant , which always emerges in case of integrating over hermite matrices, is the wave function of ground state of Calogero-Sutherland model describing the system of fermions on circle , and the orthogonal polynomials containing  satisfy particular recursion relations , we may be able to calculate exactly over remaining eigenvalues.

 Acknowledgements  

I would like to thank my colleagues for useful comments and discussions. Especially, I gratefully acknowledge S. Matsuura and S. Shinohara for helpful suggestions.


 nn 
 C. Itzykson and J.-B. Zuber, J. Math. Phys. 21(3), March (1980) 411
 M. L. Mehta, Boston, Academic Press, c1991
 M. Creutz, J. Math. Phys. 19(10), October 1978 2043
 N.Ishibashi, H.Kawai, Y.Kitazawa and A.Tsuchiya, hep-th/9612115, Nucl. Phys. B498 (1997) 467
 H.Aoki, S.Iso, H.Kawai, Y.Kitazawa, A.Tsuchiya and T.Tada, hep-th/9908038, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 134 (1999) 47
 P.Austing and J.F.Wheater, hep-th/0101071
 L. Lapointe and L. Vinet, q-alg/9509003, Commun. Math. Phys. 178 (1996) 425

