 


 
Plane Waves and Spacelike Infinity 
 Donald Marolf(E-mail: marolf@physics.syr.edu )  and
Simon F. Ross(E-mail: S.F.Ross@durham.ac.uk ) 

 Physics Department, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York
13244 USA

 Centre for Particle Theory, Department of Mathematical
Sciences, University of Durham, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE UK
 

February, 2003 

 In an earlier paper, we showed that the causal boundary of
any homogeneous plane wave satisfying the weak energy condition
consists of a single null line.  For conformally flat plane waves such
as the Penrose limit of , all spacelike curves that
reach infinity also end on this boundary and the completion is
Hausdorff.  However, the more generic case (including, e.g., the
Penrose limits of  and ) is more
complicated.  In one natural topology, not all spacelike curves have
limit points in the causal completion, indicating the need to
introduce additional points at 'spacelike infinity'-the endpoints of
spacelike curves. We classify the distinct ways in which spacelike
curves can approach infinity, finding a two -dimensional set of
distinct limits.  The dimensionality of the set of points at spacelike
infinity is not, however, fixed from this argument. In an alternative
topology, the causal completion is already compact, but the completion
is non-Hausdorff.    
Causal structure, conformal boundary, plane waves  
SUGP-03/3-2, DCTP-03/11 



defn Definition 
thm Theorem 

Introduction 

The understanding of the asymptotic structure of spacetimes plays an
important role in many problems in both classical and quantum
gravity. In the past, attention was primarily concentrated on the
formulation of suitable notions of asymptotic flatness and the
exploration of their consequences. There has, however, recently been a
renewal of interest in the careful investigation of the asymptotic
structure of other solutions in the context of the holographic
description of string theory. In particular, the proposed duality
between string theory on a plane wave background and 
SYM  has made it important to understand the structure of these
backgrounds. 

A powerful technique for studying the asymptotic structure is to
construct a suitable completion of the spacetime, adjoining some ideal
points representing the asymptotic behaviour. An elegant method of
constructing such a completion based on the causal structure was
developed in. This technique was
applied to smooth homogeneous plane waves in, where it
was shown that the causal boundary, as defined in
, of any homogeneous plane wave
satisfying the positive energy condition is a single null line.  This
generalised a result previously obtained for the special case of the
maximally symmetric (attractive) plane wave in.

Consideration of the plane wave and other examples has exposed some
defects in the approach to defining the causal completion in terms of
a quotient adopted in . In , a
new definition of the causal completion  for a general
spacetime  in terms of IP-IF pairs was proposed, and two new
candidate topologies were introduced on this completion. Neither of
these topologies is completely satisfactory, but they represent a net
improvement on previous proposals. This new definition was applied to
the homogeneous plane waves in , and we found that it
reproduces the results previously announced in .

In this paper, we will extend our previous investigations of the
asymptotic structure, applying the topologies defined in to investigate curves that approach infinity along spacelike
directions. We will show that taking limits of past and future sets
along spacelike curves generically leads to complicated behavior. In
addition to learning more about the asymptotic structure of the plane
wave spacetime, we hope that the explicit application of the
topologies may help us to better understand the differences between the
two definitions advanced in .

In one of these topologies, known as , most spacelike
curves in these plane waves do not have limit points, even when we
attach the causal boundary to the spacetime. Hence, the causal
completion of the spacetime is non-compact. If we wanted to obtain a
truly compact completion of the spacetime, we would need to adjoin
some additional ideal points reachable only by spacelike curves. Such
points are said to constitute spacelike infinity.

This is in fact a familiar situation. In the conformal
compactification of Minkowski space, there is a single point  in
the boundary which is reachable only by spacelike curves (see
figure ). If we apply the causal completion technique to
Minkowski space, on the other hand, this point will not be a part of
, because no timelike curve reaches it. Hence, the causal
completion is non-compact, and if we want to recover the usual
conformal completion, we have to add in the point  'by hand'.


     
 
A conformal diagram of 1+1 Minkowski space indicating 
spacelike infinity ().   


The consideration of spacelike infinity shows that the asymptotic
structure is not the same for all plane waves.  By a detailed study of
general sequences that approach infinity we show below that the
homogeneous plane waves fall into three classes.
 
The maximally symmetric attractive homogeneous plane wave.  An
example is the BFHP plane wave which arises from a Penrose
limit of  and has been of much recent interest in
string theory, beginning with the work of BMN.

Homogeneous plane waves violating all positive energy
conditions.  These are unphysical.

All other homogeneous plane waves, including many
 of interest to
string theory, such as those arising from Penrose limits of 
.  Here the causal boundary matches that of
case 1, but using  spacelike infinity turns out to be
larger in the sense described below.

The first case is conformally flat and is readily analyzed by
conformal embedding inside a simple globally hyperbolic spacetime (in
practice, the Einstein static universe ).
In this context, it is clear from the results of
 that all spacelike curves end on the null line
which forms the causal boundary.  The same observations are readily
seen to be true in the causal completion, using either  or
the alternate topology  also introduced in. 

Case 2 may be discarded.  Thus, the real interest is in case 3.  This
third case contains all smooth homogeneous plane waves that fail to be
conformally flat.  As a result, the Weyl tensor does not vanish for
such spacetimes.  Furthermore, since they are homogeneous, the Weyl
tensor cannot vanish even asymptotically, and these spacetimes cannot
be conformally embedded into a compact region of a smooth
manifold,(We thank Gary Horowitz for this argument: The
infinite conformal rescaling would require the Weyl tensor of the
spacetime in which we embed to diverge.)  so the boundary of such
spacetimes cannot even in principle be addressed by the conformal
method of Penrose.

In this paper, we will show that unlike case 1, the causal completion
 in case 3 does not yet contain the limits of
all spacelike curves. That is, the causal completion for these more
general plane waves is non-compact. If we wish to construct a truly
compact completion such as arises from the process of conformal
embedding in case 1, we need to adjoin additional points at spacelike
infinity. We will classify the distinct ways in which spacelike curves
can approach infinity, finding that there is a two-dimensional set of
distinct limits. Unfortunately, this does not directly imply that we
should attach a two-dimensional spacelike boundary. The subtlety is
that distinct limits can arise either from their being different
points at spatial infinity, or from approaching the same point in
different ways. We will not therefore not be able to discuss the
construction of the extended completion in any generality.  It may be
difficult to give a satisfactory definition of such a completion in
the generic case, although we feel that it is clear that one should
exist in sufficiently restrictive circumstances; however, this may
require the use of more information than just the causal information
that our construction of  is based on. 

The discussion above holds for the primary topology 
introduced in; but also introduces an
alternate topology , in which more sequences
converge.  We discuss this topology briefly in section .  It
yields identical results for case 1, while the causal completion of
case 3 becomes compact.  On the other hand, in this case 
ceases to satisfy the Hausdorff () separation axiom. We therefore
regard the use of  as somewhat more satisfactory than
that of , since the failure of compactness has a
fairly simple physical interpretation in terms of spacelike infinity,
while we can associate no obvious physical significance with the
failure of Hausdorffness in . 

We begin in section  with a summary of useful results from
.  In section , we consider a specific
spacelike curve, and show that it has no limit point in the causal
completion . Thus, 
 is not compact.  In section , we study the
asymptotic behavior of arbitrary sequences (focusing on those along
spacelike curves); this data will be used to discuss the construction
of spacelike infinity, and to show that  is compact in the
alternate topology .  We then discuss going to
infinity along spacelike curves in terms of the causal structure of
the spacetime in section . Finally, we conclude with
some discussion in section .

Preliminaries 

The homogeneous plane waves 
are those solutions  
to theories incorporating Einstein-Hilbert gravity
for which the metric takes the form
 
in a global coordinate system  where each coordinate
ranges over .  We order the  so that 
. Such spacetimes satisfy the weak
energy condition when  is non-negative.
Thus, we include the case  (with no  directions) but require
.

It was shown in that the causal completion of
this spacetime has a null line of ideal points.  Let us call the
boundary points , where we have labeled these points with the
null coordinate  used above.  Here  takes values in the
extended real line , which includes the endpoints
 and has the topology of the closed interval .  To
understand the way that these so-called ideal points are attached, let
us recall from that a point  lies to the past
of  (in the sense that they can be connected by a timelike
curve) if and only if .  Similarly, 
 lies to the future of  if and only if 
, where  is the smallest value of .
Together with the points , these  constitute the
causal completion .

In our analysis below, we will also make use of the characterization
of the future (and past) light cones of interior points .
This is most simply displayed in terms of the future  of the
origin ().  From,  if
 and either  of the following two conditions hold:
 

We will find it useful below to have an explicit characterization of
when any point  lies to the past of an arbitrary point
.  This can be obtained from the light cone of the origin by using
the symmetries of the plane wave spacetime to translate the origin to
.  Two of the symmetries are simply translations in  and
.  However, the symmetries that change the values of  are
more subtle.  From e.g., a symmetry that moves 
 to  takes the form
 

As a result, we see that  lies to the past of  exactly
when  and either 

 
Similarly,  lies to the future of  exactly when 
and either
 
Luckily these rather cumbersome expressions will simplify immediately
to () and the corresponding past light cone in the limits 
considered below.

Non-compactness of  

We would like to show that the causal completion  of the
plane wave () is non-compact in the topology 
 introduced in . To do so, we need only show that
there is some infinite sequence of points in  which does not
have a limit point, as compactness implies the existence of a limit
point for every infinite sequence.

The topology  was introduced on 
by assuming that for an arbitrary set , the
sets  are closed; these sets represent suitable
closures of the chronological future and past of . For the
present application to homogeneous plane wave spacetimes, all we need
to know is that an ideal point  of the plane wave will lie in
 if and only if its future (past) is a subset of
, and that  is always contained in
.  This is a direct consequence of theorem 8 of
 and the observation that  is
causally continuous (see appendix).

Consider the set  consisting of the spacelike curve defined
by , , and  for . (Since we
only need to produce one counter-example to disprove compactness, we
have considered a particularly simple case. We will discuss the
behaviour of more general curves in the next section.) There
are discrete subsets of this curve which do not have any point of 
as a limit point in the topology of  (for example, 
). Since  is homeomorphic to its image in
, if such a subset of  has a limit point in
, it can only be an ideal point.

To exclude this possibility, let us consider the past and future of
this curve. By (), the past of  is
 
In particular, we see that  is a subset of
 when , as when 
 we can make the RHS of the inequality arbitrarily positive by
taking  large so that the quadratic term dominates. Similarly, the future of  is, from
(),
 
so  is a subset of  for 
. Thus, the ideal points which lie in  are
 for , while the ideal points which
lie in  are  for 
. Since we assume , there are no ideal points
which lie in .(Note that in
the maximally symmetric case, where , the ideal
point  will lie in this set; this is in fact the
limit point of this spacelike curve in this case.)  Hence, 
 is an
open set in the topology of  which contains all the ideal
points. Since , the
spacelike curve never enters this open set, so no subset of 
can have any of the ideal points as a limit point. Thus, there are
infinite discrete subsets of this  which have no point of
 as a limit point. 

Hence, if the homogeneous plane wave  satisfies any positive energy
condition and is not conformally flat,  is not compact.

Limits of spacelike curves for the plane waves 

We have seen that there are spacelike curves in a general plane wave
which do not have any point of  as an endpoint in the topology
. In this section, we will classify the different ways
in which a spacelike curve can go to infinity in terms of the causal
structure. We will apply this classification to show that 
is  compact in the topology . In the
subsequent section, we will discuss what this information tells us
about the points at spacelike infinity we need to add if we want to
form a compact set  in the topology . 

Limiting pasts and futures 

We want to study the asymptotic behaviour of general sequences of
points in terms of the causal structure.  One technical complication
arises from the fact that some spacelike curves never leave a compact
region of the spacetime.  Thus, the past and future sets along a
generic curve will not converge.  Recall, however, that our goal is to
add boundary points at spacelike infinity to construct a compact space
.  This requires every sequence of
points  to have a limit point in , but
not that every sequence converge.  Note that we need only construct a
limit point for each sequence which fails to have one in  itself.
It turns out to be simplest to directly consider such sequences
instead of spacelike curves per se.

Since our approach to the construction of the completion  was
based on the causal structure, defining points of  by
identifying the spacetime regions to their past and future, it seems
natural to attempt to classify the limits by associating some past and
future sets with them. For limits where we go to infinity along a
timelike curve, there is a very straightforward identification; the
past of the endpoint is naturally identified with the past of the
whole curve. This is how the ideal points were defined
in : we defined an ideal point by saying 
 for any curve  for which  should provide
a past endpoint, and similarly  for any
 for which it provides a future endpoint.  The past and
future sets  associated with points on the causal
boundary are thus constructed directly from knowledge of the causal
relations in the original spacetime . The ideal point is then
defined in terms of its future and past; that is, formally as a pair
 of past- and future-sets .

Spacelike curves are more subtle; the past and future of an endpoint
is clearly not the past or future of a curve. We would nonetheless
like to associate limiting past and future sets with sequences which
go to infinity along spacelike curves; in our approach, this seems a
natural way to label distinct limits. In , a more general
notion of the limit of a sequence of past and/or future sets was
defined(The definition given here differs slightly from that of, but
the two are equivalent for strongly causal spacetimes  such as the 
homogeneous plane waves.)  (not necessarily timelike or spacelike). We can use this to
define the limiting past or future for some sequence 
. We say that the past sets  converge to
the open past set  if and only if
 
Given , there exists an integer
 such that  for all , and
Given , there exists
an integer  such that,  for all ,
and similarly for open future sets  converging to some
future set .   Here  denotes the closure in .

If there is a point  such that 
, then theorem 8 of  guarantees that the sequence
 will have  as a limit point in the topology 
. It seems reasonable to regard the sequence  as having
sensible limiting behaviour in a causal sense under more relaxed
conditions, however. We will therefore say that a sequence 
 converges in  when both limits  exist.
Similarly, we will say that a sequence  has a limit point in
 when it has a convergent subsequence.  This gives us some
information about the topology and point-set structure of :
we are requiring that  associate some endpoint with any
sequence such that the sets  exist.

 
 
A spacetime for which the sets  for  in the
interior of  do not approach .  
We now need to address the physical interpretation of the limiting
past and future sets defined above. Note first that in a general
spacetime, the past or future of the endpoint need not be simply
related to these limiting past and future sets. See figure
 for an example. The assumption that the past (future) of
an endpoint is a limit of pasts (futures) of points in the interior of
a curve is known as causal continuity. Thus, one can
generally determine the past- and future-sets associated with an
endpoint of a spacelike curve from the data intrinsic to the curve
only if the spacetime is causally continuous. Thus, although we
require that any sequence  such that  exist has an
endpoint in , we do not want to assume that the 
 determine the past and future of this endpoint.

Happily, it is straightforward to show (see appendix) that the
planewave spacetime  equipped with the causal boundary of
 and the topology  is causally
continuous.(Note that  is also weakly distinguishing,
meaning that if  have identical futures
() and pasts ()
then they are the same point ().)  Thus, we can
conclude that if  are not  the past and future
of some point in , the sequence  will converge to no 
point of . Thus, we need to extend  to construct a
bigger completion  if there are sequences  such that
 exist, but are not the past and future of some point
in  (however, this will not tell us what  points we need
to add). We will therefore attempt to classify spacelike sequences for
which  exist.

Let us now apply this general approach to the plane waves. Our
approach will be to identify a particular class  of
sequences which converge, such that an arbitrary sequence is
guaranteed to contain a subsequence in .

It is most transparent to present  in several stages.
First, given a sequence of points , we would like
to have some control over the behavior of the coordinate sequences
.  Thus, we first
restrict to the class  defined as follows:
 
 if and only if  and 
each corresponding sequence of coordinates 

converges in the extended real line 
Since the extended real line has the topology of  and in
particular is compact, any sequence of points in  contains a
subsequence in .  Our preferred class of sequences 
 will be a subclass of .

We present  in terms of three classes, , 
,  defined as follows:

 
 if and only if  
has a limit point in .
Thus,  dispenses with the cases already understood.

 
 if and only if 
 and
each corresponding sequence of ratios 
, 
converges to a finite real number:
, 
.
This is in some sense the generic class of sequences, which will
determine the structure of spacelike infinity.

 
 if and only if 
,
each corresponding sequence of ratios of pairs of
transverse coordinates
, , ,
,
converges in the extended real line ,
and at least one of the sequences
, 
 diverges to .
This class contains the 'exceptional' sequences which for technical
reasons cannot be analyzed along with those in .  However,
the study of sequences in  has the same flavor and
yields the same set of limit points.  Again, the compactness of the
extended real line guarantees that any sequence in  has a
subsequence in , , or .

Finally, it is useful to further subdivide 
into two parts  based on the behavior of
:

 
 if and only if
 and  for all .
 
 if and only if
 and  for all .
Since any sequence  must contain infinitely
many points for which , it contains a subsequence which
lies in .  Thus we may take  to be 
.
Note that the long inequalities (,) differ
only by the direction of the inequalities.  Though we will consider
the two classes  separately, their treatment is
identical as they are simply related by time reversal.

Convergence of sequences in  

Let us now consider a sequence .
We will show that each such sequence is convergent and that
the sets  take the form
 
where .
The parameter  is the smaller of 
and the smallest positive solution of
 
Similarly,  is the smaller if  and
the smallest positive solution of
 

To derive this result, notice that since  but 
, at least one of the coordinate sequences
 must approach .  If this is
, then it is clear that for any  we
have, for large enough , .  Thus,
 is in the future of all  with sufficiently large .
Since the plane waves contain no closed causal curves, it also follows
that  is not in the past of such .  Thus  converges
and  in agreement with
the statement above.  Similarly, if , we
have .

Let us now consider the case  with finite
.  Here one of the other coordinates () must
diverge.  Since the  are finite and  we
must have .  Thus, for large enough ,
 is positive and we may divide the
inequality () by  to yield
 
Note that since some coordinate must diverge, the suppressed
terms are subleading and can be neglected for large .
Taking the limit , we thus arrive at the result
() with  defined by ().

On the other hand, the future condition () differs from
() only by the direction of the inequalities while the
definition () of  involves a single extra sign.  As
a result,  is given by () with 
defined by ().

This establishes the convergence of .  Sequences
in the class  behave in much the same way, with the only
difference being that  has the opposite sign.  Thus we find
that any sequence  is convergent and that the
limit again yields sets of the form () where  is the
smaller of  and the solution of
 
and  is the smaller of 
and the solution of
 

Limits of  

Let us now consider the class  of exceptional
sequences. As before, if  it is easy to
find the limit, so we focus on the case 
with finite .  Since all ratios of the form
, , ,
, converge in the extended real line
, we may identify the most rapidly growing
transverse coordinate, which we call .  Note that since at least
one of the ratios , 
diverges to ,  diverges more rapidly than .  Let
us therefore divide the inequalities () and
() by  and take the limit of large  to find that
 lies to the past of  for large  
when  and

 
Similarly,  lies to the future of  for large  exactly when
 and
 

Thus, in this case we again find that any 
converges and that  are given by (),
though this time  and this parameter
is the smaller of  and the smallest positive solution of
 

We have seen that for appropriate  we always
have
 
Note, however, that in general we will not have 
, so that these sets will not be the past and future of the
same point in .  This is seen explicitly in the example
considered in section .

We should note again that in the special case where 
and  (so that there are no  terms in ()),
no additional points are needed. This is because the left-hand side of
() changes sign under 
.  Since this transformation preserves the range
 of valid , and since () and
() agree on the left hand side and differ only by a sign
on the right, this transformation maps  to .  For
the (attractive) conformally invariant plane wave, we have identically
 and in this case the sequence 
 converges to the ideal point .  For such
plane waves, the space  is already compact without the
addition of further points at spacelike infinity.  This is exactly
what one would expect from the conformal diagram provided in
.

In the more general case, one might ask whether the ideal point 
 associated with the limiting future can ever
precede  the ideal point  associated
with the limiting past.  This would happen only if 
.  That this does not occur can be seen by adding
together () and ().  The result is:
 
Now, the cotangent function is monotonically decreasing on , 
and is antisymmetric about .  Suppose for a moment
that .  Then for any term
 to be negative or zero,
we must have .
Thus, 
.  In fact, the boundary value 
 is achieved only when  for .  
An identical argument can be made for sequences in 
.

Finally, note that both  lie in the range .
 Thus, 
.


 is compact in the alternate topology 
  

In addition to the topology  addressed thus far, an
alternate topology  was also introduced in
.  All that we need know about this topology is captured
in theorem 16 of, which states that if 
 for a sequence  and a
point  with , then
 converges to .  Similarly, if 
 for a sequence  and a point 
 with , then again 
 converges to .

As a result, we can read off the convergence of various classes of
sequences directly from the results of this section.  In fact, together with
the observation that  is bounded, equation
 tells us that each sequence in the class 
converges to at least one point in .  Thus,  is
already compact in the topology .  On the other
hand, we see that most of these sequences converge to two distinct
points  and ,
since in general .  Thus 
 is not Hausdorff.

Spacelike infinity 

In the last section, we saw that we could characterise different ways
of going to infinity along spacelike directions in terms of the
limiting past and future sets, using a definition of the limit of a
sequence of past or future sets introduced in . In the
topology , these spacelike sequences have no limit
points in . In defining a larger completion 
 by adding points at spacelike infinity by hand, we
need to ask how these limiting past and future sets are related to the
points we add.

First, we should stress that we can never interpret the limiting past
and future sets  defined in the previous section as
giving the past and future of some point at spacelike infinity. By
definition, there are no timelike curves which approach a point at
spacelike infinity from either future or past. Points at spacelike
infinity are therefore spacelike separated from all points in the
interior of the spacetime, and their pasts and futures in  are
correspondingly empty.

 
     
A spacetime for which spacelike curves approaching  give
nontrivial limiting past and future sets.    

Given that, it may seem surprising that a sequence of points which is
meant to be converging to a point at spacelike infinity can have
non-trivial limiting past or future-sets. However, this is just a
failure of causal continuity in .(Thus, we learn
that if we can define a compact  by adding points at
spacelike infinity, this  will not be causally
continuous. This does not contradict the result in the appendix, which
only concerns the previously-defined causal completion .)   As
explained previously in section , if a spacetime is not
causally continuous, there is no necessary connection between the
limiting past and future sets defined by some convergent sequence and
the past and future sets associated with the endpoint of that
sequence.  A simpler example where this feature is more readily
apparent is shown in figure .  In this example
, while 
. Nonetheless, the sequence  converges to the point
 at spacelike infinity, for which it is clear that 
, . Somehow in the plane wave this
'corner' phenomenon occurs for a continuum of such pairs 
 on the causal boundary.

Thus, we cannot interpret  as the past and future of
the endpoint we add. However, we would like to ask if we can interpret
them as labeling  the endpoints we need to add? In general, even
this fails to be true. To see this, consider two simple
-dimensional examples constructed from the example in
figure . First, let us consider an example where part
of the boundary of our  dimensional spacetime is constructed by
rotating the boundary in figure  about a vertical axis
through  (through , say). This portion of the boundary
then still contains a single point at spacelike infinity
. However, we now have a one-dimensional family of distinct
spacelike limits approaching this point, labeled by the limiting past
and future sets ,  which are the images of the
original  and  under rotation through an angle
. Hence, spacelike limits with different  can
approach the same point.

Next, consider an example where part of the boundary of our 
dimensional spacetime is constructed by rotating the boundary in
figure  about a vertical axis through 
(through , say). This now contains a one-dimensional family of
points at spacelike infinity . However, any spacelike
sequence approaching any one of these points will have 
, . Hence, spacelike limits with
the same  can approach the different points. 

Finally, a  dimensional example with the naive one-to-one
relationship between  and the points at spacelike
infinity can easily be constructed by taking the product of
figure  with a real line. In this case, we have
one-dimensional families both of  and . 

Thus, it seems reasonable to use the limiting past and future sets  associated
with a sequence  to determine if  should become
convergent in , but perhaps not to determine if different
sequences have the same or different endpoints. Unfortunately, no technology has been
developed to address this latter question within the causal approach.  


Discussion 

The investigation of the asymptotic structure of plane wave spacetimes
is interesting both because of its potential to teach us more about
the holographic relation between string theory and field theory, and
because it presents a challenging case which pushes
the causal boundary technology to its limits. In this paper, we have
shown that the causal completion constructed in  is
non-compact in the topology  introduced
in . Thus, to obtain a compact completion, we need to add
additional boundary points at spacelike infinity.

Understanding the limits in spacelike directions seems important, both
because it enables a closer comparison with the more familiar
conformal compactification technique, and because points at spacelike
separation can play an important role in the definition of a duality
between quantum theories. We have therefore investigated the
classification of different spacelike sequences in terms of the causal
structure-how the past and future sets behave as we go to infinity
along the sequence. We used this information to show that in the
alternate topology  of, the
resulting causal completion  is already compact; however, it
is also non-Hausdorff.

We have attempted to relate the classification of spacelike limits in
terms of the causal structure to some characterization of the points
at spacelike infinity that need to be added to the spacetime. However,
it is not clear to what extent this determines the precise set of points that should be added at spacelike infinity.  Thus, the determination of the appropriate points at spacelike
infinity for the general homogeneous plane waves would require further
work, and will probably involve additional technical choices such as
appeared in the definition of the topologies in .

It would be interesting to see if one can extend the causal structure
on  to a causal structure on the extended compact completion
, once one had a definition of that set.  In,
the chronology relation was defined by stating that  is to the
future of  if and only if 
.  This definition is naturally extended by saying that
points at spacelike infinity have no chronological relations, as they
are associated with empty past and future sets. Note that this implies
that if  contains more than one point at spacelike infinity,
it will fail to be weakly distinguishing in this natural chronology.
It is much less clear how one would extend the lightlike (causality)
relation. The example of the conformal compactification of Minkowski
space shows that there may be causality relations which involve points
at spacelike infinity, but it is not clear how these should be
reconstructed.  An answer to this question might also clarify precisely what set of points
should be added at spacelike infinity.

It would be very interesting to relate this discussion to the dual
field theory for string theory on these backgrounds. In particular, it
would be of interest to determine which of the two topologies used
here is most directly associated with properties of the dual gauge
theory.


DM would like to thank James B. Hartle, Gary Horowitz, and Rafael
Sorkin for useful discussions.  DM was supported in part by NSF grant
PHY00-98747 and by funds from Syracuse University. SFR was supported
by an EPSRC Advanced Fellowship.

Causal Continuity of  

In this appendix we show that  is causally
continuous and, furthermore, that the topology  on
 can be characterized by the property that a sequence 
 converges to  if and only if 
 and .  Note that here we
allow any sequence in , whereas the restriction 
 was imposed in the main text.  For  we define
 to be , where  is the
chronology defined on  in: 
if and only if .

The concept of causal continuity was introduced in for
manifolds, and in fact several equivalent definitions were given.
Since  is not a manifold, we have somewhat less structure
here.  Thus, it is no longer clear that the definitions inare equivalent.  We take one of these properties, inner and outer
continuity of , to define causal continuity in the present
context.

Recall that a function  which maps points in  to
subsets of  is called inner continuous  if, for any 
 and any compact set  there is an
open neighborhood  of  such that  for all
.  Similarly,  is outer continuous  if, for any 
 and any compact set 
, there is a neighborhood  of  such that 
 for all .  Here 
denotes the topological closure in .  

We now show the following results:

 
 is inner continuous with respect to  for any causal completion  of any strongly causal spacetime .
Proof:  Consider  and a compact set 
.  Let 
.  Recall that any  is open by Lemma 3 of
.  Thus  is open, and clearly  for
all .  Thus we need only show .

Now, 
is connected to each point of  by a timelike curve on which there exist
intermediate points . But since  is compact it must be contained
in  for a finite collection of such points . 
Since each such  can signal  via a timelike curve in , 
there in fact must be some  with  that they can all signal
as well.  This  will have , so 
. Thus  is inner continuous.


 
 is outer continuous with respect to  for the
causal completion  of a homogeneous plane wave satisfying the
positive energy condition.
Proof:   It is useful to first note that, for such , a
point  if any
only if , where  are defined in.  
Furthermore, these are the closures of the sets .
We also recall from that  implies
.

Now consider any  and any compact 
 and note that the boundary point 
lies in .  As a result, it does not
lie in .  Furthermore, note that there is a past-directed timelike
curve  through  from any point  to
.  Since , we have 
 from the definition of  in.  Thus, some points on  will lie in 
 and we may associate each  with some
.  Now, 
 so in fact ,
for a finite subcollection  since  is compact.

Recall that  and let 
.  The set  is open since
the collection  is finite.  Since 
, it is clear that .  Note that any 
 must have , else some  would
lie in  and  would lie in .  Thus  is outer continuous. 

 
For homogeneous plane wave spacetimes satisfying a positive energy
condition, a sequence
 converges to  in 
if and only if  and .
Proof:  Theorem 8 of shows that convergence of the
past and future sets  implies convergence in 
 when .  For homogeneous plane waves
satisfying a positive energy condition, the case where boundary points
appear in this sequence is easily handled by inspection.

For the converse, suppose that  converges to
 in .  Consider any 
and note that  is compact.  Then from theorem
, we see that  for sufficiently
large .  Similarly, consider any 
and note that  is compact.  Then from theorem
, we find that  for sufficiently
large .  

Thus, we may characterize the topology  by theorem
.


 99 


 D. Berenstein, J. M. Maldacena and H. Nastase,
"Strings in flat space and pp waves from N = 4 super Yang Mills,"
JHEP 0204 , 013 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0202021].


R. Geroch, E. H. Kronheimer, and R. Penrose, "Ideal points in
space-time," Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 327  (1972) 545. 


R. Budic and R. K. Sachs, "Causal boundaries for general relativistic
space-times," J. Math. Phys. 15  (1974) 1302. 


L. Szabados, "Causal boundary for strongly causal space-time,"
Class. Quant. Grav.  5  (1988) 121;


L. Szabados, "Causal boundary for strongly causal space-time II,"
  Class. Quant. Grav. 6  (1989) 77.


 D. Marolf and S. F. Ross, "A new recipe for causal completions", 
[arXiv:gr-qc/0303025].

 D. Berenstein and H. Nastase,
"On lightcone string field theory from super Yang-Mills and holography,"
arXiv:hep-th/0205048.


D. Marolf and S. F. Ross,
"Plane waves: To infinity and beyond!,"
arXiv:hep-th/0208197.


M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, C. Hull and G. Papadopoulos,
"A new maximally supersymmetric background of IIB superstring theory,"
JHEP 0201  (2002) 047
[arXiv:hep-th/0110242].


J. Kowalski-Glikman,
"Vacuum States In Supersymmetric Kaluza-Klein Theory,"
Phys. Lett. B 134  (1984) 194;

J. Figueroa-O'Farrill and G. Papadopoulos,
"Homogeneous fluxes, branes and a maximally supersymmetric solution
of  M-theory," 
JHEP 0108  (2001) 036
[arXiv:hep-th/0105308].


M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, C. Hull and G. Papadopoulos,
"Penrose limits and maximal supersymmetry,"
Class. Quant. Grav.  19  (2002) L87
[arXiv:hep-th/0201081].


M. Cvetic, H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
"Penrose limits, pp-waves and deformed M2-branes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0203082;

M. Cvetic, H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
"M-theory pp-waves, Penrose limits and supernumerary supersymmetries,"
arXiv:hep-th/0203229.


I. Bena and R. Roiban,
"Supergravity pp-wave solutions with 28 and 24 supercharges,"
arXiv:hep-th/0206195.


J. Michelson,
"A pp-wave with 26 supercharges,"
arXiv:hep-th/0206204.


R. Corrado, N. Halmagyi, K. D. Kennaway and N. P. Warner,
"Penrose limits of RG fixed points and pp-waves with background fluxes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0205314.


E. G. Gimon, L. A. Pando Zayas and J. Sonnenschein,
"Penrose limits and RG flows,"
arXiv:hep-th/0206033.


D. Brecher, C. V. Johnson, K. J. Lovis and R. C. Myers,
"Penrose limits, deformed pp-waves and the string duals of N = 1
large N  gauge theory," 
arXiv:hep-th/0206045.


R. Penrose, "Conformal treatment of infinity," in Relativity,
  Groups and Topology , ed. C. M. de Witt and B. de Witt, (1964,
Gordon  Breach, New York); ibid , "Zero rest-mass fields
including gravitation: asymptotic behaviour," Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A
284  (1965) 159.




  M. W. Brinkmann, "On Riemann spaces
conformal to Euclidean spaces," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 
9  (1923) 1, see section 21.5.

 H. Bondi, F.A.E. Pirani, and I. Robinson,
  "Gravitational waves in general relativity III: Exact plane
  waves," Proc. Roy.
Soc. Lond. A 251  (1959) 519.

 J. Hely, Compt. rend. 249  (1959) 1867.

 A. Peres,
"Some Gravitational Waves,"
Phys. Rev. Lett.  3 , 571 (1959)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205040].


 J. Ehlers and W. Kundt, "Exact Solutions of the gravitational
field equations" in Gravitation: An introduction to current
research , ed. by L. Witten  (Wiley, New York, 1962).

 D. Kramer, H. Stephani, E. Herlt, M. MacCallum, and
E. Schmutzer, Exact Solutions of Einstein's field equations 
(Cambridge, 1979).


 D. Marolf and L. A. Zayas, "On the singularity
structure and stability of plane waves," arXiv:hep-th/0210309.


 S.W. Hawking and R.K. Sachs, "Causally Continuous
Spacetimes," Commun. Math. Phys. 35  287 (1974).





