
Direct Calculation of the Critical Effective Potential 

H. Ballhausen 
physics@ballhausen.com 
Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University
Philosophenweg 16, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 

 
The critical effective potential is the nonperturbative part of the effective action
at a phase transition. It equals the scale invariant effective average potential and
can be calculated from the renormalization group flow of the effective average action.
In some cases this requires only the solution of an ordinary differential equation 
without actually simulating the renormalization group flow. Here the Ising model is 
examined beyond leading order and with full field dependent effective potential.

Introduction 

The effective potential in statistical physics and quantum field theory includes fluctuations
of all wavelenghts as opposed to the microscopic potential. It is therefore relevant for the
computation of macroscopic properties.

The usual way to access the effective potential is to start with the potential given by the 
microscopic theory and follow the renormalization group flow to the infrared. 
As the potential then depends on field variables and the scale, this requires solving a 
partial differential equation.

However, an especially interesting case is a second order phase transition where the correlation
length diverges. The system becomes therefore scale invariant and the renormalization group
flow ends up in a fix point, the effective critical potential. Its calculation requires only
the solution of an ordinary differential equation.

 

Effective average action 

The effective average action ( see e.g. and references therein )  interpolates between the microscopical or 
classical action  and the effective action . By construction it includes only fluctuations 
with momenta larger than  and this transition is described by an exact renormalization group flow equation:



Here  is the two point function and  is an arbitrary momentum cutoff with the properties  for ,
 for  and  for .

We want to consider a particular interesting and common model, the three dimensional Ising model. The  symmetry of 
this theory can be exploited for a lowest order derivative expansion of the effective average action:





in terms of the most general form of the nonperturbative effective average potential  and a field independent but 
scale dependent wave function renormalization .

When inserted into the flow equation for the effective average action this ansatz gives the flow of the effective average potential.




As the potential is only determined up to a constant, 
it is convenient to consider its first derivative instead. The corresponding flow equation is given by straightforward differentiation:
 


Switching to dimensionless quantities  and choosing a linear cutoff function  
the flow equation becomes explicitely scale invariant:





Here , ,  
and  denotes the anomalous dimension .

The latter one can either be taken self consistently from 



( where  denotes the running minimum (  ) and , 
 ) or from the quite accurate approximation



which will be used in this paper.

For comparison with literature we also use a sharp cutoff, where in leading order







Scaling solutions 

The scale invariance of some system at a second order phase transition manifests itself in a fix point
in the renormalization group flow of the dimensionless, scale invariant flow equations. We are thus 
interested in scaling solutions  such that



where



This can be rewritten canonically in terms of first order ordinary differential equations for  and :





Given initial values ,  at some point  the differential 
equations yield a local solution ,  in a vicinity around . 
The space of such solutions has dimension two, its elements being uniquely defined by 
, .

However, we are interested only in physical solutions which are continuations of the local
solutions to the whole positive real axis. In other words, we must find a point  
and initial values ,  such that  is a smooth 
function for all .

Such a search is nontrivial, though, even numerically. As soon as the space of local solutions
has a dimension larger than one, global solutions can be missed even if one is already close
to the correct initial values. Fortunately, by using the constraint of requiring a global 
solution we are able to eliminate one of the two integration constants:

If , this holds true especially for :



And hence 



In the analogous calculation for the sharp cutoff we find:



where ,  such that







Furthermore, we have additional constraints on : the physically interesting 
 has a single zero and is positive for large . Thus . On the 
other hand, the denominator  must be nonzero for all .
Therefore . Now the global solution can be found be varying only , 
in the range , until the above requirements are met. This can be done 
numerically efficiently.

For any initial  the solution  extends to some . For too small
 the flow diverges to positive infinity. On the other hand, for large initial 
values the flow crosses zero a second time. These two cases are separated by a critical 
initial value which leads to the physical solution we are interested in. The plot of 
 as a function of  is then sharply peaked around this critical value:

 
file=fig01.eps,width=8.5cm 
FIG. I:
 for the linear cutoff (a),
 (b) and the sharp cutoff (c). 

In this way we find:

 

In perfect agreement with

 


Effective scaling potentials 

We can now plot the solutions  for the above initial values:

 
file=fig02.eps,width=8.5cm 
FIG. II:
 for the linear cutoff (a),
 (b) and the sharp cutoff (c).
Compare plot (b) to fig. 2 in. 

Due to the numerically limited accuracy of the initial value and the integration we are able 
to track these solutions only up to  in case of the linear cutoff and 
 in case of the sharp cutoff.

The second quantity to be read off from the critical effective potential is its zero
 where :

 

The value =0.03060... is in good agreement with
the fix point value =0.03053... from the dynamical method. 

As one can see from the different solutions for the linear and the sharp cutoff, the
effective potential is not cutoff independent. Interestingly however, the location of 
the minimum hardly depends on the anomalous dimension in case of the linear cutoff. 
Moreover, it is also only weakly dependent on the initial value .





The critical exponent  

That the effective scaling potential in fact describes critical phenomena
can be seen from the power law  
for large .

The critical exponents  and  are related by



Hence we expect



in case  and



in case .

These asymptotic values are plotted as horizontal lines:

 
file=fig03.eps,width=8.5cm 
FIG. III:
 
for the linear cutoff (a),
 (b) and the sharp cutoff (c)

approaching the critical exponent . 

The asymptotic behaviour is as expected in all three cases.
However, if one wanted to calculate  from the potential
its precision would suffer from the limited range of integration.




Comparison to the dynamical method 

In order to assess the advantage in computing complexity of the method presented, we also take a
look at the usual dynamical method. In this case one starts with an initial potential 
 at some ultraviolet scale 
with an initial expectation value of the fields  and some quartic coupling constant
.

With this initial potential the partial differential equation for 
is computed on a discretized grid. The renormalization group flow for  then either leads 
to the symmetric phase (  ) or to the phase with spontaneous symmetry breaking (  ).

These phases are separated by a second order phase transition. Correspondingly, there is a critical
. Fine tuning  this value can be found. The renormalization group
flow near the phase transition will then come close to the fix point and the scaling potential can be read out.

The fine tuning of  is now replaced by fine tuning . In effect, the solution of a
partial differential equation is replaced by the solution of an ordinary differential equation. This is
much simpler and may reduce computing time by several orders of magnitude.





 

Conclusion and outlook 

The method allows the calculation of the effective scaling potential with
very little effort. The integrable range seems to depend only on numerical precision and
could maybe be improved by the use of high accuracy floating point libraries.

The effective scaling potential could also be used as an initial value in a dynamical 
simulation, allowing the determination of critical exponents dependend on small deviations from the critical
point, while still overcoming the time consuming necessity for a dynamical fix point search.


 

 

 10 

 

J. Zinn-Justin,

Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena ,

Oxford 1993

 

M. Le Bellac,

Quantum and Statistical Field Theory ,

Oxford 1991

 

J. Berges, N. Tetradis and C. Wetterich,


Phys. Rev. Lett. 77  (1996) 873.

 

T. R. Morris,

Phys. Lett. B 329  (1994) 241 [hep-ph/9403340].

 

T. R. Morris,

Phys. Lett. B 334  (1994) 355 [hep-th/9405190].

 

T. R. Morris,

Phys. Lett. B 345  (1995) 139 [hep-th/9410141].

 

T. R. Morris, M. Turner,

Nucl. Phys. B 509  (1998) 637 [hep-th/9704202].

 

M. D'Attanasio, T. R. Morris,

Phys. Lett. B 409  (1997) 363 [hep-th/9704094].

 

T. R. Morris,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77  (1996) 1658 [hep-th/9601128].

 

T. R. Morris,

Phys. Lett. B 357  (1995) 225 [hep-th/9503225].

 

D. F. Litim,

Nucl. Phys. B 631  (2002) 128 [hep-th/0203006].

 

J. Berges, N. Tetradis and C. Wetterich,


Phys. Rept.  363  (2002) 223 hep-ph/0005122.

 

D. F. Litim,


Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 105007 hep-th/0103195.

 

D. F. Litim,

Phys. Lett. B 486  (2000) 92-99 hep-th/0005245.

 

J. Adams, J. Berges, S. Bornholdt,

F. Freire, N. Tetradis, C. Wetterich,

Mod. Phys. Lett. A 10  (1995) 2367.





