



1.1 
190mm
132mm
14mm
14mm
15mm
12pt 4mm
1em
0ex
2em
.5em
.5em
3mm





 
 


plain 

thm Theorem 
claim Claim 
propn Proposition 
lem Lemma 


defn Definition 

remark 
rem Remark 



  
  
  

  
  
  



 



                 

On the relation between quantum Liouville
theory and the quantized Teichmuller spaces 
J. Teschner 
Institut fur theoretische Physik
                 
Freie Universitat Berlin,
                        
Arnimallee 14
                                    
14195 Berlin
 Germany 


 We review both the construction of conformal blocks
in quantum Liouville theory and the quantization of 
Teichmuller spaces as developed by Kashaev, Checkov and Fock.
In both cases one assigns to a Riemann surface 
a Hilbert space acted on by a representation of the
mapping class group. According to a conjecture of H. Verlinde,
the two are equivalent. We describe some key steps in the
verification of this conjecture.

 
Dedicated to A.A. Belavin on his  birthday  

Introduction 

Quantum Liouville theory is a crucial ingredient for a variety 
of models for low dimensional quantum gravity
and non-critical string theories. In the case of two dimensional 
quantum gravity or non-critical string theories this is a consequence 
of the Weyl-anomaly, which forces one to 
take into account the quantum dynamics of the conformal factor of the
two-dimensional metric. More recently it was proposed that 
Liouville theory also plays a crucial role for three-dimensional  quantum
gravity in the presence of a cosmological constant in the sense of
representing a holographic dual for this theory, see e.g.and references therein.

For all these applications it is crucial that the quantum Liouville theory
has a geometric interpretation as describing the  quantization of spaces
of two-dimensional metrics. Such an interpretation is to be expected
due to the close connections between classical  Liouville theory and 
the theory of Riemann surfaces. Having fixed a complex structure on the
Riemann surface one may represent the 
unique metric of negative constant curvature locally in the form 
 where  must solve the
Liouville equation .
This relation between the Liouville equation and the uniformization 
problem leads to beautiful connections between classical Liouville theory
and the theory of moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces.

One may therefore expect that quantum Liouville theory is related
to some sort of "quantization" of the moduli spaces of  
Riemann surfaces. A concrete proposal in this direction was made by
H. Verlinde in, where it was proposed that the space of 
conformal blocks of the Liouville theory with its mapping class 
group representation is isomorphic to the 
space of states obtained by quantizing the Teichmuller spaces of
Riemann surfaces. We believe that understanding
Verlinde's conjecture will serve as a useful starting point for
developing the geometrical interpretation of the quantized Liouville theory
in general. The aim of the present paper
will be to outline the definition of the objects that are
involved in Verlinde's conjecture and to describe some key steps
towards the proof of it.

Teichmuller spaces  

The Teichmuller spaces  are the spaces
of deformations of the complex structures on Riemann surfaces .
As there is a unique metric of constant curvature -1 associated to 
each complex structure one may identify the Teichmuller spaces
with the spaces of deformations of the metrics with constant curvature -1.
Coordinates for the Teichmuller spaces can therefore be obtained
by considering the geodesics that are
defined by the constant curvature metrics.

Penner coordinates 

A particularly useful set of coordinates was introduced
by R. Penner in. They can be defined for Riemann surfaces 
that have at
least one puncture. One may assume having triangulated the surface 
by geodesics that start and end at the punctures. As an example we have 
drawn in Figure  a triangulation of
the once-punctured torus.

 7cm
triang2.eps 

Triangulation of the once-punctured torus. The length of these
geodesics will be infinite. In order to regularize this divergence
one may introduce one horocycle around each puncture and measure 
only the length of the segment of a geodesic that lies between the 
horocycles. Assigning to an edge  its regularized length 
gives coordinates for the so-called decorated Teichmuller spaces. 
These are fiber spaces over the
Teichmuller spaces which have fibers that parameterize the choices of the 
"cut-offs" as introduced by the horocycles. 

A closely related set of coordinates for 
the Teichmuller spaces themselves was introduced by Fock in.
The coordinate  associated to an edge  of a triangulation
can be expressed in terms of the Penner-coordinates via
, where , ,  and  label the
other edges of the triangles that have  in its boundary as indicated in
Figure . 

 0.02in 
 
The labeling of the edges 
Instead of triangulations of the Riemann surfaces
it is often convenient to consider the corresponding fat graphs , which
are defined by putting a trivalent vertex into each triangle and by 
connecting these vertices such that the edges of the triangulation are 
in one-to-one correspondence to the edges of the fat-graph.






Symplectic structure 

The Teichmuller spaces carry a natural symplectic form, called 
Weil-Petersson symplectic form. We are therefore dealing with a 
family of phase-spaces, one for each topological type of
the Riemann surfaces. One of the crucial virtues of the 
Penner/Fock-coordinates is the fact that the Weil-Petersson symplectic
form has a particularly simple expression in these coordinates. 
The corresponding Poisson-brackets are in fact constant  for
Fock's variables ,
 
The value of  depends on how edges  and  are imbedded
into a given fat graph. If  and  don't have a common 
vertex at their ends, or if one of ,  starts and
ends at the same vertex then . In the case that 
 and  meet at two vertices one has 
 (resp. ) 
if  is the first edge to the right(w.r.t.
to the orientation induced by the imbedding of the fat-graph 
into the surface)  (resp. left) of  at both
vertices, and  otherwise. 
In all the remaining cases  (resp. ) 
if  is the first edge to the right (resp. left) of  at the common
vertex. 

If one considers a surface  with genus  and
 boundary components
one will find  central elements in the Poisson-algebra defined
by (). These central elements ,  
are constructed as ,
where  is the set of edges in the triangulation that emanates from the 
 boundary component. The value of  
gives the geodesic length of the  boundary component.

Changing the triangulation 

Changing the triangulation amounts to a change of coordinates for 
the (decorated) Teichmuller spaces. Any two triangulations can be related
to each other by a sequence of the following elementary moves  called flips:


 
The elementary move between two triangulations 
The change of variables corresponding to the elementary move
of Figure  is easy to describe: 
 
and all other variables are left unchanged.
These transformations generate a groupoid, the Ptolemy groupoid
, that
may be abstractly characterized by generators and relations:
One has a generator  
whenever the triangles labeled
by  and  have an edge in common. The relation that 
characterizes the Ptolemy groupoid is called the Pentagon relation.
It is graphically represented in Figure .


   0.01in 
  

(110,90)  

(220,90)  

(55,0)  

(165,0)  

(35,70) (43,74) 
(245,70) (235,74) 
(135,28) 
(80,118) 
(190,118) 
The pentagon relation. 

The representation of the mapping class group 

The mapping class group  consists of
diffeomorphisms of the Riemann surface  which are
not isotopic to the identity. It is generated by the Dehn-twists, 
which act on an annulus  in the way indicated in Figure 
. 

7cm
dehn2.eps  
Action of a Dehn-twist on an annulus. 
Elements  will map any
graph drawn on the surface , in particular
any triangulation of , into another one. Since any
two triangulations can be connected by a sequence of elementary moves
one may represent any element  by the 
corresponding sequence of flips. This means that the 
mapping class group  is a subgroup of 
the Ptolemy groupoid .

It is extremely useful to think of
the algebraically complicated mapping class group  
as being embedded into the Ptolemy groupoid.




Quantization of Teichmuller spaces 

Algebra of observables and Hilbert space 
The simplicity of the Poisson brackets () makes part of the
quantization quite simple. To each edge  of a triangulation 
of a Riemann surface  associate a quantum operator 
. The algebra of observables  
will be the algebra with generators , relations 
 
and hermiticity assignment . 
The algebra  
has a center with generators
,  defined by ,
where  is the set of edges in the triangulation that emanates from the 
 boundary component. 
The representations of  that we are going to consider
will therefore be such that the generators  are 
represented as the operators of multiplication by real 
positive numbers . Geometrically one may interpret 
 as the geodesic length of the 
 boundary component. 
The tuple  of lengths of the boundary components
will figure as a label of the representation 
 of the algebra .
   
To complete the definition of the 
representation  by operators 
on a Hilbert space  one just needs to find 
linear combinations  and 
 of the 
 that satisfy .
The representation of  on 
 is  
defined by choosing 
the usual Schrodinger representation for the , .  

Let us discuss the example of a sphere with four holes. 
We shall consider the fat graph drawn in Figure  below.

7cm
fourpt.eps  
Fat graph for the sphere with four holes (shaded) 
with numbered edges. 
The algebra 
has six generators   with nontrivial relations
 for 
 
The four central elements corresponding to the holes in  are 
 
After fixing the lengths of the four holes one is left with two variables,
say  and . Choosing the Schrodinger
representation for ,  one simply finds 
. 


Representation of the mapping class group on  
 

The first task is to find the quantum counterparts of the 
changes of variables corresponding to the elements
of the Ptolemy groupoid. A handy formulation of 
the solution can be given in terms 
of the Fock-variables: The change of variables
corresponding to the
elementary move depicted in Figure  is given by
 
where the special function  
is defined as
 
 represents the quantum deformation of the
classical expression given in ().
The formulae () define a representation of the Ptolemy groupoid
by automorphisms of .

Let us now recall that the mapping class group  
can be embedded
into the Ptolemy groupoid. Having realized the latter therefore 
gives a representation of  by automorphisms of 
.

Representation of the mapping class group on  

The next problem is to define unitary operators that generate 
the action of the mapping class group on . 

In the case that  is is possible to describe the 
action of the generators rather simply. For this case it is known
 that the mapping class group is generated by 
the Dehn-twists along nonseparating (Cutting along
such curves preserves connectedness of , it just 
opens a handle.)   
simple closed curves. In an annular neighborhood of such a
curve  one may always bring the triangulation into the form depicted
in Figure .

6cm
trann2.eps  
Triangulation of an annulus and the dual fat-graph (dashed). 
In this case it suffices to consider the two variables , 
associated to the edges  and  marked in Figure .
They satisfy the algebra . The Dehn twist
can be represented by a simple flip. It can be checked that
the Dehn twist around  on  is represented
by the following operator :
 
where the special function  can be  
defined in the strip 
,  by means of the 
integral representation
 
Formulae () and ()  
suffice to completely define the
action of  on  for : 
By means of 
()  
one may construct the representation of the Dehn twist along 
 in an arbitrary triangulation from ().


The operators that represent 
are of course defined by their action on 
only up to multiplication by phase factors. Controlling the 
possible occurrence of phase factors in the relations of the 
mapping class group is a subtle task. 
An elegant formalism for handling this problem
was given by Kashaev in. It
uses an enlarged set of variables, where
pairs of variables are associated to the 
 triangles of a triangulation instead
of its edges. The reduction to  
can be described
with the help of a simple set of constraints. 
It indeed turns out that
the mapping class group is realized only projectively.

Liouville theory in the Moore-Seiberg formalism 

We shall now briefly review the construction of the conformal blocks 
in quantum Liouville theory from a geometric perspective.
The result will be another assignment 
, 
where  is the space of conformal blocks in Liouville
theory and  is the representation of the mapping class
group on .


Holomorphic factorization 

The spectrum of quantum Liouville theory can be represented as follows:
 
In ()
we used the notation ,  for the  
unitary highest weight representations   
of the Virasoro algebras 
which are generated from the modes of the holomorphic and 
anti-holomorphic parts
of the energy-momentum tensor respectively. 
The central charge of the representations is given by the parameter
 via , , and the
highest weight of the representations ,  is 
parameterized as .

Quantum Liouville theory in genus zero is fully characterized by the 
set of n-point functions of the primary fields ,
which are the quantized exponential functions 
of the Liouville field. The  are primary fields
with conformal weights . As usual 
 one may consider  as the generator
of a family of
descendant fields 
parameterized by vectors 
. 


In principle it should always be possible
to evaluate an n-point function



  
by inserting complete sets of intermediate states between each 
pair of fields  and 
. 
Due to the factorized structure of the Hilbert space
() one finds a holomorphically factorized form for the 
n-point functions, which may be written as







 
where we have used the following notation. 
The tuple  represents the "external"
parameters, whereas 



comprises the variables of integration. 
The fact that 
(resp. ) depends holomorphically
(resp. antiholomorphically) on  is indicated via
.
The conformal blocks 
 
are key objects. 

The conformal Ward identities 

It is well-known that the conformal blocks are strongly 
constrained by the conformal Ward-identities which express
the conservation of energy-momentum on the Riemann-sphere
. 

Mathematically speaking a conformal block is a functional


 
that satisfies the 
following invariance condition. Let  be a 
meromorphic vector field that is
holomorphic on .
Write the Laurent-expansion of  
in an annular neighborhood of  
in the form , and define
an operator  on 
by 




 
The conformal Ward identities can then be formulated as 
the condition that 
 
holds for all  and all
meromorphic vector fields  that are holomorphic 
on . 

By choosing vector fields  
that are singular at a single point only one 
recovers the usual rules for moving Virasoro generators from one puncture 
to another. In this way one may convince oneself that the conformal
block is uniquely determined by the value 
 that it takes 
on the product of highest weight states
.


A concrete representation for the  
conformal blocks in genus zero
can be given by means of the chiral
vertex operators  constructed in refs.
, and their descendants ,
. Let ,
, .
 
where  is the highest weight vector in the vacuum representation
.

It is well-known that the space of solutions to the 
condition () is one-dimensional for 
the case of the three-punctured sphere . Invariance under global
conformal transformations allows one to assume that
. 
We will adopt the normalization from and denote
 the unique conformal block 
that satisfies 

. The function 
is defined in but will not be needed in the following.

Let us furthermore note that the case of 
corresponds to the invariant bilinear form 

 which is defined 
such that 
. 

Sewing of conformal blocks 


For  one
may generate large classes of solutions 
of the conformal Ward identities by the 
following "sewing" construction. Let 
,  be Riemann surfaces with  punctures, 
and let  and 
be conformal 
blocks associated to ,  and representations
labeled by  
and  respectively.
Let ,  be the distinguished punctures on 
that are associated to the representation . Around 
 choose local coordinates  such that  parameterizes
the points  themselves. Let  be the annuli 
, and  be the disks .
We assume  to be small enough such
that the  contain no other punctures.  
The surface  
that is obtained by "sewing"  and  will
be 





where  denotes the identification of annuli  and 
via . The conformal block 
 assigned to
 , 

and  will then be
 
The sets  and
 
are supposed to represent mutually
dual bases for  in the sense that 

. In a similar way one 
may construct the conformal blocks associated to a surface that
was obtained by sewing two punctures on a single Riemann surface.


Feynman rules for the construction of conformal blocks 

The sewing construction allows one to construct large classes of 
solutions to the conformal Ward identities from simple pieces. 
The resulting construction resembles
the construction of field theoretical amplitudes by 
the application of a set of Feyman rules.
Let us summarize the basic ingredients and their geometric 
counterparts. 

Propagator  Invariant bilinear form:





Vertex  Invariant trilinear form:





Gluing  Completeness: 







The dashed lines have been introduced to take care of the 
fact that the rotation of a boundary circle by  (Dehn twist)
is not represented 
trivially. It acts by multiplication with . 
This describes a part of the action of the mapping class group
on the spaces of conformal blocks. The Riemann surfaces that
are obtained by gluing cylinders and three-holed spheres as drawn will 
therefore carry a trivalent graph which we will call 
Moore-Seiberg graph. These graphs are not to be confused with the fat graphs
that we had encountered in the previous subsections. 
 
The gluing construction furnishes  spaces of conformal blocks 
 
associated to 
a Riemann surface  together with
a Moore-Seiberg graph . A basis for this space is obtained
by coloring the "internal" edges of the Moore-Seiberg graph 
with elements of , for example








In order to show that the Hilbert spaces associated to 
each two Moore-Seiberg graphs  and  are 
isomorphic,



one needs to find unitary operators 





The Moore-Seiberg groupoid 

The transitions from one Moore-Seiberg graph
to another generate another groupoid that will be called the
Moore-Seiberg groupoid. 
A set of generators is pictorially represented 
in Figures - below. 



7cmfus.eps   
A-move 


7cmbraid.eps   
B-move 


7cmsmove.eps  
S-move  







The
Moore-Seiberg groupoid can also be characterized in terms of the generators
depicted in Figures - and certain relations, but
the set of relations for the 
Moore-Seiberg-groupoid is more complicated than the one 
for the Ptolemy-groupoid. 




Representation of the Moore-Seiberg 
groupoid on   

In order to characterize a 
representation of the Moore-Seiberg groupoid it suffices 
to find the operators 
 for the cases where  and 
differ by an A-, B- or S-move. In the case of the Liouville 
conformal blocks in genus zero this was done in.

A-Move : In order to describe the representation of the
A-move let  be the 
four-punctured sphere, with parameters 
associated to the four punctures respectively. The conformal blocks
corresponding to the sewing patterns indicated on the
left and right halfs of Figure  will be denoted
 and 
respectively. The A-move is then represented as an integral
transformation of the following form.
 
The kernel  is given by the 
following expression:
 
where the special function  
is related to  via

.
The coefficients , ,  and  are 
 
where  and 
for .
Setting 
one may finally write the measure  in the form 
, where 
. 


B-Move : The B-move is realized simply by the multiplication 
with the phase factor
 
where ,  are the conformal dimensions
.

S-Move ? It is not known yet how to construct a representation 
of the  S-Move on the spaces of Liouville conformal blocks.

Length operators 

We have described how to assign to a Riemann surface  two
vector spaces  (for genus 0) 
and  (for arbitrary genus, but ), each 
equipped with a (projective) representation of the mapping class
group. According to the conjecture of H. Verlinde the two 
are equivalent. One possible strategy to prove this conjecture 
is to construct a representation of the Moore-Seiberg groupoid 
on the quantized Teichmuller spaces, allowing one to compare the
respective representations of its generators. 

Length-Twist coordinates 

We find it instructive to discuss the corresponding classical story first.
Regarding the Teichmuller spaces as a collection
of phase-spaces naturally leads one to look for suitable 
Hamiltonians. A natural choice is furnished by the lengths
of geodesics around simple closed curves, considered as functions
on . It is known that the length-functions 
,  associated to non-intersecting  curves
 and  Poisson-commute w.r.t. the Weil-Petersson symplectic form
.
 
In the case of a Riemann surface 
of genus 
with  boundary components it is well-known that there will be a 
collection of  closed geodesics  
such that cutting  along , 
decomposes it into a collection of pants (three-holed spheres). 
The collection of  
lengths  of the geodesics  furnishes a set of functions
on the Teichmuller space  that Poisson-commute 
with each other, . Having half as many commuting
"Hamiltonians" as  we 
thereby recognize the Teichmuller space as a completely 
integrable system. 

A nice feature of the Fock coordinates is that they 
lead to a particularly simple way to 
express the lengths  of simple closed curves 
in terms the variables .
Assume given a 
closed path  on the fat graph homotopic to a
simple closed curve . 
Let the edges ,  be labeled 
according to the order in which they appear on the path , 
and define  to be  if the path turns left(w.r.t.
to the orientation induced by the imbedding of the fat-graph 
into the surface)  
at the vertex
that connects edges  and , and to be equal to  
otherwise. The length  is then computed as follows.  
 
where the matrices  and  are defined respectively by
 


Having chosen the  as the set of 
"action"-variables, it is amusing to note that the corresponding 
"angle"-variables are nothing but the twist-angles  corresponding 
to the deformation of cutting  along  and 
twisting by some angle  before gluing back along .
The set

gives another set of coordinates on the Teichmuller space ,
the classical Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates. 

Dehn twists along one of the curves ,  
do not change the pants decomposition and 
are described by . 
It seems natural to associate length-twist coordinates
 to 
each Moore-Seiberg graph . Changing the Moore-Seiberg
graph  by the Dehn-twist along one of the
curves  corresponds to a change of the twist coordinate
. The Moore-Seiberg groupoid 
thereby gets the interpretation as the natural groupoid of 
canonical transformations of the length-twist coordinates.


The length operators   

Our aim is to make contact with the Liouville conformal field theory.
In the Moore-Seiberg formalism for conformal field theories one 
considers bases for the space of conformal blocks that are associated
to pants decompositions of Riemann surfaces. Our task may be seen
as a quantum counterpart of the task to construct the
change of variables from the Penner- to the Fenchel-Nielsen
coordinates.

Let us consider a simple closed curve  in  
such that the triangulation in an annular neighborhood of 
looks as depicted in Figure .
In this case one finds according to () an expression for the
hyperbolic cosine of the geodesic length function that is easy to quantize,
 
We shall work in the
representation where  is diagonal. It is easy to check that the
functions
 
are eigenfunctions of  
with eigenvalue being .
Let  be the distribution represented by
. The following important
result was proven by R. Kashaev
in.
 
  The following set of distributions





forms a basis for 

in the sense of generalized functions. We have the relations
  
where the measure  is defined as 
.
 


It follows that there exists a self-adjoint
operator  with spectrum  
such that . 
 is the quantum operator corresponding to the 
hyperbolic length around the geodesic .


It will be shown that the definition of the length operators 
 can be extended to arbitrary  closed geodesics 
such that 
(i)  is self-adjoint with spectrum , and
(ii)  if .
Moreover, diagonalization of the length operator  
 for a closed geodesic  leads to a 
factorization  of  
in the following sense. Let 
 be the possibly
disconnected Riemann surface obtained by cutting along .
The coloring  of the boundary components of  can be
naturally extended to a coloring 
 for  by assigning the number  to
the two new boundary components that were created by
cutting along . The spectral representation for  then
yields the following representation for .
 
The corresponding representations of the mapping class group 
factorize/restrict accordingly.
This allows one to construct bases (in the sense of generalized functions)
for  labeled by the assignments of lengths to the 
closed geodesics  that define a pants 
decomposition. 

Realization of the Moore-Seiberg groupoid on  

Thanks to the factorization properties of the quantized Teichmuller
spaces one may indeed construct 
a realization of the Moore-Seiberg groupoid
by associating unitary operators to the elementary moves depicted in
Figures  -. 

A-Move  
In order to construct the representation of the
A-move let us consider the four-holed sphere with the fat graph 
introduced in Figure .
The operators  and  
that represent the lengths of the geodesics isotopic 
to the s- and t-cycles drawn in Figure  respectively
are then given by the following expressions. 











 
where we have used the notation ,
 with
  
In order to find eigenfunctions of the operators  and 
let us observe that the ansatz
 
allows one to construct eigenstates of  and  from the 
eigenstates  
of the operator  that were defined in (),
provided that
the unitary operators  are chosen as
 
The tuple  parameterizes 
the fixed lengths 
of the four boundary holes via , ,
and the  are pure phases that will be fixed 
shortly.  
We have
  The following two sets of distributions






form bases for 

in the sense of generalized functions. We have the relations
  
 
This theorem was first obtained by another method, 
but thanks to () it also follows easily from
Kashaev's Theorem . Another simple implication
of Theorem  is the relation
 

The unitary operator that represents the A-move will simply be the
one that describes the change of basis between 
the eigenfunctions of the length operators  and  respectively.
It is represented 
by the kernel

.
It is natural to choose the phase factors 
in such a way that the b-6-j symbols  defined by 
 
satisfy the following tetrahedral symmetries
 
Let us choose the  as follows:
 
The kernel  
will then differ from 
the b-Racah-Wigner coefficients 
for the quantum group  studied and calculated 
in only by multiplication with the measure .
It follows from the results of (Appendix B.2) that 
the corresponding 
b-6-j symbols indeed satisfy ().
B-move 

In order to discuss the B-move we find it convenient to use the Fock-variables
associated to the edges of the fat graph depicted in Figure . 

 6cm
bfat.eps 
Fat graph in the neighborhood of the two relevant holes. 
Let us furthermore introduce the following linear combinations of the
variables , .
 
The representation of the braiding of two punctures in terms 
of the generators of the Ptolemy groupoid was first discussed in
. Considering punctures (holes of zero size) corresponds 
to setting . The expression for the 
generator of the B-move that was found in 
 may be written as 
 
As already observed in,  is identical to the 
R-operator for the modular double  of
 that was first proposed inand further studied in. By working out the operator
 that represents the length of the geodesic 
surrounding the two punctures via ,
one finds that  coincides with the realization of the
Casimir  of  in the
tensor product of two of its representations.
 
These observations may then be used in order to find the operator
 that represents the braiding of two 
holes with 
finite circumferences . In order to do this
one may "fill" the holes by gluing disks with two punctures each
to the boundaries of the holes. The braiding of the two holes can be
decomposed into a sequence of braidings of the four punctures. By using
 (Theorem 3) it is then possible to show that
 
It remains to observe that according to (Theorem 6)
the operator  becomes diagonal on eigenstates of the
length operator . The eigenvalue of  is
 

S-move  One possibility to introduce the
operator that represents the S-move is to consider the 
change of basis between bases that diagonalize the 
length operators of a- and b- cycles on the once-holed torus respectively.
The proof that the operators that represent the A-, B- and
S-moves satisfy the relations of the Moore-Seiberg 
groupoid will be given in
. Concerning the relations coming from genus zero surfaces
we may observe that their validity immediately follows if one
combines the above observations concerning relations with 
 with the results of.

It furthermore turns out that the kernel that represents
the S-move can be expressed in terms of  
by means of an expression which is similar to the
one that was found for rational conformal field theories in.
The data  are therefore sufficient
to characterize the projective representation
of the Moore-Seiberg groupoid on the quantized Teichmuller
spaces  completely.
 
The Verlinde conjecture 

The main observation to be made is the following. One has
 
It follows that the spaces of conformal blocks of Liouville theory  
and the Hilbert spaces from the quantization of the Teichmuller spaces
are indeed isomorphic as representations of the mapping class group.

Final remarks 

First let us note that
so far the conformal blocks of Liouville theory were only constructed
in genus zero, but our results imply that the 
corresponding mapping class group representation has a 
consistent and essentially unique extension to higher genus. 

One may wonder if there is a more direct relation between the conformal 
blocks of Liouville theory as discussed in Section 4 and the eigenfunctions
of the length operators from Sections 5 and 6. 
In this regard one may observe that
so far the quantization of the Teichmuller spaces 
was based on the choice of a real polarization for . 
However, the complex structure on the Teichmuller spaces 
should allow one to introduce an alternative ("coherent state") 
representation where the states are represented by wave-functions that
are analytic on . Such a representation should have the 
property that the action of the mapping class group (the symmetry group
of our phase-space) is represented by monodromy transformations. The
field theoretical conformal blocks have exactly this property. 
This leads us to suggest that the Liouville conformal blocks are in
fact just representing the change of basis from a coherent
state basis for  to a basis in which the length operators
are diagonal.

Our results finally establish a precise correspondence ()
between
the labels  of a Liouville vertex operator 
and the length  of the hole to which  is associated.
The fact that all the basic objects are meromorphic w.r.t.
the variables  or  allows one to analytically continue 
from the case considered above to cases where .
The geometrical interpretation of the cases  was 
previously inferred from the semi-classical 
relation between  and the type
of singularity that the metric  
develops near the insertion point of , see e.g.. 
Combining these
two observations gives the diagram drawn in Figure ,
 
8cm
vofig.eps  
Relation between the parameter  and the "shape" of the 
boundary. which relates the parameter  to the "shape" of the boundary 
component to which  is associated. It is remarkable and
nontrivial that the point  indeed corresponds to the complete 
disappearance of a boundary component, as follows from 
 (Appendix B.1). 


Acknowledgments  
The author would like to thank the organizers of the 6th 
International Conference on CFTs and
Integrable Models, Chernogolovka, for organizing a nice and
stimulating conference. Many thanks also to L. Checkov, V. Fock
and especially R. Kashaev for discussions and explanations of their
work.

I am furthermore grateful to the SPhT CEA-Saclay,
where this work was completed, for hospitality. 
I would finally like to acknowledge support by the SFB 288 of the DFG.




 77 
 A.M. Polyakov: 

   103 1981 207-210 
 K. Krasnov, 


   Class.Quant.Grav. 19  (2002) 3977-3998 [arXiv: hep-th/0112164]
 D. Klemm, L. Vanzo,  

   JHEP 0204  (2002) 030 [arXiv: hep-th/0203268]
 P.G. Zograf, L. Takhtajan, 



   Math. USSR Sb. 60  (1988) 297-313
 J. Teschner:  

  Class. Quant. Grav.  18  (2001)  R153-R222
  [arXiv: hep-th/0104158]
 J. Teschner: A lecture on the Liouville vertex operators,
   in this volume.
 H. Verlinde, 


   337 1990 652-680 
 V.V. Fock,

   [arXiv: hep-th/9702018] 
 R.M. Kashaev, 

   43 1998 105-115 , [arXiv: q-alg/9705021]   
 L. O. Checkov, V. Fock, 

  Theor. Math. Phys. 120  (1999) 1245-1259

  [arXiv: math.QA/9908165] 
 R.C. Penner: 


   113 1987 299-339 
 Y. Imayoshi, M. Taniguchi: An introduction to 
    Teichmuller spaces , Springer
 S. Gervais, 
   
   Trans. AMS 348  (1996) 3097-3132
 A.A. Belavin, A.M. Polyakov, A.B. Zamolodchikov,
   
  241 1984 333 
 G. Moore, N. Seiberg, 

   123 1989 177-254 
 B. Bakalov, A. Kirillov jun.,
  Transform. Groups 5  (2000) 207-244
 
  [arXiv: math.GT/9809057] 
 R.M. Kashaev,

   Proc. Steklov Inst. of Math. 226  (1999) 63-71, 

     [arXiv: hep-th/9811203]
 R.M. Kashaev, 


  [arXiv: math.QA/0008148]
 R.M. Kashaev, 


  In: S. Pakuliak and G. von Gehlen (eds.), Integrable structures of 
  exactly solvable two-dimensional models of quantum field theory 
  (Kiev, 2000), 211-221, NATO Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys. Chem., 35, 
  Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2001.
 J. Teschner, paper in preparation.
 S.A. Wolpert, 

   Amer. J. Math 107  (1985) 969-997 
 B.Ponsot, J.Teschner, 


    224 2001 613-655 
  [arXiv: math.QA/0007097]
 B.Ponsot, J.Teschner, 

  622 2002 309-327 
 L.D. Faddeev, 
    Math. Phys. Stud. 21  (2000) 149-156  [arXiv: math.QA/9912078]
 A. Bytsko, J. Teschner,


  [arXiv: math.QA/0208191]
 G. Moore, N. Seiberg, 
   in: Proceedings of the Trieste Spring School 1989, p. 1-129 
 N. Seiberg: 
  Progr. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 102  (1990) 319 














