


New BPS Solitons in 2+1 Dimensional Noncommutative  
Model  

Hideharu Otsu  
otsu@vega.aichi-u.ac.jp 

Faculty of Economics, 

Aichi University, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-8522, Japan
Toshiro Sato 
tsato@matsusaka-u.ac.jp 

Faculty of Policy Science, Matsusaka University, 

Matsusaka, Mie 515-8511, Japan
Hitoshi Ikemori  
ikemori@biwako.shiga-u.ac.jp 

Faculty of Economics, Shiga University, 

Hikone, Shiga 522-8522, Japan
Shinsaku Kitakado 

Department of Information Sciences, Meijo University, 

Tempaku, Nagoya 486-8502, Japan
 
 
 
Investigating the solitons in the non-commutative  model, we have
found a new set of BPS solitons which does not have counterparts in the
commutative model.


[ Introduction]Introduction 

Field theories on the non-commutative space have been extensively
studied in the last few years. Particularly, BPS solitons are interesting,
because they might not share the common features with those on the
commutative
space.

Solitons in the non-commutative  model have been studied in
 and further developed in in
connection
with the dynamical aspects of the theory. The non-BPS solitons, that do not
exist in the commutative case, have been studied in.
These investigations were reviewed in.

In this paper, we report on a set of new BPS solitons in the non-commutative
 model, that does not exist in the commutative limit.

We consider the model on 2+1 dimensional non-commutative
spacetime. The space coordinates obey the commutation relation

 
or

 
in terms of the complex variables,  and 
. The Hilbert space can be described in
terms of
the energy eigenstates  of the harmonic
oscillator
whose creation and annihilation operators are  and 
respectively,

 
The  lagrangian is

 
where  is a 2-component complex vector with the constraint
. We consider  to be the fundamental field and
thus to be non-singular. Tr denotes the trace over the Hilbert space
as
 
The covariant derivative is defined by
 
where  and
.

For the static configurations, topological charge and static energy are
given
by
 
and

 
The configuration which saturates the energy bound satisfies the BPS soliton
equation
 
or BPS anti-soliton equation
 


It is convenient to introduce the 2-component
complex vector  and the projection operator  as
 
In terms of the projection operator, BPS soliton equations
() and
() are
 
and

 
Topological charge () and static energy () can be expressed
as
 
and

 


The examples of BPS soliton are  , with topological charge
 and energy , and those of BPS anti-soliton are 
 with topological charge  and energy 
. These configurations are solitons also in the
commutative theory.

[ New Solitons]New Solitons 

We have found that the following is the BPS soliton solution
of the
non-commutative  model. The configuration of the soliton with the
topological charge  is

 
which can also be expressed in terms of projection operator  as

 
For  on the other hand, the soliton can be written as

 
and the corresponding projection operator expression is

 
We can straightforwardly confirm that () and () satisfy the
BPS equations () and () respectively. The energy of
these solitons are of course , as is seen below.

We calculate the topological charge and static energy of () and
(). For BPS anti-solitons (), we use the following
relations
 


 


Substituting () and () into () and (), the
topological charge and static energy are

 
and

 
Similarly, for BPS solitons (), we use the relations

 


 
Then, the topological charge and static energy are  and 
respectively.

[ rel. to Comm. Space]Relation to the Commutative Case 

We note that these solutions do not have the commutative counterparts. In
order to see this, we consider
 
for , where  is a real parameter. Taking the limit
 in
the non-commutative case,  reduces to the non-singular configuration
(). On the other hand, in the commutative case, the same limit
leads
to
 
here. This configuration is
ill-defined at the origin.

The case of  goes along the similar line. We consider
 
and taking the limit  in non-commutative case,  reduces
to () which is non-singular. On the other hand, in the commutative
case, the same limit leads to
 
which is also ill-defined at the origin. This shows that in the commutative
theory the configurations corresponding to  limit of
(), () are absent.

Thus, we have seen that the singular configurations in the commutative
theory
become non-singular in the non-commutative case which can be attributed to
non-commutativity of the coordinates. It should be noted here that the
solutions investigated in using the coherent states are
different from ours. Although their special case of 





 does coincide with our particular case of BPS solitons in
().

To summarize, we have considered solitons in the non-commutative 
model and have found new solitons that do not have their counterparts in the
commutative theory. Further properties of these solutions will be examined
using more general
approaches in a
future publication.

 [2]#2  9  


J. A. Harvey, Komaba lectures on
noncommutative solitons and D-branes ,
[
hep-th/0102076 
].

N. Nekrasov and A. Schwarz, Instantons on
noncommutative   and  
superconformal six dimensional theory , Commun. Math. Phys. 
198  (1998) 689-703, [
hep-th/9802068 
].

R. Gopakumar, S. Minwalla, and A. Strominger,
Noncommutative solitons , JHEP  05  (2000) 020, [
hep-th/0003160 
].

B.-H. Lee, K.-M. Lee, and H. S. Yang, The
  model on noncommutative plane , Phys.
Lett. 
B498  (2001) 277-284, [
hep-th/0007140 
].

K. Furuta, T. Inami, H. Nakajima, and M. Yamamoto,
Low-energy dynamics of noncommutative  
solitons in   dimensions , Phys. Lett.  
B537  (2002) 165-172, [
hep-th/0203125 
].

K. Furuta, T. Inami, H. Nakajima, and M. Yamamoto,
Non-BPS solutions of the noncommutative  
model in  -dimensions , JHEP  08 
(2002)
009, [
hep-th/0207166 
].

J. Murugan and R. Adams, Comments on
noncommutative sigma models ,  JHEP  12  (2002) 073, [
hep-th/0211171 
].

M. Hamanaka and S. Terashima, On exact
noncommutative BPS solitons ,  JHEP  03  (2001) 034, [
hep-th/0010221 
].

M. Hamanaka, ADHM/Nahm construction of
localized solitons in noncommutative gauge theories , Phys. Rev. 
D65  (2002) 085022, [
hep-th/0109070 
].





