

 

 
MODIFIED TRIPLECTIC QUANTIZATION  


IN GENERAL COORDINATES  

 
B. Geyer (E-mail:
geyer@itp.uni-leipzig.de)  and P.M. Lavrov (E-mail:
lavrov@tspu.edu.ru;
lavrov@itp.uni-leipzig.de) 


  Institute of Theoretical
Physics and Center of Theoretical Studies,
 Leipzig University,

D-04109 Leipzig, Germany 
   Tomsk State
Pedagogical University, 634041 Tomsk, Russia 
 


 
  

We present an extension of the previous results on the
quantization of general gauge theories within the BRST-antiBRST invariant
Lagrangian scheme in general coordinates. Namely, we generalizeto the case when the base manifold of fields and antifields is a
supermanifold described in terms of both bosonic and fermionic coordinates.
 

Introduction 



Modern covariant quantization methods for general gauge theories are based
on the principle of BRST, or, more generally, BRST-antiBRST
 invariance. The consideration of these methods in
general coordinates (using appropriate supermanifolds) appears to be very
important in order to reveal the geometrical meaning of the basic objects
underlying these quantization schemes.

The study of the Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV) method in general
coordinates was initiated by the work of Witten, where the
geometrical meaning of the antifields, the antibracket, and the odd
second-order operator  was discussed. In, it was shown
that the geometry of the BV formalism is that of an odd  symplectic
superspace, endowed with a density function .

The quantization schemes based on the BRST-antiBRST symmetry involve
additional basic objects. Namely, in the -covariant and triplectic
quantization schemes one introduces -doublets of extended
antibrackets, as well as doublets of second- and first-order operators 
 and , respectively. In the modified triplectic
quantization, an additional -doublet of first-order operators 
is required. This indicates that the geometrical formulation of these
quantization methods in general coordinates, in contrast to the BV
quantization, requires more complicated tools. Indeed, in this paper we show
that the geometry of the -covariant and triplectic schemes is the
geometry of an even  symplectic superspace equipped with a density
function and a flat symmetric connection (covariant derivative), while the
geometry of the modified triplectic quantization also includes a symmetric
structure (analogous to a metric tensor).

The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we briefly review
the definitions of tensor fields, the covariant derivative, and
the curvature tensor on supermanifolds. In Sect. 3,
we introduce the notion of a triplectic
supermanifold  together with tensor fields and covariant
derivatives defined on it. In Sect. 4, an explicit realization of
the triplectic algebra of odd differential operators is suggested.
In Sect. 5, we find a realization of the modified triplectic
algebra and propose a suitable quantization procedure. In Sect. 6,
we give a short summary and a few concluding remarks. In Appendix
A, we study the connection between even (odd) non-degenerate
Poisson structures and even (odd) symplectic structures on
supermanifolds, and show their one-to-one correspondence. In
Appendix B, the algebra of the generating operators 
and  is presented.

We use the condensed DeWitt notation and apply the tensor analysis of Ref. 
. Derivatives with respect to the variables  are
understood as acting from the left, with the notation 
. Right-hand derivatives with respect
to  are labelled by the subscript , and the notation 
 is used. Raising the -group indices
is performed by the antisymmetric second rank tensor  (
): , 
. The Grassmann parity of any
quantity  is denoted by .

Tensor fields, covariant derivative and curvature tensor onsupermanifolds 

In this Section, we briefly review the tensor analysis on
supermanifolds as far as it is required for the following
considerations. For a comprehensive treatment, we recommend
Ref. .

Let the variables  be local
coordinates of a supermanifold , , in the
vicinity of a point . Let the sets  and 
be coordinate bases in the tangent space  and the
cotangent space , respectively. Under a change of
coordinates, ,
the basis vectors in  and  transform
according to
 

Tensor fields of type  with rank  on a supermanifold in some
local coordinate system  are given by a set of
functions , 


, which
transform under a change of coordinates, ,
according to
 

For second-rank tensor fields of type  and , one gets
 
Using DeWitt's index shifting rules,
 
one can rewrite ()-() as follows:
 

The unit matrix  is related to two tensor fields of type 
,  and , according to
 
In the last equality, we have used the fact that 
 iff , so that
 

Obviously, using a tensor field of type ,
, and a tensor field of type ,
, one can construct two tensor fields
of type ,
 
transforming according to () and (), respectively.
Using a vector field  and a covector field , one can construct
a scalar field, according to
 

By analogy with tensor analysis on manifolds, on supermanifolds one
introduces the covariant derivative(
In order to avoid cumbersome notation for signs, we use the convention 
that the covariant derivation always acts from the right. If necessary, we
denote this by an arrow pointing to the left.) , 
, of tensor fields by the requirement that this
operation
should map a tensor field of type  into a tensor field of type 
, and that, in cases when one can introduce Cartesian
coordinates, it should reduce to the usual partial derivative.

Now, let  be Cartesian coordinates, and  be
arbitrary coordinates. Let us consider a vector field .
Then, in the coordinate
system  we have 
 
When going over to the system , by virtue of (), the
following relation holds:
 
This implies
 
where  are (generalized) Christoffel symbols in the
superspace,
 
which possess the property of generalized symmetry:
 
Similarly, the action of the covariant derivative on a covector
field  of type  is given by
 
with the notation
 
Using the derivation of (), one readily establishes the fact that
 
and therefore
 

The action of the covariant derivative on second-rank tensor fields of type 
,  and  can be deduced in the same manner as follows:
 

Similarly, one determines the action of the covariant derivative on a tensor
field of any rank and type in terms of the tensor components, ordinary
derivatives and Christoffel symbols. Of course, on arbitrary supermanifolds 
 the Christoffel symbols (i.e. connection coefficients) are not
necessarily given by second-order partial derivatives with respect to the
coordinates, since such a simple form arises only when local Euclidean
coordinates can be introduced on . If one chooses a coordinate system on
a supermanifold, then the covariant derivative 
 is defined as a variety of
differentiations with respect to separate coordinates. These
differentiations are local operations acting on a scalar field 
by the rule
 
on a vector field , by the rule
 
on a covector field , by the rule
 
and so on. If the Christoffel symbols are symmetric ones (), then
one says that on the supermanifold  a symmetric connection is defined.
Here, we consider the case of symmetric connections only.

The curvature tensor  is defined in a coordinate
basis by the action of the commutator of covariant
derivatives 
 on a
vector field  by the rule
 
A straightforward calculation yields the following result:
 
The curvature tensor () obeys the following generalized
antisymmetry:
 
One readily establishes the fact that the curvature tensor
() also obeys the Jacobi identity
 

Triplectic supermanifolds 

The supermanifolds arising within the triplectic and modified
triplectic quantization schemes can be identified with
superspaces parameterized by the variables ,
, where  are the (field) variables of the
configuration space of a general gauge theory, and where the antifields 
 are the sources of the combined BRST-antiBRST symmetry. The
complete superspace of these quantization methods also involves variables 
 with Grassmann parity 
, opposite to . Here, the antifields 
 are the sources of the BRST () and antiBRST ()
transformations, while the fields  are auxiliary ones. In the
original formulation of -covariant quantization, these variables are
used to introduce the gauge. The character  indicates the (global)

group index. (We remind that in Ref.  only the case 
 was considered.)

In order to formulate the modified triplectic quantization in
general coordinates, let us consider a supermanifold
, , which can be locally
described by coordinates , with
, 
. Let us introduce the transformation law of 
 under coordinate transformations () in
the base supermanifold , analogous to the transformation of the basis
vectors in the tangent space , namely,
 
Supermanifolds with such a property will be called triplectic
supermanifolds . Then, right-hand derivatives with respect to 
transform like the basis vectors of the cotangent space ,
 

According to Sect. 2, a tensor field of type  and rank  is a
geometric object, which, in any local coordinate system  on 
, is given by a set of functions, 
, transforming under
a change of coordinates of the base manifold , 
, according to ().

Covariant differentiation  of tensor fields can
be introduced using the same arguments as given above. In particular, the
action of the covariant derivative on the simplest tensor fields (scalar,
vector and second-rank ones) is given by the relations
 

Since, according to their introduction, the coordinates  and 
 are independent of each other, () implies that the vectors 
 are covariantly constant:
 
Furthermore, from these relations it follows that the action of the
commutator of covariant derivatives on a scalar field is given by
 
where the curvature tensor  has been defined in ().

Explicit realization of triplectic algebra 

The triplectic algebra defined on the triplectic supermanifold 
includes two sets of anticommuting and nilpotent operators of second and
first order,  and ,
respectively, acting from the right, and obeying the following
algebra:
 
where the curly bracket denotes symmetrization with respect to the enclosed
indices  and . Using the odd second-order differential
operators , one can introduce a pair of bilinear operations 
 on the triplectic supermanifold  by the rule
 
The operations () possess the Grassmann parity 
 and obey the following symmetry
property:
 
They are linear operations with respect to both arguments (see ()),
and obey the Leibniz rule (see ()). Due to the properties ()
of the operators , these odd bracket operations satisfy the
generalized Jacobi identity
 
According to their properties, the operations  form a set of
antibrackets, as have been introduced for the first time in Ref..
Therefore, if we have an explicit realization of the operators 
with the properties (), then, according to (), we can
generate the extended antibrackets explicitly. Explicit realizations of 
 are known in two cases: in Darboux coordinates
 and in general coordinates when  is a flat Fedosov
manifold, with bosonic variables . However, in Quantum
Gauge Field Theory the base manifold  always requires fermionic
coordinates for its description, and therefore it should be considered as a
supermanifold from the beginning.

In this Section, we extend the considerations of Ref. in order to consider some possible explicit realizations of the
triplectic algebra () - () on a triplectic
supermanifold . To this end, we equip the base
supermanifold  with a Poisson structure, i.e., with a
non-degenerate even  second-rank tensor field 
, ,
obeying the property of generalized antisymmetry,
 
and satisfying the following identities:
 
This tensor field  defines a Poisson bracket, and, due to its
non-degeneracy, also a corresponding even symplectic structure on the
supermanifold  (see Appendix A). At this level, the supermanifold  can
be considered as either an even Poisson supermanifold or an even symplectic
supermanifold.

The Poisson structure  allows one to equip the triplectic
supermanifold  with an -irreducible second-rank tensor 
,
 
which is invariant under changes of the local coordinates on ,
i.e., , and is symmetric with respect to the 
indices, .

Now, let us require that the covariant derivative 
should respect the Poisson structure :
 
From () and (), it follows that the  second-rank
tensor  is a covariantly constant,
 

In terms of the tensor field , the inverse of
, the relations () read
 
which provides the covariant constancy of the differential
two-form  (see, eq. ),
 
Then the supermanifold  can be considered as an even symmetric
symplectic supermanifold, being a supersymmetric extention of the
Fedosov manifold.

Taking into account the relations () and (), and using
the covariant operators  and 
, we find that there exists a
unique (up to first-order differential operators) -doublet of odd
second-order differential operators acting as scalars on triplectic
supermanifolds ,
 
where , , is a scalar density on .
The operators () generate a doublet of operations on ,
 
These operations obviously obey all the properties of extended antibrackets,
except for the Jacobi identity, which is closely related to the
anticommutativity and nilpotency () of .

In order to get also that missing property we must restrict the
base supermanifold somewhat.  Using the operations () and the
irreducible second-rank -tensor  (), we
shall define the following -doublet of odd first-order
differential operators :
 
where the relations () have been used for the second equality.
Straightforward calculations, with allowance for the algebra of operators 
 () and  () (see Appendix B), show that
there exists a choice of the density function , namely,
 
such that the triplectic algebra () - () is fulfilled on 
 when the base supermanifold  is a flat Fedosov superspace,
 
with the curvature tensor  given by (). Therefore,
we have explicitly realized the extended antibrackets () and the
triplectic algebra () - () of the generating operators 
, . Moreover, the operators
 can always be considered as anti-Hamiltonian vector
fields.

Operators  and quantization 

The modified triplectic quantization, in comparison
with the -covariant method, or the triplectic
scheme, involves an additional -doublet of odd
operators  , with the
following properties:
 
An invariant realization of these operators on  makes us
introduce a new geometrical structure on . Namely, because  is already
equipped with the symplectic structure ,

there exists possibility to equip the base supermanifold  also with a
symmetric second-rank tensor field 
 of type .

Notice that on the triplectic supermanifold  there
exists a vector field ,
 
which, due to () and (), is covariantly constant,
 
This vector field can be used to construct on  an 
-scalar function
, the so-called anti-Hamiltonian, according to
 

The anti-Hamiltonian  generates the vector fields

 

The conditions () yield the following equations for
:
 
In fact, these are equations to be fulfilled for . Of
course, solutions of these equations always exist. For example,
the covariantly constant tensor field , 
, belongs to them. We do not restrict ourselves to this
special case, and just assume that equations () are
fulfilled. Therefore, we obtain a realization of the modified
triplectic algebra on , and have at our disposal all
the ingredients for the quantization of general gauge theories
within the modified triplectic scheme.

This quantization procedure repeats all the essential steps performed for
the first time in Ref. , and leads to the vacuum functional
 
where the quantum action  and the gauge fixing functional 
 satisfy the following quantum master equations:
 
 
Here,  is the integration measure,
 
 is an arbitrary constant, and the function  has been
introduced in (). In () and (), we have introduced
operators , , according to
 
Evidently, for arbitrary constants , ,  the
operators ,  obey the properties
 
Therefore, the operators , , 
 also realize the modified triplectic algebra.

The integrand of the vacuum functional () is invariant under the
BRST-antiBRST transformations defined by the generators
 

In the usual manner, one can prove that the vacuum functional (), for
every fixed set of parameters , , , does not
depend on the gauge-fixing function .

Conclusion 

In this paper, we have proposed a formulation of the modified triplectic
quantization in general coordinates.

We have found an explicit realization of the modified triplectic algebra of
generating operators , ,  on a triplectic
superspace , where the base supermanifold  is a flat Fedosov
superspace endowed with a symmetric structure. The proposed scheme is
characterized by three free parameters, , , ,
whose specific choice, together with the Darboux coordinates, reproduces all
the known schemes of covariant quantization based on the BRST-antiBRST
invariance (for details, see). Every specific choice of these
parameters , ,  gives a gauge-independent vacuum
functional and, therefore, a gauge independent S-matrix (see).


Acknowledgements:  The authors are grateful to D.V. Vassilevich for
stimulating discussions. The work was supported by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), grant GE 696/7-1. The work of P.M.L. was also
supported by the projects INTAS 99-0590, DFG 436 RUS 113/669, and by the
Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR), 02-02-04002, 03-02-16193.



 

Poisson and symplectic structures on supermanifolds 



Let us consider a second-rank tensor field
 of type ,
,
which is defined on a supermanifold  with local coordinates
. Then, let us introduce the
bilinear operation
 
which is invariant, , under arbitrary
coordinate transformations, .
Evidently, this operation obeys the following properties:
 
[(a)] Grassmann parity
 
[(b)] linearity
 
[(c)] Leibniz rule
 
If, in addition, the tensor field  obeys the property
of generalized antisymmetry,
 
then, the binary operation () has the property of
 
[(d)] generalized antisymmetry
 
Finally, let us restrict  to obey
 
then the operation () obeys
 
[(e)] generalized Jacobi identity
 
From (), (), (), () and (),
it follows that the operation () coincides with the
Poisson bracket when  is even, , and
with the antibracket when  is odd, .

Now, suppose that the tensor field  is non-degenerate.
Then, defining the right and left inverse matrices, labelled by 
and , respectively, according to
 
we find that these inverse matrices coincide:
 
Due to (), we find that the inverse matrix  has
the following property of generalized symmetry:
 
We also observe the remarkable fact that the symmetry properties
of the inverse matrix  do not depend on the Grassmann
parity of the tensor field . Using the tensor field
 and DeWitt's index shifting rules (), one
can rewrite the relations () in the form
 
In terms of , the generalized Jacobi identity
() can be rewritten in the form
 

Let us now introduce a differential 2-form  on the
supermanifold , having the same form in both the even and
odd cases:
 
It is invariant under a change of the local coordinates,
. The external derivative of this 2-form is
given by
 
It is also invariant under a change of the local coordinates,
. The requirement of closure
 leads exactly to the Jacobi identities for
 (). Therefore, as in the case of the usual
differential geometry, there exists a one-to-one correspondence
between even (odd) non-degenerate Poisson supermanifolds and even
(odd) symplectic supermanifolds.

Algebra of operators  and  
 


Let us investigate the algebra of the operators
 () and 
(). Omitting the details of the tedious calculations for
operators acting on scalars on , we obtain the following
results:
 

Let us introduce a function , using the  relations
 
which, in view of (), is equivalent to
 
To solve these equations, it is necessary to use the consequences
of the Jacobi identities in the form
 
Therefore, the function  must satisfy the relations
 
and can be chosen as
 
Indeed, for the variation of  () we have
 
With allowance for () and (), one can derive
the following useful relation:
 

From (), () and () one gets the final
expression for the anticommutator ():
 
Taking this into account, we can see that when the base
supermanifod  is a flat Fedosov superspace, ,
then on the triplectic supermanifold  we have an
explicit realization of the triplectic algebra () -
(). Simultaneously, the operations () satisfy the
Jacobi identity (), and therefore () are
identified with extended antibrackets.


 99 
  B. Geyer, P. Lavrov and A. Nersessian, Phys. Lett.
B512  (2001) 211; Int. J. Mod. Phys. A17  (2002) 1183.

  I.A. Batalin and G.A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. 
B102  (1981) 27; Phys. Rev. D28  (1983) 2567.

  B.L. Voronov, and I.V. Tyutin, Theor. Math. Phys. 
50  (1982) 218; ibid.  52  (1982) 628. B.L.
Voronov, P.M. Lavrov and I.V. Tyutin, Yad. Fiz. 36  (1982) 498.
P.M. Lavrov, I.V. Tyutin, Russ. Phys. J. 25  (1982) 639;
Yad. Fiz. 41  (1985) 1685; Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.
50  (1989) 912.P.M. Lavrov, P.Yu. Moshin and A.A. Reshetnyak, Mod. Phys. Lett.
A10  (1995) 2687; JETP Lett. 62  (1995) 780.
I.A. Batalin, K. Bering and P.H. Damgaard, Nucl. Phys. B515  
(1998) 455.M.A. Grigoriev and P.H. Damgaard, Phys. Lett. B474  (2000) 323.
P.M. Lavrov and P.Yu. Moshin, Theor. Math. Phys. 126  (2001) 101.



  I.A. Batalin, P.M. Lavrov and I.V. Tyutin, J. Math. Phys.
31  (1990) 1487; ibid.  32  (1990) 532 (1990); 
ibid.  32  (1990) 2513.

P.M. Lavrov, Mod. Phys. Lett. A6  (1991) 2051; Theor. Math.
Phys. 89  (1991) 1187.

  I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Phys. Lett. 
B350  (1995) 44; Nucl. Phys. B465  (1996) 521;I.A. Batalin, R. Marnelius and A.M. Semikhatov, Nucl. Phys. 
B446  (1995) 249.

  P.M. Lavrov, Phys. Lett. B366  (1996) 160;
Theor. Math. Phys. 107  (1996) 602.P.M. Lavrov and P.Yu. Moshin, Phys. Lett. B508  127 (2001); 
Theor. Math. Phys. 129  (2001) 1645.

  B. Geyer, D.M. Gitman and P.M. Lavrov, Mod. Phys.
Lett. A14  (1999) 661; Theor. Math. Phys. 123 
(2000) 813.

  E. Witten, Mod. Phys. Lett. A5  (1990) 487.

  O.M. Khudaverdian, J. Math. Phys. 32  (1991) 1934.
O.M. Khudaverdian and A.P. Nersessian, Mod. Phys. Lett. A8 
 (1993) 2377; J. Math. Phys. 37  (1996) 3713. A. Schwarz, Commun. Math. Phys. 155  (1993) 249; 
ibid.  158  (1993) 373. I.A. Batalin and I.V. Tyutin, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A8  (1993) 2333;
Mod. Phys. Lett. A8  (1993) 3673; ibid. 
A9  (1994) 1707. H. Hata and B. Zwiebach, Ann. Phys.(N.Y.) 322  (1994) 131;
Phys. Lett. B320  (1994) 29.
J. Alfaro and P.H. Damgaard, Phys. Lett. B334  (1994) 369.
O.M. Khudaverdian, Commun. Math. Phys. 198  (1998) 591;
Laplacians in Odd Symplectic Geometry , [arXiv:math.DG/0212354].

  B. DeWitt, Supermanifolds , Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1984.

  B.V. Fedosov, J. Diff. Geom. 40  (1994) 213.
B.V. Fedosov, Deformation quantization and index theory , Akademie
Verlag (Berlin 1996).

  I. Gelfand, V. Retakh and M. Shubin, Advan. Math.
136  (1998) 104; [dg-ga/9707024].

  I.V. Tyutin, Phys. Atom. Nucl. 65  (2002) 194.


