-1.5cm 0cm 16cm

24cm

One-loop effective action for  SYM theory in the
hypermultiplet sector: leading low-energy approximation and beyond
 

A.T. Banin(atb@math.nsc.ru) , I.L.
Buchbinder(joseph@tspu.edu.ru)  , N.G.
Pletnev(pletnev@math.nsc.ru)  

Institute of Mathematics, Novosibirsk, 
 630090, Russia,

 Department of Theoretical Physics
 Tomsk State
Pedagogical University
 Tomsk 634041, Russia   

 
 hep-th/0304046  
 
We develop the derivative expansion of the one-loop 
SYM effective action depending both on  vector
multiplet and on hypermultiplet background fields.  Beginning with
formulation of  SYM theory in terms of 
superfields, we construct the one-loop effective action with the
help of superfield functional determinants and calculate this
effective action in  superfield form using an
approximation of constant Abelian strength  and
corresponding constant hypermultiplet fields. Then we show that
the terms in the supercovariant derivative expansion of the
effective action can be rewritten in terms of 
superfields. As a result, we get a new derivation of the complete
 supersymmetric low-energy effective action obtained
in hep-th/0111062 and find subleading corrections to it. A problem
of  supersymmetry of the results is discussed.  Using
the formalism of  harmonic superspace and exploring
on-shell hidden  supersymmetry of  SYM
theory we construct the appropriate hypermultiplet-depending
contributions. The hidden  supersymmetry requirements
allow to get a leading, in hypermultiplet derivatives, part of the
correct  supersymmetric functional containing 
among the component fields.







Introduction 
The  SYM theory attracts much attention due to the
remarkable properties allowing to clarify the profound questions
concerning the quantum dynamics in supersymmetric field models and
their links with string/brane theory. Maximally extended rigid
supersymmetry of the  SYM theory imposes strong
restrictions on the quantum dynamics. As a result, the quantities
characterizing the theory in quantum domain can be exactly found
or studied in great detail (see e.g.).

In this paper we calculate one-loop low-energy effective action in
 SYM theory, depending on all fields of 
vector multiplet. At present, the best, most symmetric and
adequate, description of  vector multiplet dynamics is
given in terms of unconstrained harmonic  superfields.
From this point of view, the  SYM theory is a model of
 SYM theory coupled to hypermultiplet in adjoint
representation of a gauge group. It is well known that the exact
low-energy quantum dynamics of  SYM theory in 
 vector multiplet sector is mastered by the non-holomorphic
effective potential 
(Low-energy effective action in arbitrary 
SYM model can contain, in principle, a holomorphic effective potential
 but it vanishes in  gauge theory.) 
, depending on  strengths  (see
Refs. ).  The explicit form of the
non-holomorphic potential for  gauge group spontaneously broken
down to its maximal torus looks like
 
where  is
an arbitrary scale,  and  (for more
detail see Refs.).  Expression () defines exact
low-energy effective potential in leading order in external momentum
expansion in  gauge superfield sector. We
emphasize that the result () is so general that it can be
obtained entirely on the symmetry grounds from the requirements of
scale independence and R-invariance up to a numerical factor
.  Moreover, the potential () gets neither perturbative
quantum corrections beyond one-loop nor instanton corrections
 (see also discussion of non-holomorphic potential in 
SYM theories).  All these properties are
very important for understanding of the low-energy quantum dynamics in
 SYM theory in the Coulomb phase. In particular, the
effective potential () provides the first subleading terms in
the interaction between parallel D3-branes in the superstring theory
(see e.g. ).  It was proposed that full  SYM
effective action, depending on proper invariants constructed from the
arbitrary powers of the Abelian strength  and obtained by
summing up all the loop quantum corrections, should reproduce (within
certain limits) the Born-Infeld action (
SYM/supergravity correspondence). Discussion of this correspondence and
its two-loop test are given in Ref. (see also a
consideration of the analogous problem for non-Abelian background in
Ref. and general approach to calculating the higher loop
corrections in).

In order to clarify the structure of the restrictions on an
effective action, stipulated by  supersymmetry, and
to gain a deeper understanding of the 
SYM/supergravity correspondence, we have to find an effective
action not only in  vector multiplet sector but
also depending on all the fields of  vector multiplet
(see discussion in). This
problem remained unsettled for a long time. Recently, the
complete exact low-energy effective action containing the
dependence both on  gauge superfields and
hypermultiplets has been discovered. It has been shown that
the algebraic restrictions imposed by hidden 
supersymmetry on a structure of the low-energy effective action in
 harmonic superspace approach turn out to be so strong
that they allow to restore the dependence of the low-energy
effective action on the hypermultiplets on basis of the known
non-holomorphic effective potential (). As a result, the
additional hypermultiplet-dependent contributions containing the
on-shell  and the hypermultiplet
 superfields have been obtained in the form
 
where  is the Euler
dilogarithm function and  is the same constant as in () (see
the details and denotations in Refs.). The effective
Lagrangian (), together with the non-holomorphic effective
potential (), determine the exact 
supersymmetric low-energy effective action in the theory under
consideration.

The leading low-energy effective Lagrangian () has been
found in Ref. on a purely algebraic ground. It would
be extremely interesting to derive this Lagrangian and
next-to-leading corrections in external momenta in the framework
of the quantum field theory. Such a problem seems to be very
non-trivial since the expression () includes any powers
of  and is singular at , therefore the result can
not be obtained by considering the Feynman diagrams with the fixed
number of external hypermultiplet and gauge field legs. All such
diagrams must be summed up! In recent paper, the problem
of computing the effective Lagrangian () has been solved
using the covariant harmonic supergraph techniques
. The more general problem consists in quantum field theoretical
or algebraic derivation of the subleading terms in the effective
action, depending on all fields of  supermultiplet and
representation of these terms in complete  supersymmetric
form. The present paper is just devoted to solution of such a
problem for one-loop effective action. To be more precise, we
discuss the construction of the derivative expansion of one-loop
effective Lagrangian  depending both on 
 gauge background superfields, their spinor derivatives up to
some order and hypermultiplet background superfields using the
formulation of the  SYM theory in terms of 
 superfields and exploring the derivative
expansion techniques in  superspace (see
also). It allows us to obtain the exact coefficients at
various powers of covariant spinor derivatives of the 
superfield Abelian strength  corresponding to the
constant space-time background that belongs to the Cartan subalgebra
of the gauge group  spontaneously broken down to
 and constant space-time background hypermultiplet

 





where 
. This background is the simplest one allowing
exact calculation of the one-loop effective action. We will show that
in this case the  superspace effective action can
be uniquely found on the basis of the effective action for vanishing
hypermultiplet by means of a simple replacement of
variables. Following this, the obtained result is rewritten in a manifest
 supersymmetric form using the same procedure as in
 but maintaining the complete hypermultiplet dependence. We
emphasize that the background () is a special
supersymmetric solution to classical equations of motion of the
 superfield model representing the  SYM
theory in terms of  superfields and therefore the
effective action does not depend on the choice of 
superfield gauge fixing conditions we impose on the theory.
Moreover, it can be shown that the background () is completely
formulated in terms of  superfields, which provides a
possibility to write the effective action on this background in
a manifest  supersymmetric form. However, this
background is not form-invariant under the hidden 
supersymmetry transformations of  supersymmetry. The
complete on-shell  supersymmetry involves the
transformations between the physical fields from the 
vector multiplet and from hypermultiplets. But the background
() does not contain the physical spinor fields from
hypermultiplets which are mixed with physical scalar fields from
 vector multiplet under hidden 
supersymmetry. Therefore it is likely from the outset that
the effective action on this background will not possess the
 supersymmetry. The action is manifestly 
supersymmetric but hidden extra  is violated. The only
term in the effective action that do not violate the hidden
supersymmetry is the one containing no spinor derivatives of 
and hypermultiplets, which is just the effective potential
(). We will discuss these important points in Section 5.




The paper is organized as follows. In the next Section we recall
the known properties of  SYM theory in 
and  formalism and discuss the background field
quantization including the choice of proper gauge fixing
conditions. In Section 3 we describe the calculations leading to
exact one-loop  superfield effective action for the
background (). Section 4 is devoted to representation of
this effective action in a manifest  form and discussing
the ambiguity of such a form. In Section 5 we demonstrate that
the first subleading term (containing the eighth power of Abelian
strength ) in derivative expansion for the constructed
manifestly  supersymmetric effective action is
non-invariant under the hidden  supersymmetry
transformations of  SUSY and hence it is not 
 supersymmetric.  Then we examine the hypermultiplet-dependent
terms which must be added to the known effective action in
the vector multiplet sector in order to make the whole  term in
the complete effective action  supersymmetric. We show
that such terms can be found in the form of a finite order
polynomial in spinor derivatives of harmonic hypermultiplet
superfields and get the correct leading term in this polynomial.
In Summary we formulate final results and discuss unsolved
problems.






Minimal formulation of  SYM theory in 
superspaces and  supersymmetric background field method 

Formulation of  SYM theory possessing off-shell
manifest  supersymmetry is unknown so far. Therefore a
study of the concrete quantum aspects of this theory is usually
based on its formulation either in terms of physical component
fields (see e.g.) or in terms of  superspace
(see e.g.) or in terms of  harmonic
superspace. In the first case, all four
supersymmetries are hidden; in the second case, one of them is
manifest and the other three are hidden; in the third case, two
supersymmetries are manifest and the other two are hidden. It is
worth pointing out that in all cases at least some of the
supersymmetries are on shell. Taking into account that the
presence of manifest symmetries simplifies a process of
calculations in quantum theory, it is reasonable to consider that
at present just  harmonic superspace formulation is
the best one for quantum  SYM theory. However, the
formulation in terms of  superspace has its own
positive features basically due to a relatively simple structure
of  superspace and large accumulated experience of
work with  supergraphs.

 superfield description of  vector
multiplet can be realized with the help of on-shell 
superfields  satisfying the
reality condition




and on-shell constrains





All physical fields of 
vector multiplet are contained in the superfield . We
point out also the attempts to develop unconstrained formulation
in harmonic superspace approach. However, a 
off-shell supersymmetric action for  SYM model is
still unknown.




 SYM theory in  superspace 
The physical field content of the superfield  can be
obtained by combining three  chiral superfields and
one  vector multiplet superfield. Then, the
six real scalars, which are the lowest components of the
superfield , are represented by the three complex scalar
components of the chiral  superfields .
The four Weyl fermions from  are divided into three plus
one. Three of them are considered as the spinor components of
 and the fourth fermion is treated as gaugino and
constitutes, together with the real vector, the  vector
multiplet superfield . In such a description, the
 subgroup of   symmetry group is
manifest and the representations of the  are decomposed
according to ,
 so that the chiral superfields
 transform in the  of , the antichiral
 transforms in the  and the vector
multiplet superfield is a singlet under .



The action of  SYM model is formulated in terms of  superspace
as follows
 
The denotations and conventions correspond to Ref..
All superfields here are taken
in the adjoint representation of the gauge group. Both 
SYM and chiral superfield actions are superconformal invariants. In
addition to the manifest  supersymmetry and 
symmetry on the  indices of  and , it has
hidden global supersymmetry given by transformations
&W_ =-^i _  ^2 _ci +
i^ _i _ _c ^i ,&

&W _ =-_i ^2 _c ^i + i^i _ _ci ,&

&_c ^i =^i W_ ,_ci =^ _i W _ .&The action () is also invariant under the transformations
 _c ^i &=&c^ijk  ^2 ( _j  _ck )+i
[ ^j _cj ,_c ^i ],
 _ci &=&c_ijk ^2 ( ^j _c ^k )+i
[ _j _c ^j ,_ci ],Here the covariant spinor derivatives
,, and
 are defined in Ref.  and
 are the  superfield parameters  forming
the -isospinor as well as .  These parameters
include the central charge transformation parameters,
supersymmetry transformation parameters and internal symmetry
parameters of . The transformations ()
are given in terms of background covariant superfields 
, 
. Further
we use only these covariant chiral superfields and the
subscript  is omitted.  It is convenient to introduce
the new notations
 and rewrite two
last terms in () as follows





which is  form
of hypermultiplet and lowest component of the chiral 
field strength vector multiplet interaction for 
model.


If the gauge group is Abelian, we get a free model. In the
non-Abelian case, the theory has a moduli space of vacua
parameterized by the vev's of the six real scalars. The manifold
of vacua is determined by the conditions of vanishing scalar
potential (F-flatness plus D-flatness). The solutions
to the equations determining a vacuum structure of the theory can
be classified according to the phase of the gauge theory they give
rise to. In the pure Coulomb phase, each scalar field can have its
specific non-vanishing vev. As a result, space of vacua is 
 where  is the Weyl group of
permutations for  elements and an unbroken gauge group is .
But when several vev's coincide, some non-Abelian group 
 remains unbroken and some massless gauge bosons appear in
the theory.






 SYM theory in  harmonic superspace 
From  supersymmetry point of view, the 
vector multiplet consists of the  vector multiplet and
hypermultiplet. Therefore the  SYM action can be
treated as some special   supersymmetric theory,
action of which is the action for  SYM theory plus
action describing the hypermultiplet  in adjoint
representation coupled to  vector multiplet. Such a
theory is formulated in  harmonic superspace
. The dynamic variables in this case are real
unconstrained analytic gauge superfield  and complex
unconstrained analytic superfield . The harmonic gauge
connection  serves as the potential of the 
SYM theory and  describes the hypermultipet. Action of the
 SYM theory looks like
 
The corresponding equations of motion are
 
Here  is the index of the rigid  symmetry,
,
 and
 is the strength of  analytic gauge
superfield  connection in the -frame
,  is a coupling constant, 
, 
,  is the measure of integration over the
harmonic variables . The derivatives
 do not need a connection in the
frame where G-analyticity is manifest. All other
denotations are given in Ref.. Equations ()
present the  SYM field equations of motion written in
terms of  superfields. The off-shell action
()  allows to develop the manifest 
supersymmetric quantization. Moreover, this action is invariant
under hidden extra  supersymmetry transformations
 which mix up ,  with .
For our aim it is sufficient to point out that in the Abelian case
the corresponding transformations of hidden 
supersymmetry are defined only on shell and have the form
 
As a result, the model under consideration is 
supersymmetric on shell.

Vacuum structure of the model () in Abelian case is defined in
terms of solutions to
the following equations
 
which are simple consequences
of the Eqs. () in Abelian case.
Equations () for physical components of the 
vector multiplet determined by the expansion
 



look like

 
The simplest solution to these equations of motion forms a set of
constant background fields
 
which transform linearly  through each other under hidden
 supersymmetry transformations ():
 
The solution () is the simplest vacuum configuration
carrying out a representation of  supersymmetry and
allowing to calculate the  supersymmetric low-energy
effective action in  SYM theory.

It is instructive to compare the  supersymmetric
backgrounds () and the background (). Last
background contains the components  and  of the 
 vector multiplet when the components  and 
of the hypermultiplet are absent. As a result, the background
() is not form-invariant under the hidden 
supersymmetry transformations () and therefore this
background is not a representation of  supersymmetry.
However, the background () is a representation of manifest
 supersymmetry. Therefore we can state that effective
action found on the background () within 
background field method will be manifestly 
supersymmetric and gauge invariant but it should not be completely
 supersymmetric. The explicit calculations, fulfilled
in Sections 3 and 4, confirm this point of view. To construct the
complete  supersymmetric effective action, we can
follow the approach developed in. We consider the
effective action in  vector multiplet sector and find
such an action depending both on  vector multiplet and
on hypermultiplet so that the sum of above actions would be
invariant under hidden  supersymmetry transformations
(). This idea is realized in Section 5 for finding
leading contributions to the  supersymmetric form of
the -term in the effective action.




 background field quantization 
For computation of the effective action we use 
superfield background field method (see e.g.)
in combination with  superfield heat kernel techniques
. These methods for constructing the effective action in
gauge field theories allow to preserve a classical gauge
invariance in quantum theory and sum, in principle, an infinite
set of Feynman diagrams to a single gauge invariant functional
depending on the background fields. As we pointed out, the theory
under consideration can be formulated either in terms of component
fields, or in terms of  superfields, or in terms of
 harmonic superfields. The evaluation of effective
action in component formulation is extremely complicated even
within background field method because of a very large number of
interacting fields and the absence of manifest supersymmetry. The
effective action can be studied within  harmonic
superspace. The corresponding  background field method
was proposed in Refs. The aspects of heat kernel
techniques were considered in Refs.. However, these
techniques are undeveloped yet in many details to be extended for
our goals. We take into account a problem of matrix operators
mixing the  vector multiplet and hypermultiplet
sectors. Of course, the effective action can be studied using
harmonic supergraphs but we expect here meeting with the standard
problem of how to organize the calculations allowing to go beyond
leading low-energy approximation (see calculations in leading low-energy
approximation e.g. in Refs..
Therefore, we work within a formulation in terms of 
superfields and use our experience to work with the theories
formulated in  superspace.


The background field method is based on splitting the fields into
classical and quantum and imposing the gauge fixing conditions,
i.e. preservation of a classical gauge invariance,
only on quantum fields. Of course, the
gauge fixing conditions can break some classical symmetries as it
was mentioned above (for detail see e.g. Refs.
).
We define one-loop  effective action  depending on the
background superfields () by a path integral over quantum fields
in the standard form
 
where  is a quadratic in quantum fields part of the
classical action including a gauge-fixing condition and 
 is a corresponding ghost action. Formal calculating the above
path integral leads to a functional determinant representation of
effective action (see ()). The main technical tool we
use in this paper for the -superfield calculations is
the background covariant gauge-fixing multi-parametrical
conditions
 
here  are the Nielsen-Kallosh ghosts. We choose the
convenient gauge-fixing conditions for the quantum superfields
 and  in the form
 
where  are the arbitrary numerical
parameters and ,  are the standard notations for
Laplace-like operators in the  superspace. It is
evident that the gauge fixing functions () are covariant
under background gauge transformations. These gauge fixing
functions () can be considered as a superfield form of
so-called -gauges (see Refs.) which are
usually used in spontaneously broken gauge theories. Since an
Abelian background is a solution to classical equations of motion,
we won't worry about the choice of gauge-fixing parameters.
Therefore it is convenient to take gauge-fixing which we
call the Fermi-DeWitt gauge: . Such a choice of
the gauge parameters allows us to avoid the known problem
 in the functional determinant method for calculating the
mixed contribution which contains vector-chiral superfield
propagators circulating along the loop. Calculation of such
contributions using a conventional gauge is related to the necessity
of working with a cumbersome expression:
& Trln (-+
iW^ _ 
+iW ^   _   + M -&

 &-X 1 _- -  X
 ^2 ^2
-X1 _+ -  X ^2 ^2+
X 1 _- -   X 
 ^2+ X1 _+ -  X
 ^2),&
where the notations of were used.

We want to note once again that in gauge theories not all rigid
symmetries of the classical action can be maintained manifestly in
quantum theory, even in the absence of anomalies. The issue here
is that quantization requires gauge fixing and the latter, as can
be shown, breaks some symmetries (breaking the classic conformal symmetry
is discussed e.g. in Ref.). This is the known
general situation (see e.g.). In our case, the
gauge-fixing () obviously also breaks rigid classic 
 symmetry (, ) since it is
covariant only under  supersymmetry transformations.
Therefore the effective action obtained should be invariant only
under quantum deformed hidden transformations (). This
deformations can, in principle, be computed at each loop order but
this problem is beyond the purposes of this work.


After splitting each field
on the background and quantum part (i.e. 
,



), we can rewrite a quadratic part
of sum of the classical action () and gauge fixing action
() in the form
 
 where 



 



and  


are the background field strengths belonging to the Cartan subalgebra
and . The Weyl basis in the space of
hermitian traceless matrices from the algebra  was used in
order to obtain (). We consider the case of the gauge
group  broken down to the maximal torus .
The constraint   arises since the components of the quantum
superfields which lie in the Cartan subalgebra do not interact
with the background field and therefore they completely decoupled.
For details of using the Weyl basis to calculate the effective action
see e.g..



The operator  is a matrix depending on covariant derivatives
and background fields. The explicit form of this matrix looks like
 
where the following notations were used






and  means
 and 
respectively. In the space of chiral and antichiral superfields
these operators act as follows



 



It should be
noted that generally speaking, the second variation of the
classical action leads to a  matrix operator.
But the chosen gauge-fixing condition () allows partial
diagonalization to a  block matrix and
separation of kinetic operator for the vector fields. Hence
we avoid the functional trace calculation problem for the
above-mentioned cumbersome operator. This gauge-fixing condition
eliminates the interaction vertexes between quantum matter fields and
quantum vector fields but generates new interaction vertexes
between quantum chiral fields and ghosts.

Let us consider now a structure of Faddeev-Popov ghost contribution to
the one-loop effective action.
The action of the
Faddeev-Popov ghosts  for the gauge fixing functions
() has the form
 
It leads to the following contribution of the ghosts to the effective action
 
where  was defined in ().

The final result of the integration in path integral
() over all quantum superfields is given by
formal representation for the one-loop effective action
in terms of functional determinants
 
Since the strengths  and  belong to the Cartan
subalgebra, only half of roots should be taken into account during
the integration over the quantum fields and the effective action
looks like



Our next purpose is a computation of the
above functional determinants.




Evaluations of superfield functional traces and one-loop effective action. 
In this section we present the basic steps of
functional traces calculations for the operators, which make
background-dependent contributions into the effective action
(). It is seen from () that in the absence of
background superfields  , the matrix operator 
includes only the background-dependent inverse propagators , 
and vertices for the background field  interacting with the
quantum hypermultiplet. Such a situation has been studied
in detail (see e.g. Refs.
). It should be noted
that the form of  containing dressed inverse propagators
is directly related to the  gauge fixing conditions
().

On the first stage we divide the matrix  into a sum of two
matrices  where the matrix
() contains all blocks with

 and the matrix  contains blocks
with  and  only. Let's present the logarithm
of matrix  as follows




Using the known Frobenius formula for inversion
of block type matrix





where ,
we get by direct calculation the inverse matrix for 
 
here we have introduced the notations




One can note that the
combination  () has naturally appeared during the
inversion procedure. Then we find the product 
 in a remarkably simple form
 

The next stage consists in matrix traces calculations. Let's
expand 
in a series in powers of .
The nonzero matrix traces will have only even powers of the
series, which are grouped into
 
where  was introduced in () and  means the
functional trace. Also we have to consider the matrix trace of the
. According to the above strategy,
we write the matrix as a diagonal matrix plus the rest, i.e. 
:
 
where matrix  contains only 
and  at zero background fields 
 and
therefore can be omitted. The matrix elements of  are
blocks with chiral  and antichiral
 projectors. After permutation of the
lines and columns, the trace logarithm of the matrix 
 can be reorganized as follows
 
The direct calculation of the matrix traces for the first terms in the Taylor series
allows to write the result
 
that together with () gives
 


The contribution of the Faddeev-Popov ghosts is determined by
eq.(). Extracting and neglecting the expression


, we obtain the ghost contribution to the effective action in the form
 
which is exactly () with the opposite sign. Therefore
second and third functional determinants in () cancel
each other. This surprising cancellation between contributions of
ghost and chiral fields to one-loop effective action in 
SYM theory was firstly noted in in harmonic superspace
approach. It should be especially pointed out that this result is
correct only on the constant chiral superfield background.

Finally, due to the cancellation between () and
(), the whole one-loop contribution to the effective action
() has an extremely simple form and is determined only by vector loop contribution
 
and all background superfield dependence is encoded in . For
the operator in the above relation, the powers expansion over
Grassmann derivatives of the gauge field strength of the
functional trace has been already calculated by different ways for
models with one chiral background superfield (seeand reference therein). As a result, we transformed a rather
complicated problem with hypermultiplet background to a known
problem. The feature of the theory with hypermultiplet background
is the combination () 
 which is
invariant under the -symmetry group of 
supersymmetry. That allows application of the results obtained for
 models to the case under consideration making the
corresponding redefinition of the quantity .

The functional trace () can be written
as a power expansion of dimensionless
combinations ,  in hypermultiplet superfields, where
 
In the constant field approximation
this expansion is summed to the following expression for the whole one-loop effective
action (see details in):
 





As a result, we see that the only difference between the effective actions
with and without the hypermultiplet background is stipulated by the structure of
matrix  defined by ().
In component form, the
closed relation for one-loop effective action () has natural
Schwinger-type expansion over  powers. The expansion
doesn't include  term that is a property of  SYM
theory. The function  defined in
() (see) has the following expansion
 
Eq. () allows to expand the effective action
() in series in powers of ,  as
follows
 
where the term  contains terms
 with . In the bosonic sector,
this expansion corresponds to expansion in powers of the strength ,
namely 
, where  and
 are physical bosonic fields of the  vector
multiplet and hypermultiplet.





Transformation of the  supersymmetric effective
action to a manifest  supersymmetric form 
The effective
action () and its expansion () are given
in terms of  superfields. Our next purpose is to find
a manifest  form of each term in expansion
(). To do that, we extract from  the 
form of the
,
(which was defined in eq. ()  in terms of 
superfields) writing , and then expand the
denominator  from () in a power series in
. This expansion leads to the following form for a generic term
of the series
 
Further, using 
 and definitions of
 projections for  on-shell vector
multiplet 
, we can reconstruct
 form of the above generic term. It is worth pointing out that
the reconstruction procedure has some off-shell ambiguity (see
) even for vanishing hypermultiplet fields but this ambiguity
is unessential in the case under consideration.

The derivative expansion () of the effective action
contains the known non-holomorphic potential as a first term (see
()). It can be unambiguously rewritten in a 
form, following from  calculations on the
background (). This unique term is automatically 
 supersymmetric since it does not contain the derivatives of the
hypermultiplet and vector strengths. Recovering of the other terms
in the derivative expansion of the effective action is not so
evident and needs special prescriptions.

Calculation of the above effective action was fulfilled on the constant
background (), but for recovering the  form
such a background is insufficient. We must take into account the
derivatives of the  hypermultiplet fields. The
procedure of restoring the  supersymmetric expressions,
based on corresponding  reduction, always implies
forming of the  integral measure 
.
Therefore, to get an integral over  superspace from an
integral over  superspace, we must form the derivatives
 in the initial 
 superspace integrand. In order to obtain such total derivatives
in the integrand (), we have to add all necessary
 derivative-containing terms with
specified numerical coefficients to the initial  superspace integrand by hand,
since they did not appear in the process of computations. If we
calculate the effective action in terms of  superfields not
on the special background () but on the proper background
(), these absenting terms will be presented
automatically. Then the derivatives 
could be formed in the  superspace integrand and, as a
result, we would obtain the integral over  superspace.

Further, we use the evident enough assumptions about the properties of
the effective action. Effective action is manifestly 
supersymmetric and, hence, each term in its expansion in
derivatives can be written as the integral over 
superspace of function depending on  superfield
strengths, hypermultiplet superfields and their spinor
derivatives. It allows to argue as follows. Using
integrations by parts in the integrals over  superspace and
expressing the terms in derivative expansion of effective action, we
transfer all derivatives from hypermultiplets to the 
superfield strengths and then ones make the reduction to 
form. As a result, we see that all terms in derivative expansion can
be written in the form similar to  defined in
(), i.e.  without derivatives of the hypermultiplet
superfields. It means that we can act in reverse order beginning with
the given  form and restoring the corresponding 
form. Also we take into account that the derivative expansion at
vanishing hypermultiplet superfields is presented in terms of 
superconformal scalars 
and will search for hypermultiplet dependence compatible with this
property.

Further we demonstrate how the use of the above prescription allows to
obtain the functionals 
 () in terms of 
superfields. Let us begin with the functional 
 (which is
) and rewrite it in the form () using

 
It is natural to identify the quadratic combination of 
 superfields  of 
 superfields with  projection of the quadratic
combination of Fayet-Sohnius hypermultiplets .
Such an identification can be checked e.g. by comparison of the
component structures. Then we apply the relations
 
where dots mean the terms involving the derivatives of 
which can be omitted in our on-shell analysis. Thus, the 
 integrand () can be written via 
vector multiplet superfields and hypermultiplets as
 
where the dots mean all terms involving hypermultiplet derivatives
of the form 


 which, according to
the above prescriptions, should be added in order to obtain the
full   integration measure 
in the integral over  superspace (40). As a result,
the above prescriptions lead to an expression
 
where 
 was defined in (). The second term in
() can be transformed to the form () using the power
series for the Euler dilogarithm function and relation
. We see
that the expression () is just the effective Lagrangian
() found in.

 form of next term () in the series
() is reconstructed using () and expansion of
 in . Direct analysis, analogous to one
in the previous case, leads to the following expression for
 in ()
 
The
-independent part of this term was given in.  The sum in
() can be written in an explicit form as follows
 
Applying
the same procedure to the third term () in (),
one obtains  
where the sum in the right-hand side is
 
Thus, we have found the hypermultiplet-dependent complementary terms to
,  and  for the effective
action obtained in in the  vector multiplet sector.
Clearly every term in the expansion of effective action
() can be written in  supersymmetric form.
For example, the -dependent part of the fourth term (
) in () contains two parts. The first one is
 




and the second part is given as follows
 









Thus, we see that this  reconstruction procedure for
the effective action () of  SYM theory,
written initially in terms of  superfield, can be
realized completely for any terms in the expansion ()
completing these terms by the corresponding terms containing the
hypermultiplet superfields.  Unfortunately, we can not guarantee
that the reconstructed effective action will be 
invariant. Therefore this point needs independent test. For this
purposes, we can use either  form of the hidden 
 supersymmetry transformations (,
), or  form of hidden 
supersymmetry transformations () in the harmonic
superspace.

The low-energy effective action  SYM theory is
expected to be self-dual and, in addition, invariant under the
(probably quantum deformed, see) superconformal group transformations.
But it turns out that even these requirements are not sufficient
to fix the  form of the effective action functional
uniquely. Until now we have used the constant
field approximation () which supposes that all derivatives
of the hypermultiplet fields vanish. This approximation suffices
to restore the manifestly  supersymmetric effective
action on the basis of its  form (),
calculated on the background (), in terms of 
superconformal scalars. However, finding 
supersymmetric effective action requires fulfillment of all
calculations on the background mentioned in the section 2.2. (i.e.
supposing ). Another way to obtain terms with
derivatives , necessary for constructing the 
supersymmetric form, can be based on algebraic consideration
analogous to.


Since in on-shell description the  hypermultiplet superfields
 and superfield strengths  are
independent on harmonic variables , one can insert a
harmonic integral into the expressions for 
 and write the variables 
as  
. This allows studying the variation of effective
action under hidden supersymmetry transformations using harmonic
superspace formalism. This variational procedure and other problems
of restoring  supersymmetric effective action will be
considered in the next section.




Problem of restoring  supersymmetric effective
action 
As we already pointed out, all manifestly 
supersymmetric contributions obtained in the previous section and
defining a derivative expansion, except (), should not be 
 supersymmetric because of the background choice () and
the gauge-fixing procedure (). In particular, they must be
non-invariant under hidden  supersymmetry transformations
(), except (). It is obvious that in order to
obtain  supersymmetric contributions from the ones given in the
previous section, we have to add to each term in the derivative
expansion of () some extra terms.
On equal footing these extra terms must contain fields  of the vector
multiplet, which are presented in the effective action (),
as well as fields  of the hypermultiplet, which are absent in the
special background definition ().

We study a possible form of terms depending on the
hypermultiplet  and its spinor derivatives  in
the effective action. We assume that this on-shell 
supersymmetric effective action is described by manifestly 
 supersymmetric effective Lagrangian depending on 
, their spinor derivatives,  and spinor
derivatives of . The leading low-energy contribution to
such an effective Lagrangian is known and given by the expressions
(), (). Now we discuss a possibility to obtain
next-to-leading corrections. First, we note that the 
is a fermionic superfield; second, it is known that on shell
. Hence, the effective Lagrangian
can be written as a finite order polynomial in first derivatives
 with the coefficients depending on  and 
 and their spinor derivatives. Since the
superfield effective Lagrangian is integrated over full 
 superspace, it is dimensionless and chargeless. The only way
to compensate dimensional quantities 
 is to use the  strengths and
their spinor derivatives. Therefore we can write down all the
possible terms in expansion of the effective Lagrangian in power
series in  up to dimensionless functions which can
depend only on dimensionless quantities  () and
quantities (). As a result, we get a method allowing, in
principle, to find the entire structure of the on-shell 
supersymmetric effective action.

Let's assume that the above procedure has been realized and we got
such an effective Lagrangian. Using the integrations by path we
transfer, where it is possible, all spinor derivatives from
 onto  and compare a result with
derivative expansion of the expression (). Since the
effective Lagrangian under consideration contains the derivatives
 which are absent in (), transferring the
derivatives from  to  will lead to
new terms in comparison to (). Hence, one can expect
that a proper  supersymmetric effective Lagrangian, in
principle, should have the other numerical coefficients at the
-dependent terms in comparison to (), except the
term (). We conclude once more that the result
() does not allow to derive the  supersymmetric
effective action directly.

However, there exists a principal possibility to construct
 supersymmetric on-shell effective action on the basis
of the relation (). We can act as follows. Let us
consider a derivative expansion of () at .
Each term of the expansion is expressed in a manifestly 
 supersymmetric form. We insert the integral over
harmonics, which is equal to unit, into each integral over full
 superspace, taking into account that the integrands
are harmonic-independent. Then we investigate which
hypermultiplet-dependent terms have to be added to each term
of the derivative expansion so that the whole expansion would become
invariant under the hidden  supersymmetry transformations.
This is just the procedure proposed in for finding
the  extension of non-holomorphic effective potential
(). Further, we are going to discuss an application of this procedure to
reconstruction of some leading contributions to the on-shell 
 extension of -term in effective action.

Since the entire effective action can be presented as a polynomial
in , terms in the effective action corresponding
to the  extension of  have a form
 
where the dots mean the terms depending on the derivatives
. Direct quantum field calculation of the
-dependent terms demands to use an appropriate background
but it is an unsolved problem yet.(To get such an effective
action in  formalism we have to carry out the calculations
keeping the spinor derivatives of background chiral superfields. The
only example of these calculations was given within Wess-Zumino model
for finding the effective potential of auxiliary fields in Refs.
. In particular, such a potential for chiral 
superfields of the  vector multiplet arises from the
self-dual requirement for the  SYM effective action (see
Ref.).) 
Here we consider calculation of the first,
derivative-independent term only  in
() and show that the function  can be reconstructed on
the basis of -independent term in (). Then we check if
this function  coincides with -dependent terms in ().
Taking into account that we are interested only in the first term in
the derivative expansion (), we systematically omit, in process
of our calculations, all terms containing , since they
can not contribute to .

Let us consider the variation of the -independent term 
 in () under hidden
 transformation with parameters 
 directly in  harmonic superspace. Writing  as
 allows to rewrite the
initial expression as 
 which is equal to






Because of , a variation
of   is proportional to 
. Such terms are systematically truncated and
the whole variation is defined only by the numerator variation, which
gives





After integration by parts, the last expression becomes




Collecting all variations, we get
 
One can note that the hypermultiplet fields variation in the first
-dependent term 

 in () gives the expression similar to
() but with another factor: . To obtain this
result, we used a property of the full harmonic superspace integral


. It shows that the variation of the first term in ()
does not cancel the variation of the linear in  terms in the
-dependent sum. It means that the invariance under above
transformations is impossible. It is felt that this
non-invariance is compensated by "quantum" modification
 of the classical
transformation law like 

 and
these quantum additions to the variation of  would
compensate the non-invariance of the variation 
(). However, the direct analysis of several first terms in sums () and () shows that the quantum modification
can not save the situation since a coefficient  presenting in
 is changed with every order of  and never can be
chosen properly. We see the  invariant expressions
can't be constructed by the naive quantum modification of the
classical transformations (, ) and
therefore the quantum modification problem should be studied
separately. Nevertheless, the algebraic procedure proposed in
 for  completion can be applied in the case
under consideration.

To compensate the expression in right hand side of (),
we introduce the -dependent
complimentary term
 
We demand, a variation of the hypermultiplet "numerator" (i.e.
) in () should compensate the
variation (). This requirement fixes the coefficient
. But the whole variation  again contains another
extra variation terms, which can be compensated only by
introducing one more complementary terms. Further, we
consider a  variation of  in (). The
expression





can be written as
 
The numerator variations of both terms in ()
give








The first term in the brackets is represented by means of the
superconformal invariants ()
 
as well as the second term
 
In order to compensate
 
which is a part of (), we add the next complementary term
 
Then we consider variation of  in this term and compare a
result to (). The requirement of compensation
fixes the coefficient . The
uncompensated part in variation of  is
 
In order to compensate the first term in the last variation, we
introduce another type complementary term
 
In the component form the term  is proportional to




which obviously vanishes in the bosonic sector of the theory.
A partial variation obtained by varying only  in square
brackets () leads to 




 
In order to compensate the first term in (), the
coefficient . The direct
calculation shows that this coefficient allows to compensate the
second term in () with () as well.
Further, we have to obtain the whole variation of 
and take into account variation of  contained in
. Obviously, in order to compensate the whole variation of
, the
new complementary terms  are necessary. They
will lead to a new type of complementary terms 
, where , .

The analysis of all complimentary terms  is greatly
simplified when we calculate only the first -independent
term in the expansion (). In this case, we can find all
 in the series of the complementary terms
 
Let us consider the variation of general term in this series
 
Using the transformations (), we rewrite the second term in
() as follows
 
The variation  contained in the first term of
() is proportional to . Let us
transform the first term to form () using
integration by parts. Excepting the superfields  and
derivatives , which are unessential for this
transformation, we rewrite the first term in () in the
form
 
Taking into account the property ,
 and cyclicity property 

 at permutation of  -isospinor group
indices, we find, after some algebraic manipulations,( The
property  and cyclicity lead to an
identity 
.
The second term in this identity can be transformed to
 using integration by
parts and relation . Then, the identity
takes the form
.
Substituting it to the right-hand side of the expression
() instead of the second term and transferring a result
to the left-hand side, we obtain


 that leads to (). )  the first term of
() in the form similar to ()
 
The requirement of cancellation of () and
() leads to a recursion condition
 
which has a solution
 
It is highly amazing that the correct coefficient ()
obtained from invariance under hidden  supersymmetry
transformations differs from the coefficient in () only by
the numerical denominator!

Summing the series ( ), we find the correct leading
part  in expansion () of on-shell 
supersymmetric -term in the closed form
 
It is obvious that this expression does not coincide with result
(,) obtained by restoring the  form
of  from its  form. Thus, the leading
bosonic part of complete on-shell  supersymmetric
extension of  invariant is finally established.


Summary 
We have studied the one-loop effective action in  SYM
theory, depending on  vector multiplet and hypermultiplet
fields.  The theory under consideration was formulated in 
superspace and quantized in the framework of the background field method with
the use of a special gauge fixing conditions preserving manifest 
supersymmetry. The effective action is given by superfield functional
determinants. The concrete calculations of these determinants are done
on specific  superfield background corresponding to
constant Abelian strength  and constant hypermultiplet fields.
We have proved that the effective action depending on all
fields of  vector multiplet is restored on the base of
calculations only in  vector multiplet sector by special
change of functional arguments (see () and ()).

We have examined a possibility to present the effective action
obtained in a manifest  supersymmetric form. Analyzing
the effective action as an expansion in spinor covariant
derivatives, we have showed that the terms of this expansion can be
expressed via integrals over  superspace of the
functions depending on  strengths, their spinor
derivatives and hypermultiplet superfields. As one of the results,
we have rederived the complete  supersymmetric
low-energy effective action, which was discovered in.
All other terms in the derivative expansion of the effective
action describe the next-to-leading corrections to the effective
action found.

We point out that all terms in hypermultiplet sector in derivative
expansion of the effective action are gauge-dependent, except the first
leading term. They do not invariant under hidden 
supersymmetry transformations, which are a part of complete
on-shell  supersymmetry transformations of 
 SYM theory, because of the chosen background and the gauge
fixing procedure. To analyze a possibility of presenting
the derivative expansion terms in on-shell 
supersymmetric form, we applied a formalism of harmonic superspace
and algebraic approach developed in. We have considered the
first subleading term in expansion of the effective action in
 vector multiplet sector (-term written via
 superconformal invariants depending on strengths
 and their spinor derivatives)
and proved that it can be completed up to on-shell 
supersymmetric form by the hypermultiplet dependent terms and
presented as polynomial in hypermultiplet spinor derivatives.
The first leading term of this polynomial, which depends on
hypermultiplet but does not depend on its derivatives, is given in
explicit form (see ()).

The most important extension of this work that may clarify a
structure of next-to-leading corrections to low-energy effective
Lagrangian () in hypermultiplet sector is a computation of
effective action on the background (). It can provide
a direct independent verification of the results given in Section
4. It would be extremely interesting also to study full 
 completion of the  and higher invariants by all
appropriate hypermultiplet derivative dependent terms.




Acknowledgements 
I.L.B would like to thank E.A. Ivanov, S.M. Kuzenko, A.Yu. Petrov and
A.A. Tseytlin for numerous discussions on the problem of effective
action in extended supersymmetric field theories. The work was
supported in part by INTAS grant, INTAS-00-00254 and RFBR grant,
project No 03-02-16193.  I.L.B is grateful to RFBR grant, project No
02-02-04002 and to DFG grant, project No 436 RUS 113/669 for partial
support. The work of N.G.P and A.T.B was supported in part by RFBR
grant, project No 02-02-17884. I.L.B is grateful to Center of String
and Particle Theory at University of Maryland, where part of this work
has been fulfilled, for partial support and S.J.  Gates for kind
hospitality.  He is also grateful for partial support to INFN,
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, where the work was finalized, and S.
Bellucci for warm hospitality.

 000 



 W. Taylor, "Lectures on D-branes, gauge theory and
M(atricies)"; hep-th/9801182; O. Aharony, S.S. Gubser, J.
Maldacena, H. Ooguri, Y. Oz, Phys.Repts. 332  (2000) 183;
hep-th/9905111; E. D'Hoker, D.Z. Freedman," Supersymmetric Gauge
Theories and ADS/CFT Correspondence", TASI 2001 Lecture Notes;
hep-th/0201253.

 E.I. Buchbinder, I.L. Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, S.M. Kuzenko,
B.A. Ovrut, Physics of Particles and Nuclei, 32  (2001) 641.

 J.K. Erickson, G.W. Semenoff, K. Zarembo, Nucl.Phys. B582  (2000) 155; hep-th/0003055; N. Drukker, D.J. Gross,
J.Math.Phys. 42  (2001) 2896; hep-th/00102274; M. Bianchi,
M.B. Green, S. Kovacs, JHEP 0204  (2002) 040; hep-th/0202003.

 A.V. Kotikov, L.V. Lipatov, Nucl.Phys. B582  (2000)
19; hep-ph/0004008; "DGLAP and BFKL evolution equations in the
 supersymmetric gauge theory"; hep-ph/0112346; "DGLAP
and BFKL equations in the  supersymmetric gauge
theory"; hep-ph/0208220.


 I.L. Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, "Exact  supersymmetric
low-energy effective action in  super Yang-Mills
theory"; hep-th/0211067; to be published in the Proceedings of the
3-rd Sakharov Conference on Physics, Moscow, May, 2002.


 S.J. Gates, Jr. Nucl.Phys. B238  (1984) 349.

 M. Dine, N. Seiberg, Phys.Lett. B409  (1997)
239; hep-th/9705057.

 D.A. Lowe, R. von Unge, JHEP 9811  (1998)
014; hep-th/9811017.


 F. Gonzalez-Rey, M. Roc ek, Phys.Lett. B434  (1998)
303998; hep-th/9804010.


 Periwal, R. von Unge, Phys.Lett. B430 
(1998) 71; hep-th/9801121.

I.L. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko, Mod.Phys.Lett. A13 
(1998) 1623; hep-th/9804168;  E.L. Buchbinder, I.L. Buchbinder and
S.M. Kuzenko, Phys.Lett. B446  (1999) 216; hep-th/9810239.

I.L. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko, B.A. Ovrut, Phys.Lett. B433  (1998) 335; hep-th/9710142.

 B. de Wit, M.T. Grisaru, M. Roc ek, Phys.Lett. B374  (1996)
297; hep-th/9601115.


 A.De Giovanni, M.T. Grisaru, M. Roc ek, R. von
Unge, D.Zanon, Phys.Lett. B409  (1997) 251; hep-th/9706013.


A. Yung, Nucl.Phys. B512  (1998) 79; hep-th/9705181;
D. Bellisai, F. Fucito, M. Matone, G. Travaglini, Phys.Rev. D56  (1997) 5218; hep-th/9706099; N.  Dorey, V.V. Khoze, M.P.
Mattis, M.J. Slater, W.A. Weir, Phys.Lett.  B408  (1997) 213;
hep-th/9706007.

 A.A. Tseytlin, "Born-Infeld action, supersymmetry and
string theory"; hep-th/9908105.

 I. Chepelev, A.A. Tseytlin, Nucl.Phys. B511  (1998) 629;
hep-th/9706072.


I.L. Buchbinder, A.Yu. Petrov, A.A. Tseytlin,  Nucl.Phys. B621  (2002)
179; hep-th/0110173.

A. Bilal, Nucl.Phys. B618  (2001) 21;
hep-th/0106062; P. Koerber, A. Sevrin, JHEP 0109  (2001) 009;
hep-th/0109030; A. Refolli, A Santambrogio, N. Terzi and D. Zanon,
Fortsch.Phys. 50  (2002) 952; hep-th/0201106; D.T. Grasso,
JHEP 0211  (2002) 012; hep-th/0210146.

S.M. Kuzenko, I.N. McArthur, "On the Background Field Method Beyond One Loop:
A manifestly covariant derivative expansion in super Yang-Mills
theories"; hep-th/0302205.


 E. Ivanov, Russ.Phys.J. 45  (2002) 697;
hep-th/0202201.


 I.L. Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, Phys.Lett. 524  (2002) 208; hep-th/0111062.

 A.S. Galperin, E.A. Ivanov, S. Kalitzin, V.I. Ogievetsky, E.S.
Sokatchev, Class.Quant.Grav. 1  (1984) 469; A.S. Galperin,
E.A. Ivanov, V.I. Ogievetsky, E.S. Sokatchev, Class.Quant.Grav.
2  (1985) 601; ibid  613.

 A.S. Galperin, E.A. Ivanov,
V.I. Ogievetsky, E.S. Sokatchev " Harmonic Superspace",
Cambridge Univ. Press, (2001).

 I.L. Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, A.Yu. Petrov, Nucl.Phys. B653  (2003)
64; hep-th/0210241.


E.I.
Buchbinder, I.L. Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, S.M. Kuzenko, B.A.
Ovrut, Phys.Lett. B412  (1997) 309; hep-th/9703147; I.L.
Buchbinder, E.I. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko, B.A. Ovrut, Phys.Lett.
B417  (1998) 61; hep-th/9704214;   E.I. Buchbinder, I.L.
Buchbinder, E.A. Ivanov, S.M. Kuzenko, Mod.Phys.Lett. A13 
(1998) 1071; hep-th/9803176; S. Eremin, E. Ivanov, Mod.Phys.Lett.
A15  (2000) 1859; hep-th/9908054.


 J. Gates, M. Grisaru, M. Roc ek and W. Siegel,
"Superspace", Benjamin/Cummings, Reading MA (1983).

 I.L. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko, "Ideas and Methods of Supersymmetry
and Supergravity or a Walk Through Superspace", Bristol, UK: IOP
(1998).



 N.G. Pletnev, A.T. Banin, Phys.Rev. D60  (1999) 105017; hep-th/9811031;
A.T. Banin, I.L. Buchbinder, N.G. Pletnev, Nucl.Phys. B598 
(2001) 371; hep-th/0008167.


 K. Shizuya, Y. Yasui, Phys.Rev. D29  (1984) 1160;
T. Ohrndorf, Phys.Lett B176  (1986) 421; I.N. McArthur, T.D.
Gargett, Nucl.Phys. B494  (1997) 525; hep-th/9705200.

 I.L. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko, A.A. Tseytlin, Phys. Rev. D62  (2000) 045001; hep-th/9911221.

E.S. Fradkin and A.A. Tseytlin, Nucl.Phys. B277  (1983) 252.

P. Howe, K.S. Stelle and P.K. Townsend, Nucl.Phys. B192  (1981) 332.

E. Sokatchev, Phys.Lett. B217  (1989) 489; G.G. Hartwell, P.S. Howe,
Int.J.Mod.Phys. A10  (1995) 3901; hep-th/9412147; L.
Andrianopoli, S. Ferrara, E. Sokatchev, B. Zupnik,
Adv.Theor.Math.Phys. 3  (1999) 1149; hep-th/9912007; B.M.
Zupnik, Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl. 102  (2001) 278;
hep-th/0104114.




P.C. Argyres, M.R. Plesser and N. Seiberg, Nucl.Phys.
B471  (1996) 159; hep-th/9603042.

 S.M. Kuzenko, I.N. McArthur, Phys.Lett. B506  (2001) 140; hep-th/0101127;
 B513  (2001) 213; hep-th/0105121.

J.W. van Holten, Phys.Lett. B200  (1988) 507.


S.M. Kuzenko, I.N. McArthur, Nucl.Phys. B640  (2002)
78; hep-th/0203236; Phys.Lett. B544  (2002) 357;
hep-th/0206234; S.M. Kuzenko, I.N. McArthur and S. Theisen, "Low
energy dynamics from deformed conformal symmetry in quantum 4D N =
2 SCFTs"; hep-th/0210007.

 B.A. Ovrut, J. Wess, Phys.Rev. D25  (1982) 409.

 A.T. Banin, I.L. Buchbinder, N.G. Pletnev, Phys.Rev. D66  (2002) 045021; hep-th/0205034.

 M.T. Grisaru, M. Roc ek, R. von Unge, Phys.Lett.
B383  (1996) 415; hep-th/9605149.

I.L. Buchbinder, S.M. Kuzenko and J.V. Yarevskaya,
Phys.Atom.Nucl. 56  (1993) 680; Nucl.Phys. B411  (1994)
665; A. Pickering, P.  West, Phys.Lett B374  (1996) 297;
hep-th/9604147.

 S.M. Kuzenko,  S. Theisen,
JHEP 0003  (2000) 034, hep-th/0001068; Fortsch.Phys. 49 
(2001) 273; hep-th/0007231.

 F. Gonzalez-Rey, B. Kulik, I.Y. Park and M. Roc ek,
Nucl.Phys. B544  (1999) 218; hep-th/9810152.


