















340mm




























#1#2  
e^#1  
#1 , #2 
 #1  
 #1  





. 
. 
[. 
.] 
(. 
.) 





L   
L  _E 
H  _E 





_f 
_i 
__i ^_f   d  
d 
d 
_1 
_2 





S_c  
x_c  
x _c  
x _c  
x 
x ^2 
y 
y ^2 





k  
kx 
ky 
(ky)^n 
kx 
ky 
(ky)^n 
n! 
 _1 
 _2 
 
x  
y  
f^(n) () 





 J__#1  ()  





K_fi  
D [#1()] 







  
15 truecm
22 truecm
-1.5 truecm
-0.5 truecm

14 pt


Scalar and spinning particles in a plane wave field. 

A. Barducci and R.Giachetti 



  Department of Physics, University of
Florence and I.N.F.N. Sezione di Firenze    Via G.
Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Firenze , Italy(
e-address: barducci@fi.infn.it, giachetti@fi.infn.it)    
 Firenze Preprint - DFF - 401/03/2003  

 

We study the quantization problem of relativistic scalar and
spinning particles interacting with a radiation electromagnetic
field by using the path integral and the external source method.
The spin degrees of freedom are described in terms of Grassmann
variables and the Feynman kernel is obtained through functional
integration on both Bose and Fermi variables. We provide 
rigourous proof that the Feynman amplitudes are only determined by
the classical contribution and we explicitly evaluate the
propagators.
Introduction. 

Many years ago we studied the quantum mechanical interaction of a
relativistic material point (scalar particle) with an external
radiation field using the Feynman path integral method
. The eigenfunctions of this problem had been
known for a long time, and  a
beautiful method of evaluating the Green' s functions had been
introduced by Fock and Schwinger through the solutions of the
Heisenberg quantum equations of motion in the proper time
representation.
A direct calculation in terms of path integral
had remained unexplored probably due to mathematical difficulties. 
However, looking at the problem in a
a semiclassical way, in ref. we found a canonical
transformation which made it possible to evaluate in a closed form
the Feynman kernel for a scalar particle interacting with an
external electromagnetic wave field and to obtain an exact
expression for the propagator of the theory.

Later on  a lot of interest was devoted to theories involving
anticommuting (Grassmann) variables. This was mainly raised by
supersymmetries, but very soon the relevance of
anticommuting variables in many other fields was realized,
. In particular it was shown that Grassmann
variables are suitable tools for giving a classical 
description of spin and internal degrees of
freedom of elementary particles. These dynamical
theories described by Lagrangians involving ordinary c-numbers and
anticommuting numbers (Grassmann variables) were called pseudoclassical theories  and the general approach has been
defined as pseudomechanics , due to the special nature of the
variables occuring in the problem.

Having obtained a  pseudoclassical description of many interesting
physical systems it was very natural to investigate the
quantization of such systems by path integrals, performed both on
the ordinary and the Grassmann variables (for the general theory
of integration on Grassmann algebras see ref.). This
program had already been developed in some cases; for instance it
was shown that the Wilson loop could be reconstructed as a path
integral on Grassmann variables describing the colour degrees of
freedom. Other physical systems, such as 
non-relativistic spinning particles interacting with constant electric
and magnetic field and relativistic spinning particles in external
crossed static electromagnetic wave field were studied .
In each case, the result was obtained in a quick and
straightforward way, by solving the classical equations of motion
both for  position  and  Grassmann variables. Just a bit of
caution had to be taken for systems involving an odd number of
Grassmann variables, like for  the non relativistic and for the
massive relativistic spinning particle: it was shown in ref.
 how to extend the path integral techniques in such
circumstances, by separating from the total phase space a coupled
one-dimensional system and studying the general solution for the
latter. For a different approach to the path integral quantization
for a non-relativistic and relativistic spinning particle by using
BRST-invariant path integral see ref..

A further powerful instrument that can be brought to bear to the
present context is the well known external source approach (in our
context real and Grassmann sources). Indeed the aim of this paper
is to provide a rigorous determination of the Feynman propagator
for a charged relativistic particle, both scalar and spinning,
interacting with an arbitrary external electromagnetic wave field
by using path integral and external sources formalism.

One can ask about the intrinsic interest of this approach apart
from the pedagogical one. We would suggest that it is at least
twofold. In the first place
the development of new techniques to solve old problems usually
increases their comprehension. Secondly, new techniques
can produce new approximation methods to apply to new problems.
In this particular case we would like to emphasize the use of these
methods in
statistical mechanics, where  an impressive number of
old problems was solved in a very fast way by using
path integrals over Grassmann variables.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present the
results for the relativistic material point in this new framework:
they are certainly simpler, due to the simpler underlying physical
model (scalar particle). Next, in section 3, we switch to the
spinning particle and we prove that this approach works well in
this case too and we evaluate the physical Feynman kernel. In the final
section 4 we express the physical kernel on a spinor basis, obtaining
a more transparent expression for the Feynman propagator.


The path integral for the scalar particle. 

The Lagrangian describing the dynamics of a relativistic scalar
particle interacting with an external electromagnetic field is
given by

 

This Lagrangian is singular, giving rise to the constraint

 

and to a vanishing canonical Hamiltonian. According to Dirac 
we define an extended Hamiltonian

 

and we require the usual form of canonical Poisson brackets

 

The Lagrange multiplier  for the
 constraint   must be chosen to be
 negative in order to have a definite positive kinetic part.
The extended Lagrangian corresponding to  is


 


We assume that the electromagnetic potential  describes
the field of an external plane wave and therefore  is of
the form


 

where ,  is the
propagation
vector and   a transverse real
polarization vector. We find it useful to introduce a second
transverse vector  and the conjugate light-like vector
: they
satisfy the orthonormality relations

 

 

We shall derive the amplitude for the propagation of the particle
interacting with the external field, using the path-integral
technique as developed by Feynman. If 
is the initial point, and  is the final one
, we get

 

where the constant c is determined by the condition

 

and the physical propagator is obtained by the integral

 

where .
The calculation is done by introducing the shift
  where  is the classical path
which satisfies the equation of motion

 

and by integrating over the deviation  from the
classical path  with the boundary conditions
. In equation ()
 is the electromagnetic tensor of the potential
.  A series expansion in terms of  then gives 

 

where  is the
classical action corresponding to the extended Lagrangian .
By introducing the functional differential operators

 

the propagator takes the form

 

where

 

is the path-integral for a free system in the presence of an
external source . The latter is easily calculated and
reads

 

Here

 is the
contribution of the source to the classical solution. By using the
Green function of the classical free system,
 
, a simple
computation shows that

 

and

 

Similar equations hold for the terms containing higher order
derivatives.

We therefore see that both 

 and 

, as well as the 
action of all
possible mixed products of  corresponding to different values of 
the proper time over ,
are vanishing at  due to the relations (7). In other words

 

and we finally get

 

so that the propagator is expressed in terms of the classical
action only. To evaluate the action  we have therefore to solve
the classical equations of motion ()
or by projecting on the
basis  the equations

 

where  is the derivative with respect to the argument.
Letting  and ,
their solution, although somewhat lengthy, is straightforward and
reads as follows:

 
where we have defined . 




The explicit form of the classical action turns out to
be
 

and the final integration of () over ,
as in equation(),
gives the physical propagator in agreement with previous results
.



The path integral for the spinning particle. 

We now calculate the propagator for a spinning particle in an
external plane wave. The pseudoclassical description of a spin-1/2
particle interacting with an arbitrary external electromagnetic
field has been already described in and the Lagrangian
is

 

Analogous results, with minor
differences, were found in, while the general theory of
quantization Fermi-Bose systems is explained in.

The Lagrangian () is singular and produces the two
first class constraints
 

 
and the second class constraints
 

The extended Hamiltonian, compatible with (,
) is


 

The further second class constraints

 
will be imposed directly on the states, thereby restricting the
Hilbert space of the system. The relevant Dirac brackets are

 


According to the common practice for the path integration in 
quantum mechanics of an even number of
Grassmann variable, ,
we substitute the  variables with their
holomorphic combinations

 
 

(observe the useful identity

 ). For the path integration on the 
 variables we follow the procedure given in.
 The propagator takes the form

 

where
 
is the extended action. The shift from the classical or
pseudoclassical path

 

 
implies that the boundary conditions

 
have to be imposed when integrating over the shifted variables.

We next observe that the propagator factorizes as

 
where the meaning of the three factors will be explained here
below.

First of all it is rather evident that  refers to the
contribution of the path integral over  and . The
explicit calculation has been developed in and we quote
the final result:

 

The factor  accounts for the classical contribution including
the necessary surface terms, as explained in,

 

and the classical variables satisfy the equations of motion

 

 

The third factor  represents the contribution of the quantum
fluctuations and it is a straightforward generalization of that 
obtained in the scalar case. We can assume, without losing in 
generality, that
the plane wave field is of the form

 
with  and
. The corresponding
 electromagnetic tensor is therefore

 
and we finally write

 

Recalling the definition () of the functional differential 
operators
and introducing Bose and Fermi external sources,  and
 respectively,   we have

 

Here  is given in (,), while

 

where

 

is the Green function of the free pseudoclassical system.



By taking into account the results obtained in equation () for 
the scalar case,  the further relations  

) 

 

and
 


we finally have for  the same result as in the scalar
case, namely
 

In conclusion, the propagator we are looking for is again fully
 determined
once we compute the classical contribution . We find it
convenient
 to
write the latter separating in the exponent the normalization
factor of coherent states, the even Bose and even Fermi parts and
the odd Fermi
 part,
, , 
and
 
respectively, i.e. 

 

  and  are obtained by solving the classical
equations of motion. Explicitly, with ,

 


 


 


We now collect all the contributions , ,  and we
integrate over the
Lagrange multipliers associated to the first class constraints. We
get an integrated kernel

 



This is not yet the true physical kernel. As already
said, the second class constraint () imposes a restriction on 
the
Hilbert space of the states. We will now produce the projection
operator that does the job. Introducing, as in
, the
symbol  to indicate a change of sign for all the odd variables
inside the state vector, we have

 

where  represents an arbitrary four component
spinor.
The kernel in spinor basis. 

The propagator contains the complete information on the quantum
system and in particular the wave equation itself can be deduced from
it.
This is what we are going to do in this last section and to this
purpose we begin by rewriting the different terms composing the
physical kernel as matrix elements between states of the quantum space:


 

The appearance of  in equation() is due to
the fact that in the basis chosen for the coherent states
 we have the relation
. It can be
verified by a direct calculation that the explicit form of the
operators reproducing the kernel () are the ones
given here below.


 



 

and

 



 We must now choose a representation for  the algebra of the
 operators
. Two possible choices are given by the
following relations:

 

By  substituting () into  equations
(,,), the operator which represents the
physical kernel becomes

 


where   turns out to be a factor
  for the first representation in equations () and
  for the second one. Notice that if we choose the 
 first and simpler
 representation we have to perform a Pauli-Gursey transformation on the
 physical spinors

 

to obtain equation (). In this case it is then easy to
verify that

 

where we have defined

 

and  satisfies the squared Dirac equation

 

We therefore conclude that the physical kernel is indeed
the propagator for a spinor particle in the external
electromagnetic field, since it satisfies the Dirac equation

 

 999 


 A. Barducci and R. Giachetti, Il Nuovo Cimento 
A29 , 256, (1975).

 D.M. Volkov, Zeits. Phys.  94 , 25, (1935); V. 
Berestetski, E. Lifchitz, L. Pitayevski,
Theorie Quantique Relativiste , Editions
MIR, (Moscou,1973 ).

 V. Fock, Physik Z. Sowjetunion  12 , 404, (1937).

 J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82 , 664, (1951).

 Yu. A. Golfand and E. P. Lichtman, JETP Lett.  
13 ,  452,
(1971); D. V. Volkov and V. P. Akulov, Phys. Lett. 
B46 , 109, (1973); J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. 
B70 , 39, (1974); A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Nucl. Phys. 
B76 , 477, (1974).

 R. Casalbuoni, Il Nuovo Cimento 
33A , 115, (1976) and  33A , 389, (1976) .

 A. Barducci, R. Casalbuoni and L. Lusanna, Il Nuovo
Cimento 
35A , 377, (1976).

 F. A. Berezin and M. S. Marinov, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 
104 , 336, (1977).

 R. Giachetti, R. Ragionieri and R. Ricci, J. Diff.
Geom.  16 , 297, (1981); R. Giachetti and R. Ricci, Advances
in Mathematics  62 , 84, (1986).


 A. Barducci, R. Casalbuoni and L. Lusanna, Nucl. 
Phys. 
B124 , 93, (1977); Nucl. Phys.  B180 (FS2) , 141,
(1981).

 F. A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization 
(New York, N. Y., 1966).

 J. Ishida and A. Hosoya, Prog. Theor. Phys. 
62 , 544, (1979); S. Samuel, Nucl. Phys , B148 , 517,
(1979).

 F. Bordi and R. Casalbuoni, Phys. Lett. 
B93 , 308, (1980).

 A. Barducci, F. Bordi and R. Casalbuoni, Il Nuovo 
Cimento 
B64 , 287, (1981).

 C. Battle, J. Gomis and J. Roca, Phys. Lett.   
B207 , 309, (1988); Phys. Rev.   D40 , 1950, (1989). 

 For a review see Path Integrals from pev to
Tev , editors R. Casalbuoni, R. Giachetti, V. Tognetti, R. Vaia
and P. Verrucchi, Florence 25-29 August 1998 (World Scientific, 
1999).

 P. A. M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics ,
Belfer Graduate School of Science, Yeshiva University (New York,
N. Y., 1964).

 R.P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. , 33A , 440, (1950).

 L.D. Faddeev, in Methods in Field Theory , Les Houches,
R. Balian and J. Zinn-Justin eds. (Amste rdam, 1976).





