









          
 
      
        

Who Confines Quarks?  
 
- On Non-Abelian Monopoles and  

 Dynamics of Confinement      

K. Konishi  
  
Dipartimento di Fisica,"E. Fermi"

Universita di Pisa, 
 
Via Buonarroti, 2, Ed. C

56127 Pisa, Italy 
 
E-mail: konishi@df.unipi.it 







The role non-Abelian magnetic monopoles play    in the dynamics of confinement is discussed  by examining carefully 
 a class of  
 supersymmetric gauge theories 
as  theoretical laboratories.  In particular, in the so-called 
-vacua of  softly broken  supersymmmetric    QCD,  the Goddard-Olive-Nuyts-Weinberg  monopoles
appear as the dominant  low-energy effective degrees of freedom.  Even more interesting is the    physics of  confining vacua which
are deformations  of nontrivial superconformal theories.     We argue that in  such cases, occurring    in the   vacua of  
 theories  or in all of confining vacua of  or  theories with massless flavors,   a new mechanism of confinement 
involving strongly interacting non-Abelian magnetic monopoles is at work.     

Confinement as  a dual superconductor?  

The basic issue underlying  the problem of confinement and dynamical symmetry breaking  in QCD  
is the nature of the effective  degrees of freedom and their interactions.    The  idea of Abelian gauge fixing and the resulting picture of
(Abelian) dual superconductivity mechanism  for  confinement   implies 
that the most relevant  low-energy effective degrees of freedom are the  magnetic monopoles of
 two types,   carrying each unit charge with respect to  the  two  subgroups of   the color   group.  Condensation of these
monopoles would  lead to confinement of electric charges.   This scenario, however, 
leaves  many questions unanswered.  One is the issue of chiral symmetry breaking.   Do the
Abelian  monopoles  carry flavor quantum numbers?   If so, which, and how?  Does confinement induce chiral symmetry breaking?
Also, what is  the gauge dependence of such a description? 


Another, more serious  problem is this.   Does the Abelian dominance of confinement  imply dynamical color   breaking,
with a characteristic enrichment of meson  spectrum?   There are no phenomenological indication  that this  takes place in the real world
of strong interactions.    If so, what are  the other relevant   degrees of freedom, and how do they interact?  What is the structure of the 
low-energy effective action? 

Lattice QCD has not given a clear  answer  to these questions so far. 

Here we follow another approach: we examine    carefully  certain    solvable models which are basically  very  similar to QCD but  in  which
mechanism of confinement and  dynamical flavor symmetry breaking can be studied in exact, quantum mechanical 
fashon.     The models which we study with particular  attention will be  softly
broken

  supersymmetric gauge theories with gauge groups
,  and 
, and with all possible numbers of fundamental quark flavors, compatible with asymptotic freedom
. 




 
cm 
SUNQMS.eps            
Quantum moduli space of  theories. 
   


 

USPQMS.eps              
Quantum moduli space of  theories. 
  




Models and Global Symmetry  

         
  

The Lagrangian has the structure 
 
where
  
and      ()  gauge multiplet

   

   are both in the adjoint representation; 
  
describes  the   quarks and squarks. 

The number of flavor is limited to 

 respectively,   by the requirement of   asymptotic freedom.  
 The global symmetry  of the model is    (): 
   

It turns out  that  upon   perturbation  ,   and with  generic quark masses,  only a discrete set of 
vacua remain.  Most important of all,  vacua in confinement phase can be classified further by the type of the low-energy degrees of
freedom and by the way they interact.   See  Figs 1,2 and below.  

   Different types of Confining Vacua   in Softly Broken 
 Gauge  Theories        

Indeed, different types of confining vacua  are (see also Table  ): 

 



  Abelian  dual superconductor   -    with dynamical Abelianization.    
  The effective action has the form of a magnetic   gauge theory, where 
     rank of . 
 

[Examples are:  vacua in    also   all vacua in theories with  ] ;   

  



  Confinement by condensation of non-Abelian dual quarks    of effective
     theory; 

[    vacua   of ;  also 
    models with  ]   
  


     Confining vacua  which are   deformed   superconformal theories  
[    vacua of ;  also all confining vacua 
in  models with  ].     

  



 There exist also   vacua in free-magnetic phase, with   no confinement, no DSB,   for theories with larger
 (e.g.     in  .)
   




We wish to find out: 


 Why  does Abelianization   occur in some vacua?  

 What are the dual quarks?    

 What degrees of freedom  are there  in SCFT   and   how do they interact?  
 
 Phases of  gauge theory with  flavors.       

.  NB  and BR   stand for the "non-baryonic" and "baryonic"   Higgs branches.  


   
  


  
 Phases of  gauge theory  with  flavors  with
.   .   


   
  


  



Non-Abelian Monopoles 




 Gauge Symmetry Breaking and Goddard-Nuyts-Olive-Weinberg monopoles  


In order to answer these questions,  let us first recall some well-known and some relatively little-known   
 facts about non-Abelian monopoles.    The relevant setting is a gauge theory in which gauge symmetry is broken
spontaneously as  
  
where  is in general non-Abelian.  Finite energy classical configurations are such that



  
   
they represent elements of the homotopy group 
Asymptotically we can take
    
so that the constant vectors  characterize the configurations.

Topological quantization leads to the result that 


where examples of duals of gauge groups are:
 

   
 
 

  
Note that as   these finite energy solutions become singular 
  Dirac type monopoles.   Also, in the simplest case of    ,  
they reduce to the well known 
 't Hooft-Polyakov  monopoles.

  Quantum Numbers of N.A. monopoles     

In order to see what quantum numbers these monopoles carry, let us consider first the simplest case



Consider  the  subgroup 



          
which is broken as 

Use 't Hooft-Polyakov  solution   for     for the broken ,     one finds a    solution  (Sol. 1) : 








 
Another solution  (Sol. 2)  can be found by considering another      



    
leading  to a degenerate doublet of monopoles with  charges.    
       
      
 
 

    

  
  Generalization   
Generalization to the case of the symmetry breaking






can be done by considering  various     subgroups  ()   living in   subspace: one finds
(see the Table below)  
   

Degenerate  -plet of monopoles  ();  
  
Also,      Abelian monopoles  (),   ()     of       (non degenerate) appear;

       
 
 

  


 

These monopoles have  the same charge structures found in the  -vacua of    SQCD     (!) 

Also,  the flavor quantum numbers   of     non-Abelian   monopoles can be understood by the generalized  Jackiw-Rebbi
mechanism. 
 
 
   

   Subtleties     

There are certain  subtleties around  the non-Abelian monopoles:  

 

"Colored dyons" have been shown not to exist.  
Actually there  is no paradox here.     Non-Abelian  monopoles carry both Abelian and non-Abelian  charges, but both refer to   
  not  itself, while the results of Abouelsaood et.al.  refer to a non-Abelian generalization of charge fractionalization,
which is not possible;  

Non-Abelian monopoles are to transform as members of various  multiplets of the dual group , not    of  
itself.  Any search for the "gauge  zero modes"  should involve  non-local field transformations ;


It is not     justified to study the system
 
as a limit of maximally broken cases   ( Cartan S.A.  of ):


To do so would necessarily lead one to  the (non-semi-classical)  domain of strongly coupled, infinitely extended, light
monopoles     (just think of taking the limit     to   study   the 't Hooft-Polyakov monopole of   


  theory!).

Indeed, non-Abelian monopoles  are never really  semi-classical, even when 
       
if    interactions   grow   strong in   the IR:        may be   further  dynamically     broken  at 

.     
If it  is, "non-Abelian monopoles" simply means a set  of       approximately     degenerate  monopoles
 We verified this   explicitly by using the  formula of Klemm et. al. 	in   susy   pure
Yang-Mills theory   in an appropriate region of quantum moduli space. . 

 
Only if   remains   unbroken do   non-Abelian monopoles in an irreducible representation  of  
  make appearance in the low-energy action. 


Most remarkably,    
this last option  seems to be realized in the  -vacua  of ,  theories. We propose that   the dual quarks are nothing but
the        GNO monopoles.    



   


    Duality      

Further justification of our ideas  comes from the duality considerations. 

  

 vacua with 
     gauge group  occur     only   for

This can be understood as due to the      sign-flip of the  beta  function:    
  
so that the low energy  interactions are infrared-free.  Note that for this to happen 
the flavor-dressing of the monopoles  is   essential.

When this sign flip is  not possible for some reason,  such as in   pure  YM or in   generic points of QMS  of 
  theories,       dynamical Abelianization occurs.

These questions are  related to the  resolution of the old  Dirac-quantization-vs-Renormalization-Group  puzzle   (i.e., why the 
quantization condition 
 
is valid at any scale ?) 
in the Seiberg-Witten model.   


The boundary,      case,     is a    SCFT  (nontrivial  IR  fixed point):
    non-Abelian monopoles and dyons   still  show up as recognizable low-energy effective degrees of freedom,  although  their interactions are
nonlocal. 






 
5   cm    
RG.eps            
Duality. Monopole loop is equivalent to infinite instanton sum.   
     


      Dynamical Symmetry Breaking: a Puzzle
    




 
cm 
rvacua.eps              
 
  
  
  

As the quark masses are chosen unequal, , each of   vacua  splits into     points in QMS.   
This is very suggestive of a possibility that the massless monopoles in each vacuum is an   (Abelian)  monopole in 
  representation   of the global   
. This is precisely what happens in  the    theory with  . 
This would however (for generic   theories)  lead  to an effective action 
  with an  accidental   global   symmetry and hence to an enormous  number of Nambu-Golstone bosons   
when these field condense. 

Actually this does not happen. The system avoids this  awkward  situation by having 
  non-Abelian  monopoles in    of  dual  color , and  in the fundamental representation   
   of  the   global 
.    They      condense     in color-flavor diagonal fashion
     
("Color-Flavor-Locking"), breaking the global symmetry as
  

   
The non-Abelian monopoles may be regarded as baryonic constituents of  the Abelian monopole, 


The Abelian monopole,    being  infrared free, breaks up into the former!









     Almost Superconformal   Confining Vacua     

The most interesting sort of confining vacua  we encounter in the softly broken   
supersymmetric gauge theories are however  those which appear as deformation (perturbation) 
of a  nontrivial superconformal theory.   In order to be concrete, let us  study the case of the sextet vacua in 
,   ()    supersymmetric QCD in some detail below.   

   Sextet Vacua of  ,  Model   

The Seiberg-Witten  curve  of this theory equal bare quark masses     ()  is    



At the sextet vacua  of our interest (),
      the curve
exhibits  a singular behavior,

 
corresponding to the unbroken   symmetry.

The well known  mass formula  is  






 where the (meromorphic)  one-form  is given by


 

Expansion near the SCFT Point    

In order to find out the nature of the low-energy massless fields present, one has to expand around the singularity, 


The discriminant of the curve factorizes as 

 
so   the loci of    are



By rescaling    
 ,   and   intersecting  them with   a      
   and making  a  stereographic projection  from  
, one finds  that   the curves (in   space)  along which some particles become massless take the form of the 
three linked rings (Fig. ).     
       

 
cm  
IllustRings.eps                
Loci in  space where certain particles become massless.  
     
   
  Monodromy and Charges 

In order to find what  charges are carried by these massless particles, one has then to  study 
the monodromy  transformations (among    )  as one moves along  various closed curves 
encircling  parts of the linked rings. 

 
 
cm  
BitorusBr.eps                  
Homology cycles and the transformation exchanging the two necks of the bitorus. 
    
For instance  the monodromy around     leads to  



namely,

    From  the  formula 
   
  
the (four)  massless particles   at the singularity  
are   found to  carry  charges

i.e.,   they are  four magnetic monopoles carrying the unit charge with respect to the first .  
Analogously:




  

By using  then the conjugation   relations  among   the monodromy matrices 

    
they can be uniquely determined.  They correspond to the 
charges  

         
Now  
 
How are  these  charges   related to    ? 
Which of them are actually  there at the SCFT Point?  
How do they give    ?   
How do they interact  ?        
   
   


The first of these questions can be answered by studying the effect of transformation
which exchanges the two necks of the bi-torus (Fig. ),  



This allows us  to introduce a new basis such that one of the  factors is  a subgroup of   
and  another   is 
orthogonal to it.  In the new basis,  the charges look as in Table .   

       
     
     
      
        

    Superconformal Limit (  )     

We must  first of all  define    SCFT  limit appropriately.  
 

 
cm    
SCFTBitoro.eps                       
 


   

As ,  the bitorus degenerates.   
 If the branch points     collapse to   then    becomes diagonal with 
(Lebowitz)
 







In our sextet vacua the curve has the singular  form 
 
By an apporpriate change of the variable ,  one finds for 
the modular parameter   of the large  torus:     (weakly interacting  theory);

As for  the small torus  (  ),         apparently  depends on the way   are taken to .  

By studying the simplified  curve    with  variable change, 

 
one  finds that      depends only  on    
In other words,   different sections  of the   linked rings  at different phase of     
are  different  (-related)    descriptions of the same physics!   




Thus     we  define     the  SCFT  by taking the limit  


namely,  first.    This finally yields the following  charges of the massless particles in different sections.   Note the three-fold
periodicity. 



  
 
           
      

 
The three sections are related   by unimodular transformations
2  

  
At ,  the small  branch points are  at  
so that one finds  for 


which has solutions     

Other solutions by   transformations   
 

     Renormalization-Group  Fixed Point       


 
cm     
ADpoint.eps                       


Now how do  these massless particles give a vanishing beta function?    In the case of a 
nontrivial    IR fixed point of  the pure      Yang-Mills  theory,
cancellation occurs among a  monopole, a dyon and an electron (see Figure above).

   The cancellation of   in our  case (consider ) is more involved since now there  are  also contributions  of the
gauge multiplet.   Nonetheless, 

 

four monopole doublets     cancel the contribution  of the gauge multiplets;
a dyon doublet   and an electric doublet    cancel  each other as  


showing a nice (non-Abelian) generalization of Argyres-Douglas'   mechanism;  
in the second section cancellation occurs because both the charges and the coupling constant 
get transformed   by  ,   and the above argument works for  
   
and      with  

!   
This strengthens  our idea that different sections  are simply  different descriptions of the same physics. 



   Thus the  low-energy theory is an interacting SCFT  with
  gauge group and 
four  magnetic monopole doublets, one dyon doublet and one electric doublet.           







       Six Colliding   Local   Vacua:    

Another way to study  our   SCFT  would be to consider first the theory with unequal quark masses
and then to take the limit of the equal mass.   The SCFT  singularity splits to six  singularities.  

   
Each of the six   theories    is  a local   theory with  a pair of massless  Abelian monopoles  
    ()  carrying each unit charge with respect to one of the  factors; 
altogether there are  12  massless hypermultiplets (as in the SCFT);   
The effect of  perturbation     can be studied in a  well-known way,   in
terms of  an effective superpotential:    
 
which leads to      ,     (Confinement);    
However,      in the        (SCFT)   limit,  the VEVS of the Abelian monopoles   are  found to vanish: 
  
Analogous phenomenon was found in ,    theory.  

We do know (from  the large  analysis, vacuum counting, and holomorphic dependence of physic on ) however 
that   the flavor group is    dynamically broken in the perturbed  SCFT vacua:
      
 then what is the order parameter   of the symmetry breaking?  

    

We propose that   condensation of     doublets  
 
   (,   )  
     
is formed  due to       the  strong     interactions.       This is compatible with the known dynamical symmetry breaking
pattern.   Note that,  in the sense of complementarity,   such VEVS can alternatively  be understood as 


i.e.,  color-flavor diagonal  VEVS as in the generic -vacua.  

  
Summary  

 Softly broken     gauge theories with    quarks thus  exhibit   
various  confining vacua with:   

  

physics quite different  for 

(i)      Weakly coupled Abelian monopoles;

(ii)         Weakly coupled non-Abelian monopoles;

 (iii)          Strongly  coupled non-Abelian monopoles; 


nonetheless, both  at  generic   - vacua  and  at the SCFT () vacua,  the non-Abelian monopoles
condense as  

("Color-Flavor-Locking");  

Abelian  and non-Abelian monopoles  apear to be related  as  
 

  

   


QCD  

Finally let us come back briefly to the real-world  QCD.  Here   


   

no dynamical Abelianization is known to occur; 
    
on the other hand,   in QCD  with   flavor,     the original and dual beta functions have the first coefficients
(, )

they have the same sign  because of the large coefficient  in front of the color  multiplicity  (cfr.  Eq.()).  


  

Barring that higher loops change the situation, this leaves us with  the option of   strongly-interacting non-Abelian monopoles.  
Is it possible that non-Abelian monopoles (perhaps certain  composite theirof)  carrying nontrivial flavor   quantum
numbers condense 
yielding  the global   symmetry breaking such as 

observed in Nature? 
Are  't Hooft's Abelian monopoles    in some sense  composites of these non-Abelian  monopoles ? 


Acknowledgments 
The author thanks R. Auzzi, S. Bolognesi, G. Carlino, R. Grena, P.S. Kumar,
 H. Murayama and L. Spanu for fruitful collaboration.
The author  also thanks the organizers of the 2002 International Workshop
"Strong Coupling Gauge Theories and Effective Field Theories (SCGT 02)" (Nagoya, November 2002)
where this talk was given, and of  "Institue of Physics Meeting" (London, February 2003) where a
 slightly modified version of the 
talk was presented, for  stimulating  discussions. 




 100 


  G. 't Hooft, Nucl. Phys.   B190    (1981) 455;
S. Mandelstam,  Phys. Lett.  53B    (1975) 476.  

N. Seiberg and E. Witten,   Nucl. Phys. B426  (1994) 19; Erratum
ibid.      Nucl.Phys.   B430  (1994) 485, hep-th/9407087.

N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys.  B431  (1994) 484,
   hep-th/9408099.



P. C. Argyres and A. F. Faraggi, Phys. Rev. Lett 74   (1995)
3931, hep-th/9411047;
A. Klemm, W. Lerche, S. Theisen and S. Yankielowicz,  Phys. Lett.
B344       (1995) 169, hep-th/9411048;
 Int. J. Mod. Phys. A11    (1996) 1929, hep-th/9505150;
A. Hanany
and Y. Oz,   Nucl. Phys. B452      (1995) 283,
hep-th/9505075;
P.  C.  Argyres, M.  R.  Plesser and A.  D.  Shapere,   Phys.  Rev.
Lett.  75         (1995) 1699, hep-th/9505100;
P. C. Argyres and A. D. Shapere,   Nucl. Phys. B461       (1996)
437,
hep-th/9509175;   A. Hanany,
 Nucl.Phys. B466      (1996) 85,  hep-th/9509176.

P. C. Argyres, M. R. Plesser and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B471 
(1996)
159, hep-th/9603042.


  G. Carlino, K. Konishi and H. Murayama,
 Nucl. Phys.  B590   (2000) 37,     hep-th/0005076; 
G. Carlino, K. Konishi, P. S.  Kumar  and H. Murayama,
 hep-th/0104064,   Nucl. Phys.  B608   (2001) 51.



   S. Bolognesi and K. Konishi,  Nucl. Phys.  B645    (2002) 337, hep-th/0207161. 


 A. Abouelsaood, Nucl. Phys. B226  (1983) 309; P. Nelson and A. Manohar,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 
(1983) 943; A. Balachandran et. al.,   Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 
(1983) 1553;  P. Nelson and S. Coleman,  Nucl. Phys. B227  (1984) 1;  E. Weinberg,  Phys.Rev.D54  (1996) 6351,
hep-th/9605229. 



  R. Auzzi, R. Grena and K. Konishi,  Nucl. Phys.  B653   (2003) 204, hep-th/0211282.


   P. Goddard, J. Nuyts and D. Olive,   Nucl. Phys.  B125 
(1977) 1,    E. Weinberg, Nucl. Phys. B167  (1980) 500;  Nucl. Phys. B203  (1982) 445. 

P. C. Argyres and M. R. Douglas,   Nucl. Phys.  B448   (1995) 93,   hep-th/9505062.


P. C. Argyres,  M. R. Plesser,  N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys.
461     (1996) 71, hep-th/9511154.

 T. Eguchi,  K. Hori, K. Ito and S.-K. Yang, Nucl. Phys. B471  
(1996)
430, hep-th/9603002.

A. Lebowitz, Israel J. Math. 12  (1972) 223.

 A. Gorsky, A. Vainshtein and  A. Yung,   Nucl. Phys.   B584    (2000) 197,  hep-th/0004087. 




