 
 FSUJ-TPI-05/03

 CGPG-03/4-5

  Classical Solutions for
 Poisson Sigma Models 
 on a Riemann surface 

1.5em  Martin Bojowald(e-mail
address: bojowald@gravity.psu.edu )  and Thomas
Strobl(e-mail address: Thomas.Strobl@tpi.uni-jena.de ) 

0.5em  Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry,
Department of Physics,
 The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA
0.5em  Institut fur
Theoretische Physik, Universitat Jena, D-07743 Jena, Germany

1.5em 
  

1 2   
  
  
( 


  


(  )     
   

 
 
G  N  C  
L   X   A   E  
F   D   d 
D  H   T   M  
I  
P   S   C  
R  
O  
U  



 

.730
to0pt.40width.70
height.1pt depth.1pt 0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
 
 

  

theo Theorem 
lemma Lemma 
cor Corollary 
defi Definition 
prop Proposition 



 
We determine the moduli space of classical solutions to the field
equations of Poisson Sigma Models on arbitrary Riemann surfaces for
Poisson structures with vanishing Poisson form class. This condition
ensures the existence of a presymplectic form on the target Poisson
manifold which agrees with the induced symplectic forms of the Poisson
tensor upon pullback to the leaves. The dimension of the classical
moduli space as a function of the genus of the worldsheet  and the
corank  of the Poisson tensor is determined as 
.  Representatives of the classical solutions are
provided using the above mentioned presymplectic 2-forms, and possible
generalizations to cases where such a form does not exist are
discussed. The results are compared to the known moduli space of
classical solutions for two-dimensional BF and Yang-Mills theories.


Introduction  Poisson Sigma Models (PSMs)are topological or almost topological two-dimensional field theories
associated to a Poisson manifold. Given any Poisson bracket on a
manifold , characterized
by a Poisson bivector 
 where , , are local coordinates on ,
the topological part of the action has the form
S = _A_i X^i +  ^ij  A_i A_j  .
 It is a functional of the fields , which
parametrize a map  from the two-dimensional worldsheet  into
the target , as well as 1-forms on the worldsheet  taking
values in the pullback of  by the map , 
, . More compactly,  may be regarded
as a functional on the vector bundle morphisms from  to
.
The action remains topological if, e.g., one adds to it the pullback
of a 2-form  which has an exterior derivative  that
vanishes upon contraction with any Hamiltonian vector field of 
(cf for further details as well as for a topological
generalization of the PSM associated to -Poisson
manifolds)(This corrects an inaccurate statement in
, where only invariance of  under the Hamiltonian vector
fields generated by  was required.  Likewise, if one adds a
WZW-like -term: invariance of the closed 3-form  would require
the contraction (now a 2-form) to be closed only (instead of to be
zero as turns out to be necessary for gauge invariance).)   _^B  .  Likewise the local
symmetries are not spoiled, if one adds e.g. a term of the form _  C(X(x))  ,  where  is a
Casimir function of  and  a 2-form on . (More
generally, one may also add a sum of such terms, with several Casimir
functions and volume forms).  Due to the appearance of the 2-form(s)
on , the action is no longer topological in this case. Still,
several features of the theory, including the structure of the moduli
space of classical solutions considered in this paper, remain
unaltered; consequently, the theories are called almost topological.

Poisson Sigma Models are of interest for at least three
reasons. First, they provide a unifying framework for several
two-dimensional field theories,
including gravity and Yang-Mills gauge theories. Within this paper we
will use part of this relation to check more general considerations. 

The second point of interest in the topological Sigma Model
action ) stems from its significance for the quantization of
Poisson manifolds. It was noticed already early on (cf also) that
the quantization of the two-dimensional field theory () is
closely related to the quantization of the target manifold,
interpreted as the collection of phase spaces for fictitious point
particles (namely the symplectic leaves). Indeed, in a Hamiltonian
quantization,  taken cylindrical, any physical quantum state
of the theory corresponds to a symplectic leaf  satisfying
the integrality condition(In fact it is true in this form
only if the respective symplectic leaf  is simply
connected. Otherwise there are additional states, in general also
corresponding to nonintegral leaves. Cf for a complete
set of conditions.)   _= 2n  , n  , H^2(L)  .  This relation is readily recognized as the condition for
quantizability of the respective symplectic leaf  in the framework
of Geometric Quantization (cf e.g. ).

An approach to quantization applicable to general Poisson manifolds
 is provided by the program of Deformation Quantization (cf e.g.
). Here the main idea is to find an associative  (local) deformation of the product of functions on 
in the form of a formal power series which in next to leading order in
the deformation parameter coincides with the Poisson bracket. A
solution to this by then already long-standing mathematical problem
was provided by Kontsevich. Kontsevich's formula,
finally, received an illuminating interpretation as
appropriate two-point correlation function (evaluated on the boundary
of a disc, ) in a perturbation expansion of
action ).

Last but not least, a Poisson Sigma Model may be regarded as an
appropriate zero slope limit of (perturbative) String Theory in the
background of a -field. This may be a particularly interesting
point of view in the context of open strings ending on D-branes, where
in the case of a constant  background, the effective Yang Mills
theory induced on the D-brane was seen to become noncommutative
. The induced noncommutative product was found to
be the Moyal product of the respective Poisson bivector
 - the antisymmetric part of the inverse of the sum of  and
the closed string metric  - which is the (previously known)
specialization of the Kontsevich solution to the case of constant
.  One of the open issues in this realm is the generalization of
this result to the case of nonconstant -fields (resp. nonconstant
bivectors ). A reformulation of String Theory in terms of a
nontopological deformation of action ) may provide the appropriate
link in this context. Such a relation shall be pursued elsewhere,
however.

In the present paper we focus on the moduli space  (denoted also
more explicitly by  or by ) of classical  solutions of the (almost) topological models discussed
above. For a fixed topology of the worldsheet (two-dimensional
spacetime or base) manifold  and fixed target Poisson manifold
, we are interested in all smooth solutions to the classical
field equations (stationary points of the action functional ),
where solutions differing only by a gauge transformation (specified
more clearly in section  below) are to be
identified.  For fairly reasonable topology of  (guaranteeing
that  is finite) this moduli space will be finite
dimensional.  We will not be able to find globally valid solutions for
completely arbitrary Poisson structures , the main condition
being the existence of a presymplectic form  (on  or at least
in a neighborhood of any symplectic leaf  of ) which is
compatible with the Poisson bivector , i.e. whose pull back to a
leaf  coincides with the symplectic structure of  as induced by
. This result can, however, also be used to
determine solutions if such a compatible presymplectic form only
exists for some subset of leaves in . Moreover, information
about the space of solutions  can still be found
in more general cases by gluing techniques.

If the boundary of  is non-empty, there are some options as to
what kind of boundary conditions to place on the fields and
symmetries. In the present paper we allow for noncompact topologies of
, but will not restrict fields or symmetries at the (ideal)
boundary. This may be motivated e.g. by physical models arising as
particular PSMs. At least for some mathematical applications (but also
e.g. in gravitational models in the Hamiltonian formalism for "open
spacetimes", cf, e.g.,) it is, however, also of
interest to restrict some of the fields at the boundaries of 
and simultaneously to freeze all or some of the symmetries there; the
corresponding moduli space will in general differ from the above one
and shall be denoted by  (irrespective of the precise kind of
conditions at ). For  with
boundary conditions requiring that the pull-back of  to
 and  vanishes and frozen symmetries
at these boundaries,  may be obtained also by symplectic
reduction, and for sufficiently well-behaved  it was found in
 to carry the structure of a symplectic groupoid over ,
which integrates the Lie algebroid on  associated to the Poisson
manifold . In this case the transition from  to 
essentially corresponds to an additional factorization, replacing 
by the corresponding leaf space induced by .  Many of our results
can be adapted to the case of  for any , but we will
not do so explicitly in the present paper.

The organization of the paper is as follows. In Sec.
 we discuss the field equations and symmetries
of Poisson Sigma Models.  We also briefly review how particular
choices of Poisson structures result in known theories such as
two-dimensional nonabelian gauge theories and the gravity theories
mentioned above. In the subsequent section, Sec.
, we determine  for particular
choices of  where methods other than the one presented in the
main part of the paper are available such that there are results to be
compared with. These are in particular the nonabelian gauge theories
as well as Poisson Sigma Models with a topologically trivial foliation
of the target manifold , i.e. where  is fibered by leaves of
trivial topology.

(Likewise results, not mentioned explicitely, are available for the
case of the general Sigma Model when one restricts to topologically
trivial worldsheet manifolds, . Furthermore, quite
explicit results exist for the case of the 2d gravity models
; due to an additional complication
resulting from a nondegeneracy condition to be satisfied by the
gravitationally acceptable solutions, these are mentioned only rather
briefly here and a more detailed analysis is deferred to later work.)

In Sec.  we present our main results concerning the
solutions to the field equations of Poisson Sigma Models. They are
summarized in Theorem , providing the general solution for
Poisson structures permitting a compatible presymplectic form in a
neighborhood of any leaf, where the topology of  is arbitrary. We
are also able to integrate the symmetries effectively,
Eqs. symmetries ) below, such that we can provide representatives
of any gauge equivalence class of the space of solutions. Leaves which
do not have a neighborhood permitting a compatible presymplectic form
are not covered by the theorem, but we provide a discussion of a
possible generalization. (Let us mention right
away that there are Poisson manifolds with prominent examples such as
the Lie Poisson manifold ,  compact semisimple, where
there are no  leaves permitting a compatible presymplectic
form.)


In Sec.  the results are specialized and compared to the
results of Sec. , in particular also to the
two-dimensional nonabelian -theories with noncompact Lie algebra
. This example is also used in Sec.  to
illustrate the role of nonregular leaves. The analysis shows that in
the case of -theory nonregular leaves are related to the
irreducibility of connections. If the rank of the fundamental group of
 is at most one, nonregular leaves contribute only a subset of
lower dimension to the solution space . For sufficiently
large rank, the highest dimensional stratum of  is obtained
for irreducible connections corresponding to the origin as a
nonregular leaf. The methods of this paper then give information on
lower dimensional subsets of the solution space  with reducible
connections. For Yang-Mills theories these are solutions with
non-vanishing electric field, whereas an irreducible connection can
only exist when the electric field vanishes. The results for
Yang-Mills theories together with those of other methods indicate
that the classification of solutions can be generalized
straightforwardly to non-regular leaves, even though the explicit
formula for the solution  in Theorem  does not hold true.

Setup 

Field equations, gauge symmetries and moduli spaces 

For a chosen local coordinate system in , the fields can be
understood as a collection of scalar fields  and 1-forms ,
, , living on .  In general, this
works on local patches of  only, however; still this
perspective is sufficient for most of the purposes of the present
paper.  These patches on  may still be larger than those where
local coordinates , , on  exist and in which
. (E.g. if  is chosen as the dual of a
Lie algebra,  may be taken as linear coordinates on . Then
 and the 1-forms  exist globally on , irrespective
of the topology of the worldsheet manifold).  For some purposes it is
also convenient to consider  as a Grassmann odd field on
; in this context (such as in the field equations below)
functional derivatives are understood as left derivatives always and,
unless otherwise stated, products of forms (Grassmann objects) are
understood to be wedge products.

The field equations of the action functional () are
S A_i  X^i + ^ij (X) A_j = 0
 
   S X^i  A_i + 
^kl  ,_i (X)  A_k A_l = 0  If the terms
() and () are added only the second of these
equations changes, since both terms depend on the field  only.
Moreover, the contribution of () to the second equations, 
, vanishes upon use of () and the
condition imposed on ! So, the addition of () or a
similar WZW-term has neither an effect on the field equations nor on
the local symmetries (cf below) and consequently the classical moduli
space is unchanged. A more interesting modification of the topological
PSM is obtained when one drops the condition of a vanishing
contraction of  with the bivector while simultaneously replacing
the Jacobi identity for the Poisson bracket by the more general
condition 
 characterizing an H-Poisson structure (cf
); this changes both field equations and
symmetries, but will not be further pursued in the present paper. The
contribution from () to the lefthand side of (),
on the other hand, is simply  or, more generally,
, where several Casimir functions
 and 2-forms  have been introduced, which
explicitly breaks the topological nature of the equations:
 

We remark in parenthesis that the field equations () are
covariant with respect to target space diffeomorphism induced changes
of field variables only if the field equations () are
used. Given some auxiliary connection  on , this
may be cured by replacing () by D  A_i + 
^kl  _;i (X)  A_k A_l = 0 , where 
 ( is the induced exterior covariant
derivative acting on forms taking values in the pullback bundle 
) and the semicolon denotes covariant differentiation
with respect to .

Next we turn to the symmetries of the action (). It is
straightforward to check that under the infinitesimal symmetry
transformations
_X^i = _j ^ji (X)  ,  
_A_i = _i + ^kl  ,_i (X) A_k _l
 , where the  are arbitrary functions on , 
the action changes only by a total divergence 
 thanks to the Jacobi identity
^il ^jk  ,_l + ^jl ^ki  ,_l +
^kl ^ij  ,_l =0  for the Poisson tensor. Almost topological
models have the same symmetries due 
to the definition of a Casimir. 

The set of gauge transformations () is (in general
slightly over-)complete, or, in other words, it is an (in general
slightly reducible) generating set of gauge transformations (cf
 for definitions and further details).(At least for
topologies of  with  this is obvious
from a Hamiltonian analysis of the theory, cf e.g. . For
general topologies of the worldsheet it may, strictly speaking,
require a separate proof. In any case, we will consider as symmetries
to be factored out all those that are generated by
().)   This in particular implies that any 
other local (gauge) symmetry of () (invariance of the
functional, parametrized by some set of arbitrary functions on
)  can be expressed in terms of
() up to so called trivial gauge transformations and  with possibly field dependent parameters . If
 denotes the set of all fields of the action functional ,
,  being a collective index, then trivial gauge
transformations are (infinitesimally) of the form 
 (the sum also involving an
integration) for some graded "antisymmetric" but otherwise arbitrary
. They are called trivial because on-shell (that is on the space
of solutions to the field equations) they act trivially and because
they exist for any action functional . According to Theorem 17.3 of
 any  symmetry of () vanishing on-shell is
of this form.

The trivial transformations form a normal subgroup  of all the
gauge transformations . It is only the respective quotient 
group  that is of relevance for the
gauge identification of solutions. The infinitesimal gauge
transformations certainly form a Lie algebra (the infinite-dimensional
Lie algebra of ). However, the representatives
() do not; instead one finds: [_,
_ ] = _[ , ]  + __j _i
^ij  ,_kl  S A_k   A_l   , where 
.  
 This is of the expected form since the commutator of two
gauge transformations is another one, and the representatives
() are complete. Also the (field dependent)
coefficient in front of the contribution vanishing on-shell is indeed
symmetric in the Grassmann part. (But even in the absence of the
latter contribution, making the algebra of () an
"open" one, the field dependence of the new parameter
 spoils the Lie
algebra property.)  Completeness ensures also that the obvious
worldsheet diffeomorphism invariance of () can be
expressed in terms of (); indeed for any generating
vector field  one finds for the respective
Lie derivative acting on the space of fields under consideration _= _A ,   + _S A_i  ,  X^i  -
_S X^i  ,  A_i  _A ,   
,
 
where the latter weak equality sign  is used to denote on-shell
equality. 

The moduli space  is now defined as the space of all gauge
inequivalent smooth fields  and  on a
fixed worldsheet , which we denote collectively by ,
satisfying the field equations () and (): () =
   S/=
0 gauge equivalence    ,  where
"gauge equivalence" is the equivalence relation generated by
(); in particular the gauge group, called  above,
is taken to be connected and simply connected. According to
(), on the space of solutions infinitesimal
diffeomorphsims are generated by the symmetries under consideration;
correspondingly, at least  the component of unity of
 will be factored out in (). It may also
happen, however, that several disconnected components of
 fit into , and thus are factored out in
- provides an explicit example for this scenario.

Note that in the general case the gauge symmetries are known explicitly 
only in their infinitesimal form symmetries ). To determine whether 
two given solutions are gauge equivalent, we will, however, have to 
integrate these symmetries in one way or another. 

According to Noether's second theorem
the existence of
nontrivial gauge symmetries implies dependencies among the field
equations. With () one finds ^ij (X) 
S X^j  ^ij  ,_k (X) A_j S A_k  + S A_i   .
  

A discussion of the relevance of Noether's identities in the BV
formalism with a special emphasis on the example of the PSM may be
found in. 

As mentioned already in the Introduction, in the case that 
has (ideal) boundary components, one possibly wants to impose some
additinal boundary conditions on the admissible fields  and on
the parameters  in (). Acceptable boundary
conditions on  should be such that 
 vanishes, so that () has well-defined
functional derivatives.  This is guaranteed e.g. by the
Cattaneo-Felder boundary conditions 
for any  and 
.  Alternatively, one may also
consider some Dirichlet-type boundary conditions on  (more
generally, some mixture of both types of conditions, cf
e.g. ), where the image of  has to
lie within one symplectic leaf of  so as to permit nontrivial
solutions of the field equations.

Note that the moduli space () does not change if the
symmetries are restricted correspondingly  on the boundary,
i.e. if any gauge orbit of the unrestricted theory leading to the
moduli space  is in 1-1 correspondence with a gauge orbit of the
restricted gauge equivalence on the set of the restricted
fields. E.g. in the particular model () with 
 and upon the choice of the CF boundary conditions this would imply
that  should be constant along the boundary. Requiring,
instead,  to vanish on all of  then enlarges
the moduli space to a bigger one, , which yields  only
after taking another  quotient. 

In the gravitational context there will be also other moduli spaces of 
relevance, denoted collectively by ; we will 
discuss this briefly below.

As alluded to already above, not all of the symmetry generators
() are independent, at least if the topology of
 is nontrivial and  has a nontrivial kernel. For
illustration let us consider a Poisson tensor for which the first 
coordinates , , are Casimir functions.  Then, for
any choice of  nonvanishing only in the first  indices,
one has  and 
 for any closed loop . This
corresponds to  times  nontrivial (global) relations
between the generators (). In a BRST or BV
quantization scheme this requires ghosts for ghosts (for an explicit
construction of the respective Hamiltonian BRST charge for 
 cf. ). This complication is e.g. absent if 
is a disc as in since  vanishes in this case.

Special cases 

As mentioned already in the Introduction, there are several particular
cases of models of the type action ) for which  (or at
least some facts about  like its dimension) is known
or can be determined by other means. 

Two-dimensional nonabelian gauge theories 

The most obvious of these is the specification to a nonabelian gauge
theory resulting from a choice of  linear in ,
.  In this way,  can be
identified with the dual of the Lie algebra defined by the structure
constants , equipped with the Kirillov-Kostant Poisson
structure defined by  where
 and . In
coordinates  with generators  of , this yields
the above linear Poisson tensor. In what follows, we will restrict
ourselves to semisimple Lie algebras such that the dual of  can
be identified with  itself by means of the Cartan-Killing
metric, which we will denote by  below. We then express the
fields as the Lie algebra valued functions  and 
on  for which the field equations eqs1 ), eqs2 ) may be
rewritten as  and 
. Furthermore, the gauge symmetries symmetries ) can
be integrated to the equivalence relations 
,  where  is an
arbitrary -valued function on .  We restrict ourselves to
trivial bundles ; for nontrivial bundles, already
 is no more just a map , and much of what has been
said above needs reformulation (cf for such an
attempt).

The gauge transformations deserve further mention:  denotes a
map from the worldsheet  to the chosen structure group  whose
Lie algebra  has structure constants . The choice of
 is not unique, different choices differing by the fundamental
group . A nontrivial , on the other hand, gives
rise to "large" gauge transformations for a multiply connected
worldsheet , i.e. gauge transformations not being connected to
the identity and thus not resulting from a direct integration of the
infinitesimal form of the symmetries. Thus, for a better comparison,
 should always be taken to be the uniquely determined simply
connected group having the given structure constants
.(In some cases, as e.g. for the Lie algebra
, this excludes the possibility of a matrix representation
of . It is, however, still possible to construct the moduli space
along the lines below.) 



Yang-Mills theories are obtained by adding the part nontop ) with
the quadratic Casimir  and a volume form  on
 to the action. The field equation for  is unchanged while
the zero curvature condition turns into

, rendering  to play the role of the electric field. 
 As in the general case, gauge transformations are not
changed by adding nontop ).

Two-dimensional gravity models 

Let us choose  with coordinates 

 and a Poisson bracket defined through ,
 for a (sufficiently) smooth function
.  Such a bracket has one Casimir function  given by(To
fully define  by this equation, one may choose some fixed constant
for the lower bound of the integral.) 
C = 2X^+X^- - 2 ^W(z) z  .  Interpreting , , as a Lorentz vector in a
two-dimensional Minkowski space, the bracket  is
seen to be invariant with respect to the corresponding Lorentz
transformations. Actually, for this purpose and most of what is
described below,  could be allowed also to depend on the Lorentz
invariant combination ; for simplicity, however, we restrict
ourselves to functions of the third coordinate  only.

Identifying the respective 1-forms  with a zweibein 
 (using the Minkowski metric of a frame bundle to raise and
lower indices) and  with a spin connection 1-form 
(, 
antisymmetric and normalized according to ), and
upon dropping a surface term, the action action ) assumes the form
S^grav  = _ X_a De^a + + W() 
 ,  where 
 is the torsion 2-form and 
 is the (dynamical ) volume form on . Thus  is seen
to yield an action for a gravitational theory defined on a
two-dimensional spacetime .

In fact, e.g. if  is a convex function, we may eliminate the
fields  by means of their algebraic field equations, and the
action may be seen to take the purely geometrical form S^geom [g] = _^2x -g  f(R)  ,  where 
is the Legendre transform of  and  is the Ricci scalar of the
torsion free Levi Civita connection associated to the two-dimensional
metric . The prototype of such a higher
derivative theory is provided by  gravity, 
, resulting from the quadratic Poisson bracket defined by 
.


There are also more general possibilities to obtain gravitational models 
as particular PSMs. We will come back to this elsewhere. 

Results by other methods 

In special cases of the Poisson manifold , there are known
methods to solve the field equations which will be recalled here for
later use.

 for topologically trivial Poisson manifolds 

Let us assume within this subsection that the Poisson manifold
 is foliated regularly into symplectic leaves and that the
typical leaf admits a set of globally  defined Darboux
coordinates .  Indexing the leaves by (possibly only locally
defined) coordinates , , (any set of independent
Casimir functions on  where  is the dimension of the kernel of
, which, by assumption, is constant all over ), there thus
exists a combined coordinate system  on  for
which the matrix  is zero everywhere except for the block
 which has standard Darboux form.

In such a coordinate system the field equations eqs1 ), eqs2 )
are trivial to solve: Clearly, the first set of equations implies that
the  are constant functions all over 
and that the  are determined uniquely by means of ; if
 denotes the (constant) inverse to , 
.  The nontrivial content of the second set of the
equations, furthermore, reduces to . Also the local
symmetries symmetries ) can be integrated easily in this case. One
learns that any smooth choice of the set of functions  is
gauge equivalent to any other choice and that any  just
transforms like a  gauge field, i.e. 
for any (smooth) function .

Thus, restricting  further to  for simplicity, we obtain
 
  Let  be a trivially foliated Poisson manifold with
  leaves homeomorphic to  where .  A set of
  representatives of the gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the
  field equations is given by X^I(x) = C^I = const.  ,  
  X^(x) = 0 = A_ ,   A_I = _I   
  with   [_I] H^1()  .  Correspondingly, the
  classical moduli space is found to be of the form:   () = ^k(r+1)  with   r
  H^1() = _1() and  k =
   .
Here,  is also the (by assumption constant) codimension of the
symplectic leaves in . As usual,  denotes the (always
abelian) first cohomology of the base manifold , its rank being
the number of independent generators.

Note that in the original formulation of the action action )
admitting the above mentioned coordinates on , as obtained, e.g.,
in the case of a gravity model, the matrix  as a function on 
may be highly nonlinear. Then the change of coordinates implicitly
used above provides a trivialization of the otherwise possibly not
that simple field equations (for a partial illustration of this point
cf).

In the above we assumed that the symplectic foliation of  is
topologically trivial while  was kept arbitrary. Alternatively,
one may achieve similar results (cf, e.g.,) for the
case that one restricts attention to a
local, topologically trivial patch of . The reason for this is
that any (generic) point in  has a neighborhood which admits
Casimir-Darboux coordinates putting  in the above mentioned
standard form. It is the intention of the
present paper to extend these results to the case where  is left
completely arbitrary, but now  need not necessarily be foliated by
symplectic leaves homeomorphic to a linear space (as implied by the
global existence of Darboux coordinates). E.g., we will be able to
cover cases such as those where  is (regularly) foliated by
topologically nontrivial leaves provided only that they have trivial
second cohomology. For specialization to topologically trivial leaves
the above results will then be regained.

Gauge theories 

It is precisely in the case of linear Poisson structures in the
setting of Sec.  that the second set of field equations
eqs2 ) decouples from the first set eqs1 ), being a set of
equations for  only. The moduli space of solutions to  (the
space  of flat connections) modulo gauge symmetries is
well known: a flat connection is characterized uniquely by its
holonomies (elements of ) along a set of representatives for
generators of , and gauge transformations act thereon by
joint conjugation. Therefore, the space of flat connections modulo
gauge transformations is given by  where
 denotes the adjoint action of , and any gauge invariant
function on the space of flat connections can be written as a function
of traces of holonomies, called Wilson loops, along generators
of the fundamental group. Note that for a compact structure group 
the space of flat connections modulo gauge transformations is compact.
This space is in general not a manifold but only a stratified space
because the adjoint action may have fixed points on . The
smooth part of  is given by the space of gauge equivalence
classes of those flat connections which yield holonomies with
centralizer in , , of minimum dimension. If
 is large enough, these are irreducible connections; the latter 
can be defined as connections for which there is no non-central
element  commuting with all holonomies.

Given a flat connection , one can determine  by solving the
equation , which locally can be integrated to
 where  is an arbitrary fixed point
in  and  denotes the parallel transport between 
and  along an arbitrary path. In a simply connected neighborhood of
, the parallel transport  is unique (i.e., independent
of the path) because  is flat, and so  is well defined. If 
is not simply connected, the initial value  has to fulfill 
 integrability conditions because
 for any holonomy  along a
closed curve based in . Given an irreducible flat connection ,
evidently these conditions cannot be fulfilled non-trivially for a
semisimple Lie group ,  being the only admissible
solution in this case.

Only for a reducible flat connection  can there be non-trivial
solutions .  The explicit form, in some gauge, is determined by a
given connection  via the field equation  , which
infinitesimally expresses the fact that a change in  is given by
conjugation. Therefore, the image of  under the map
 corresponding to  has to lie entirely within
an adjoint orbit of , the explicit form being determined by a
particular flat connection. If only "small" gauge transformations
are allowed, gauge transformations acting on  correspond to smooth
deformations of the map  within an adjoint orbit, demonstrating
that gauge equivalence classes of solutions  are given by
particular homotopy classes of maps from  to some adjoint orbit in
.

Given a semisimple Lie Group  of rank , there are always
irreducible flat connections on the Riemann surface  provided  that  is large enough. If  has
genus  and  holes (boundary components), the fundamental group
can be represented by  generators ,
 and  with one relation
 using the commutator
. A flat connection is uniquely specified by
its  holonomies in  around the generators, which also have to
be subject to the given relation (eliminating one free holonomy).
Furthermore, factoring out gauge transformations generically
eliminates  parameters for choosing the holonomies. Thus, we
have a maximal dimension  for
the space of irreducible flat connections modulo gauge transformations
(see also). This shows that  has to be
larger than two in order to allow irreducible connections.

Thus, in general the moduli space  of gauge equivalence
classes of flat connections has a smooth stratum of maximal dimension
consisting of gauge equivalence classes of irreducible flat
connections (if  is non-compact, this stratum may be non-Hausdorff,
but one can choose a dense subspace which is Hausdorff) of dimension
, whereas reducible flat connections give
lower-dimensional strata.

Solutions for  which lie in adjoint orbits of maximal dimension
(which is ; this case corresponds to a flat connection with
holonomies generating a maximal abelian subgroup of ) contribute a
subset maximally of dimension . The first
part, i.e. , is the dimensionality of the space of
connections whose holonomies generate a maximal abelian subgroup of
, whereas the contribution of dimension  is the remaining
freedom in choosing  (which is only free at a single point and has
to commute with all holonomies, i.e. it must also lie in the maximal
abelian subgroup of dimension ).  Clearly this is of lower
dimension if the rank of the fundamental group is large enough.  The
case of small  is special; in particular if
, all  flat connections are reducible and
a dense set in  is provided by connections which lead to
non-trivial -solutions; this is also the case if  is
abelian (e.g., if  is a torus).

For Yang-Mills theories, the curvature of  is not necessarily zero
but given by  in terms of the electric field
. Therefore, the above strategy cannot be applied for a general
solution since holonomies are no longer invariant under deformations
of the curve defining . This is the case only if 
vanishes where we have the same solutions as described above given by
flat connections. But in the physically more interesting case of
non-zero electric field , a connection cannot be flat and solutions
for  have to be determined by other means. This shows that
differences between - and Yang-Mills theories only arise in the
sector of non-vanishing  which in -theories leads to reducible
flat connections and in Yang-Mills theories to non-flat
connections. The standard methods reviewed in the present subsection
start by using the mathematically well-studied space of irreducible
flat connections and are insensitive to those differences. On the
other hand, we will see that the methods of this paper are well-suited
to determine solutions with non-vanishing -field and nicely
demonstrate the key difference between solutions to both theories.

Gravity models 

In the gravitational setting, one is interested in maximally extended
solutions to the field equations resulting from a variation of the
action grav ) for fixed topology of , having a globally smooth
and nondegenerate metric, and identifying solutions which are mapped
into one another by the gravitational symmetries, i.e. by
diffeomorphisms and local Lorentz transformations. This program has
been carried out in full generality in,
yielding implicitly a description of the "gravitational moduli
space" , which, in particular, was found to be
finite dimensional for any fixed topology of .

With the methods of the present paper we will be able to derive
information about the space of solutions at a global level. Because
the requirement of a non-degenerate metric (including subtle relations
of the gravitational symmetries to the symmetries generated by
()-cf also () and the explicit
discussion of this relation in) needs some care, however,
we will discuss this application elsewhere. Also other issues which
are specific to gravity, such as the completeness of the resulting
two-dimensional space-time, can be studied within the present setting.



Moduli space of classical solutions 

In this section we present our results concerning solutions to the
field equations of Poisson Sigma Models. The topology of the
worldsheet  is taken to be fixed. Along possible boundary
components of  neither the fields nor the local symmetries will be
restricted in this context; for given  we look for the moduli
space of solutions to the field equations eqs1 ), eqs2 )
subject to the equivalence relation generated by the symmetries
symmetries ).  The situation remains unchanged when boundary
conditions on the fields are added in the same "number" as
symmetries along the boundaries are frozen. In a Hamiltonian
formulation of the model on , this is not
always adequate or in the line of a particular (physical or
mathematical) problem. Examples for this are two-dimensional gravity
models on open spacetimes as well as the recent considerations of
Cattaneo and Felder: In both cases additional parameters of the moduli
space appear by freezing all  the symmetries on the boundary of
the first factor  of  while only part of the fields are
subject to boundary conditions (in the case of Cattaneo and Felder
e.g. only the tangential components of ). The present method,
however, may be applied also to such cases.

Solutions for  

For the case that  is linear, it was found in Section
 that it is advisable first to solve the equations
eqs2 ) for the -fields, as (for the topological model) the
field equations for them decouple from the fields . In the
general case, however, the field equations eqs2 ) are much harder
to solve and in the present paper this will be achieved only under
certain conditions on the target manifold . The field
equations eqs1 ) for the -fields, on the other hand, can be
solved in full generality for arbitrary target, and even the local
symmetries may be integrated easily (although in a rather abstract
manner):

   Let  be a solution
to the field equations () and ().

Then the image of  lies entirely within one of the symplectic
leaves 
 of the foliation of . All gauge equivalence classes
of solutions  are provided by the homotopy classes of maps from
 to any .

  
  Let  be a point in the image of . We first assume
  that  is a regular point of the foliation of  into symplectic
  leaves, i.e. that  lying in a symplectic leaf  has a
  neighborhood  homeomorphic to  with
   where  denotes the connected
  component of  containing  (only in the case of a leaf
   which lies densely in a part of  do we have 
 for all ).  After choosing local
  coordinates in  adapted to the decomposition into 
  and , it is immediate to see that the components
  of  along  have to be constant in  owing to Eq.
  (). Therefore, the image of  lies in  in a
  neighborhood of any regular point and the first assertion follows
  for the case of a regular foliation of .
  
  In general, however,  is not foliated regularly into symplectic
  leaves, meaning that there are also lower dimensional leaves which
  then lie in the boundary of a higher dimensional one. For  lying
  in a lower dimensional leaf , where  is a
  higher dimensional one, the above reasoning shows that all
  derivatives of components of adapted coordinates "normal" to 
  have to vanish. But this information alone is not sufficient to
  ensure that the image of  lies entirely in , for there are
  directions normal to  but tangential to  leading to
  derivatives of  which have to vanish only in , not in
  . It is then possible to construct smooth maps 
 which connect  with . Using the complete field equations
  () for , however, we can exclude such maps thanks to
  the uniqueness theorem for solutions of first order differential
  equations: Suppose there is a solution  of ()
  connecting  with  and a corresponding smooth solution  of
  ().  We can then find a smooth path  of finite
  parameter length in  such that the interior of  lies in
   and its endpoint in . Eq. () then implies that
  the restriction of  to  is the integral curve of a smooth
  vector field (determined by ) vanishing at the endpoint of
  . The existence of such an integral curve reaching the
  singularity of the smooth vector field in a finite parameter
  distance is a contradiction.  This proves our first assertion in the
  general case.

  Using again local coordinates adapted to the foliation, it is
  easy to see that the gauge transformations () are
  infinitesimal homotopies of the map , immediately
  leading to the second assertion.

Since in the proof we only used the field equation eqs1 ) and
symmetries symmetries ) for  and the fact that  is subject
to a first order differential equation which also holds true for an
almost topological model, we obtain the following

  Let  be a solution
 to the field equations () and ().

 Then the image of  lies entirely within one of the symplectic
 leaves  of the foliation of . All gauge
 equivalence classes of solutions  are provided by the homotopy
 classes of maps from  to any .

Thus, although the model is no longer topological with the term
nontop ), the -solutions are still classified solely by
topological properties of the spaces  and  (the latter as a
foliated space).

Compatible presymplectic forms 

The main tool for constructing solutions for  corresponding to a
map  into a leaf  will be a presymplectic form 
, which, upon restriction to tangential vectors to any leaf  in
 coincides with the respective symplectic 2-form  induced
by the given Poisson bracket on . Such a compatible
presymplectic form   of  does not exist under
all circumstances and if it exists, it will not be unique.

General conditions for the existence of such a 2-form 
, compatible with  in the above sense, have been investigated
in where the obstruction has been identified as the
characteristic form class of the Poisson bivector  and
recently in under the condition that there is an
integrable distribution transversal to the leaves in , where they
have been put into the form of descent equations. Specializing these
equations to particular cases gives the following results which we
will use later:

  
 If  is foliated trivially, i.e. it is of the form 
, then a necessary condition for the existence of a
 compatible presymplectic form in a neighborhood of  is


 
 where  denotes any differentiation transversal to  and
  is a closed 2-cycle in . This means that the symplectic
 volume of any closed 2-cycle in a leaf has to be constant in .

The second result, which can be easily verified, applies to leaves of
trivial second cohomology:

   If  has a symplectic potential  on any leaf  in
  , i.e. , and 
  varies smoothly from leaf to leaf, then  is a
  compatible presymplectic form on .

  In particular, if all leaves  in a trivially foliated 
 have trivial second cohomology, then there exists a
  compatible presymplectic form on .

The notation here is as follows:  and  are
differential forms on the leaves which depend parametrically on
coordinates transversal to the leaves (e.g. Casimir functions). The
derivative operator  only acts on coordinates inside the leaf
, whereas  is the exterior derivative in the embedding space
 and acts on all coordinates; , finally, by definition
coincides with  on any leaf . 

As already mentioned, a compatible presymplectic form is not
unique. Given one such form , one can always add a closed 2-form
 which vanishes when pulled back to the leaf, giving in fact
the complete freedom in defining 
. 

It is interesting to observe that conditions such as in Corollary
 have been found as obstructions to integrate the Lie
algebroid  to a smooth Lie groupoid, cf. .

Solutions for  

We now may solve for the -fields assuming a fixed map  which
in particular singles out a symplectic leaf .  (To obtain all
solutions, all possible leaves  as well as representatives of all
homotopy classes from maps  to  have to be considered; in any
of these cases we then proceed by solving for  for given .)
In general, the field equation for  is harder to solve, and we will
start our discussion with a special case and later discuss
generalizations.

Solutions for topological models corresponding to
regular leaves of trivial holonomy 

We first assume that we are dealing with a map  into a regular
leaf of trivial holonomy which allows a compatible presymplectic form
in a neighborhood.  By this assumption, we can choose a set of Casimir
functions  in the neighborhood such that  is given by the
preimage of zero (and  has a neighborhood of the form
).  We then arrive at


   For a given map  with image in a symplectic leaf  of trivial
 holonomy which has a neighborhood  permitting a presymplectic form
  compatible with , any solution to the field
 equations (), () may be written in the form  A_i = -^(_i O) +
 _I  ^(_i C^I)  , where ,
 , are some Casimir functions with 
 and  are closed 1-forms on . For fixed  and
 , redefining  by adding an exact 1-form on  is a gauge
 transformation. For fixed map , gauge equivalence classes of
 solutions to the field equations for  correspond to the set of 
 elements .

Here,  denotes the first cohomology of 
over the real numbers. Eq. () demonstrates that, in
contrast to the moduli space of flat connections (see Sec.
), the -solutions of Poisson Sigma Models corresponding
to -solutions lying in regular leaves are not classified by the
fundamental group  but by its abelianization, which is
. This point will be clarified in the examples below when we
will reexamine the case of two-dimensional gauge theories from the
Poisson Sigma Model point of view.

  
 Let  be a solution to the equations () and ()
 and  be a presymplectic form compatible with . We first
 introduce coordinates  on the neighborhood  of
  in  adapted to the foliation such that the 
 coordinatize a leaf  and the  are transversal, and show that
 in these coordinates 
  
 Using that  is compatible with , Eq.
 () immediately implies  
 which shows () for tangential components.

 For transversal components, Eq. () with the expression for
  leads to 



 
 where tangential components of the matrix  appear.
 Owing to compatibility of , which for tangential components
 implies inverseness 
, as well as adaptedness of the coordinates,
 which implies , the tangential components
 fulfill the equation 
. Taking a derivative with respect to  yields
  and thus



 Note that when we take the derivative, we need  to be compatible
 with  in a whole neighborhood of the leaf and not just on the
 leaf itself. Using that the second term
 is nothing but the Lie derivative of  with respect to
  and that  is closed, we can reexpress this term as
 . This proves Eq. () for all
 adapted coordinates.

 It now follows directly from dA ) that



 
 for a set of closed 1-forms  on
 . According to Eq. Aalpha ) these 1-forms have to vanish for
 components of  tangential to . This then establishes Eq.
 solu ) as a necessary condition for the solutions
  and also for  in arbitrary coordinates since
 Eq. () as well as Eqs. (), () are
 target-space covariant.

  Sufficiency follows from the equivalence of Eqs. (),
  () with (), () and the restriction on
   found in Theorem .

  Eq. solu ) is already covariant with respect to the gauge
  transformations of Theorem  (a change of 
  induces the corresponding change of  according to this
  equation, which reduces to Eq. ()). As seen best in
  adapted coordinates, independently of those transformations, the
  gauge transformations () allow us to change the
  transversal components  by adding exact 1-forms (analogously to
  the discussion in Sec. ).  Thus, for a fixed map
  , gauge equivalence classes of solutions are given by the
  cohomology classes  of .  This demonstrates the
  last assertion of the Theorem.

In the Proposition, the Casimir functions  and the compatible
presymplectic form  were assumed to be fixed. Any other set
 of Casimir functions can be obtained by a map
 where  are differentiable functions of the
original Casimir functions forming an invertible matrix. We then have





and the 1-forms  corresponding to the Casimir functions
 are given by 
 
This is just a linear recombination of the original 1-forms, but it
can still change the classes in .

Choosing a different compatible presymplectic form  also implies
a redefinition of the 1-forms . As remarked after
Lemma , the freedom in  is given by adding a closed
2-form  which vanishes when pulled back to a leaf, i.e.
. In a neighborhood of the leaf, such a
2-form can always be written as 
 with 1-forms  and functions
 which fulfill 
. The last equation implies
 since the image of  lies in
the leaf  where the  are constant. If we change the compatible
presymplectic form to be , we obtain
* 
and the 1-forms are changed to
 
 As shown above,  is closed so that the new 
still define elements of the first cohomology. However, the
 need not be exact and so also a redefinition of 
may change the cohomology classes characterising a given connection
(not just the representatives of the original classes).

This implies that there is no canonical  isomorphism between
gauge equivalence classes of -fields for fixed  with the set
of  elements in , while still any particular choice of
 and  does define an isomorphism. The situation is
comparable to that in non-abelian gauge theories where a map between
gauge equivalence classes of gauge fields and elements of 
is defined only upon choosing closed curves which generate .

Generalizations 

So far we assumed that the leaf  has trivial holonomy, implying
that there is a global set of Casimir functions  such that
. In other words, the conormal bundle

 of  is a trivial vector bundle with global basis
. As seen in Prop. , for a fixed
leaf  solutions  to the Poisson Sigma Model are then given in
terms of closed 1-forms  on ,
taking values in the pull back of the conormal bundle of .  Here we
denoted the basis in the pull back bundle which corresponds to 
 by ; it is not to be confused with the pull back of
, which would be identically zero (and also a section in a
different bundle). The respective contribution to () then
can be understood in the following way: Take  as a section in
, i.e. 
.  is embedded canonically into
, we thus may view  also as a particular section
through that bundle. Then we can contract  with ,
viewed as a basis in . Thus the second part of ()
can be written as . Up to gauge
transformations, only equivalence classes 
 are representatives. This will be made more
precise in the more general setting to follow.

If the leaf  has non-trivial holonomy, its conormal bundle is
non-trivial and () cannot be used as a global
expression. Instead, we have to choose a covering of the leaf such
that in any neighborhood  of the covering there exist Casimir
functions  specifying . If
two neighborhoods have non-empty intersection, there are different
sets of Casimir functions which are related by a transformation
 as discussed in the
previous subsection. 

Example:  Let  where the
identifacation  is defined by  for all
, equipped with the Poisson tensor
 admitting the compatible
presymplectic form . Any section
 is a Mobius strip. The set  is a leaf
in  (while a set  is only half of a
leaf) which can be covered by two neighborhoods 
admitting the local Casimir function . On the full leaf, however,
 is not a global Casimir function since values  and 
belong to the same leaf for any constant 
. Correspondingly, we have non-trivial transition functions
 and  in the two intersections of the neighborhoods.

In any neighborhood, () is the local expression of a
solution with  representing the solution
as local section of the conormal bundle (plus the cotangent bundle of
 certainly). The transformation between
different charts is done via () such that

in . As a global object, therefore, the
local sections  form again a 1-form
 on  taking values in the pull back of the conormal
bundle of . 

Every local section has to be closed according to the field equations,
and they combine to a global 1-form which is closed in the following
sense: The transition functions of a non-trivial conormal bundle are
given by the constants  , implying that the
conormal bundle is a flat vector bundle(We are grateful to
A. Kotov for pointing this out to us.)  with a canonical derivative
operator . To be more explicit, one may define an
operator  which annihilates any local basis ;
this derivative is then extended to forms on  with values in
 by the graded Leibniz rule: For
 locally we have 
 and then simply 
.  The locally
-closed 1-forms  combine to a
globally -closed section , 
which represents a solution to the field equations. Clearly, 
(since the connection is flat, by construction) and there is a natural
cohomology defined on  , denoted by
. 

To find unique
representatives, we have to consider the symmetry
transformations. As before, the local expressions 
 can be changed by adding an exact local 1-form
. Again, the local 1-forms combine
to a -exact 1-form  taking values in the
pulled back conormal bundle. Thus, solutions are classified by the
first -cohomology .

A similar strategy can be used to deal with leaves which do not admit
a compatible presymplectic form: those leaves can be cut into parts
each admitting a compatible presymplectic form which have to be glued
together by the transformation of the preceding subsection. This will
then imply a transformation () for the  on
overlapping charts. Returning back to already existing charts then
leads to restrictions on the permitted s. This may lead also
to compactifcations in the solution space, which in previous cases was
always non-compact while it would be compact for, e.g., 2d
-theories with compact gauge groups. In the present paper,
however, we do not intend to work this out in more detail. 

Almost topological models 

Adding a term nontop ) to the action changes the field equation
for , so we will also obtain different solutions. However, the
changes are not too drastic. To show this we consider the slightly
more general case of an additional term _ C^(X(x)) _where a sum of such terms
with possibly different Casimir functions  appears. The
contribution of this addition to the field equations has been
determined in (). Using a set of  functionally
independent Casimir functions , all the  can be expressed
in terms of these functions (at least locally). Then 
; introducing 
 (a 2-form with values in the conormal bundle; we will make
use of this observation below), using eqsnontop ), the key
equation dA ) in the preceding proof is changed to
 
while Eq. Aalpha ) still holds true due to
. Let us first assume that 
  (if some  are taken to be
a volume form as in Yang-Mills theories, this can be the case only if
 is non-compact); then also  is exact
(since  in  is, as a function of
Casimirs, constant on ). With the assumption,
any solution  can still be cast into the form solu ), but now
the  are not necessarily closed but only  (by
assumption not all  can be closed, since otherwise all
 would vanish). Noting that the symmetries are
unaltered, we obtain

 
  For a given map  with image in a symplectic leaf  of trivial
  holonomy which has a neighborhood  permitting a presymplectic
  form  compatible with , any solution to the
  field equations eqs1 ), eqsnontop ) with 
 may be written in the form solu ) where ,
  , are some Casimir functions with .
  The 1-forms  are closed on . For fixed 
 and , redefining  by adding an exact 1-form on 
  is a gauge transformation. For a fixed map , gauge equivalence
  classes of solutions to the field equations for  correspond to
  the set of  elements .

If an  is not exact, we have to proceed more
carefully. For an exact  we have just seen that
the  have to fulfill 
. Locally, this will still hold for a non-exact
 as a consequence of the field equations, but there will be
no 1-forms  which can fulfill this equation globally.

For simplicity we first discuss the case , i.e. that there is only
one  which locally fulfills . If we choose
a good cover  of  (the neighborhoods  as
well as their nonvanishing intersections are topologically trivial),
then in each  we have a 1-form  such that 
. Furthermore, due to ,
we have functions  with  on 
. Now,  has to fulfill 
which implies  for some functions  which
can be chosen to be zero by redefinition of  or by
using an appropriate local gauge
transformation. In the intersection of two neighborhoods  and
,
the local 1-forms of  do not necessarily agree but differ by
an exact form: . In other words,
 is a connection on the line bundle with curvature 
which is obtained as the pull back of the conormal bundle of the leaf
. As usually, we have 
such that the difference of two such connections  and
 is a global 1-form. It has to fulfill
, i.e., it is closed. Therefore, the space of
all connections of curvature  can be identified with the
space of closed 1-forms, and the space of gauge equivalence classes
with the first cohomology .

If , we obtain the  as  connections on  line
bundles the -th one of which has curvature
. Alternatively, the  together can be viewed
as components of an -connection on the pull back of the conormal
bundle of the leaf , where  is the transversal Lie algebra of
the leaf. In fact, the part  of
(),  denoting a basis in , in a
point  always takes values in the transversal Lie algebra
 which, as a manifold, can be identified with the conormal
space .  Furthermore, the transversal Lie algebra of a
regular leaf is always abelian and, therefore, isomorphic to 
with  which coincides with our result of 
abelian connections on  line bundles. For a regular leaf the
reformulation via the transversal Lie algebra is thus almost trivial,
but we will see later that it is helpful for a possible generalization
to non-regular leaves.

Finally, gauge transformations of the Poisson Sigma Model have already
been seen to add   exact 1-forms to ,
which agrees with the notion of gauge transformation for a
connection. Together with the known classification of inequivalent
bundles with connection we obtain

   For a given map  with image in a symplectic leaf  of trivial
  holonomy which has a neighborhood  permitting a presymplectic
  form  compatible with , any solution to the
  field equations eqs1 ), eqsnontop ) may be written in the
  form solu ) where , , are some Casimir
  functions with .

  The  form a transversal Lie algebra valued connection on
  the pull back of the conormal bundle of  to  with
  curvature . For a fixed map , gauge equivalence
  classes of solutions to the field equations for  correspond to
  inequivalent connections of the given curvature on the given line
  bundle on . All those connections are classified by 
  elements of .

This agrees with the previous results in the case of vanishing or
exact , in which case the bundles with connection over
 are trivial. If  has non-trivial holonomy, we can combine
Prop.  with the result of the previous subsection. On
each chart  there is a 1-form  with values in the
pull back of the conormal bundle (restricted to the chart). Globally
there is some 2-form , taking
values in , furthermore; on local charts , it
has primitives , i.e. .  Similarly to before
we find , concluding . With
 we then obtain on intersections _n = _m
+ D(_mn  +_m - _n )  , where  reflects
the ambiguity in the definition of the local primitives  or
likewise the local gauge freedom.  This defines a kind of connection
on the conormal bundle with "curvature" 
 (on each chart we have 
). It would be interesting to clarify
the precise mathematical nature of such an object .  Since
the  can be gauged to zero and the  are fixed by the
2-forms  (up to the previously mentioned ambiguity
given by ), the difference  between two such collections
 again defines a global 1-form with values in 
. Thus the space of all inequivalent  of the given
"curvature"  is classified by the first cohomology of
conormal bundle valued forms.

Despite the fact that the addition of nontop ) spoils the
topological nature of the model, Corollary  and
Proposition  show that the moduli space of classical
solutions is parameterized by the same topological objects which
classify solutions of the topological models.

Summary 

Let us summarize the results of this section in

  Let  be a two-dimensional manifold and  a Poisson
 manifold.

 For stationary points of a topological or almost topological Poisson
 Sigma Model with  and  the image of the map
  is contained in a symplectic leaf  of
 . If  admits a compatible presymplectic form, the space of
 corresponding solutions for  is given by the first cohomology
 class  of forms on  taking values in the
 pull back via  of the conormal bundle of the leaf .  A local
 representation of -solutions is given by ().


We already remarked on a possible generalization to cases where a
compatible presymplectic form does not exist globally
(Sec. ). Later we will in particular discuss the case of
non-regular leaves.

Examples 

Applying Theorem , we see that in all cases where all leaves
have the same codimension  the solution space  is of
dimension


 
which generalizes formula () for the dimension in the
topologically trivial case. However, in the general case the solution
space will not be a linear space because there may be non-trivial
identifications, which depend on the topology of  and the leaf 
and can even lead to a non-Hausdorff topology by gluing the sectors
corresponding to different homotopy classes of maps 
. Specializing Theorem  to the topologically trivial case
dealt with in Sec.  shows that we get back the explicit
solutions given there. But Theorem  is applicable to a class
of Poisson Sigma Models more general by far.  E.g. if  is foliated
trivially but by topologically non-trivial leaves provided only their
second cohomology vanishes, all solutions are given by Theorem
 owing to Lemma .

We can also compare with the results obtained in Sec. for non-abelian -theories. In this case  is the Lie algebra
 of a semisimple Lie group  equipped with the Poisson tensor
 and the symplectic leaves are identical
to the adjoint orbits in  (we identify the Lie algebra of a
semisimple Lie group with its dual by means of the Cartan-Killing
metric).  As compared to Sec. , we are now solving the
field equations in the opposite direction, i.e. we first solve for
. According to Theorem , all equivalence classes of
solutions are given by homotopy classes of maps  for
any leaf . This is identical to the results found in Sec.
. Now, given a solution , solutions for  are given
by Theorem  in those cases in which a compatible
presymplectic form exists. This can be the case only for non-compact
: for compact  all leaves in  are compact symplectic
manifolds which necessarily have non-trivial second homology, for
otherwise their symplectic form would be exact and so the symplectic
volume would vanish. Now appealing to Corollary  shows that
there is no compatible presymplectic form in any neighborhood of a
given regular leaf because the symplectic volume of any non-trivial
two-cycle is not constant along the direction  given by
the Casimir function .  Recall that for compact  the
solution space, i.e. the space of flat connections, is compact, which
also demonstrates that in this case our methods cannot be applicable
(Theorem  always implies a non-compact solution space). As
discussed at the end of Sec. , solutions for leaves which
do not admit a global presymplectic form can be found by gluing
solutions obtained with local forms. The gluing procedure will lead to
additional identifications which can compactify the solution space.

If there is a compatible presymplectic form for a non-compact group
 (if, e.g., all leaves have trivial second cohomology, cf. Lemma
), we can apply Theorems  and  in order
to find solutions. Solutions for  are given by maps 
 with image contained in an adjoint orbit which coincides with the
observations in Sec. . However, general results about
the existence of compatible presymplectic forms are available only for
a non-degenerate leaf such that Theorem
 can directly only lead to solutions with reducible
connections for a semisimple group . In fact, in simple cases one
can show easily that a connection of the form () is
reducible: If  the Casimir function is ,
denoting the Cartan-Killing norm on  by , and ()
takes the form (using generators  of )

 with a closed 1-form  on . If  can be gauged to be
a constant map, the first term vanishes leading to . This
implies that all holonomies of  are given by  for some
 which shows that  is reducible. We can, therefore, expect
to have access to the generic part of the solution space only if
 is small (see, however, possible generalizations
discussed in the next section). Otherwise, the
solution space would be dominated by irreducible connections which
lead to -solutions in the degenerate leaf given by the origin. For
, which physically is most interesting, Theorem
 determines the generic part of  because there are
no irreducible connections. In fact, the dimensions of the solution
spaces given in Sec.  and Theorem  coincide:
in both cases we need  parameters to specify a leaf,
which in turn determines the equivalence class of an -solution (up
to certain discrete labels which we need in order to fix the homotopy
class of the map ), and  parameters to specify
the -solution. Note that  so that
the dimensions of the space of reducible flat connections and of the
solution space according to Theorem  in fact coincide.

Noting that, as already remarked in Sec. , -solutions
lying in regular leaves correspond to reducible connections whose
holonomies generate a maximal abelian  subgroup of , we can
clarify the appearance of  in the Poisson Sigma Model
classification of -solutions as opposed to  in the gauge
theory classification: Since all holonomies commute, only the
abelianization of  matters, which is just .

Corollary  and Proposition  in
particular provide solutions for Yang-Mills theories when we choose a
quadratic Casimir  and volume form . Proposition
 only applies if the -solution maps  into a
non-degenerate leaf, so that we obtain solutions with non-vanishing
electric field  leading to a non-flat connection. The difference
between - and Yang-Mills theories is automatically accounted for
by the appearance of  in the conditions for a solution .

Non-regular leaves 

Since we are not aware of general results concerning the existence of
compatible presymplectic forms for non-regular leaves, Theorem
 does not give us direct access to solutions in this
case. The comparison with non-abelian -theories shows that in
general we cannot expect non-regular leaves to contribute only a
lower-dimensional set to ; in fact those leaves usually
correspond to solutions forming a dense subset of the moduli
space. Only if the rank of the fundamental group of  does not
exceed one is the moduli space dominated by solutions corresponding to
non-degenerate leaves. As we will see below, this holds true also for
non-linear Poisson structures.

But the information we obtain is of interest also in cases where
solutions for regular leaves do not correspond to the generic part of
 in a given model and complements methods which are targeted
to the generic part (e.g. the theory of irreducible flat connections
on compact Riemann surfaces used in two-dimensional non-abelian gauge
theories).

The case of gravitational models is special because we have an
additional condition which requires the metric constructed from  to
be non-degenerate. Investigations with other methods
 suggest that this reduces the contributions from
non-regular leaves such that the methods developed here can have access to
the main part of the moduli space.  In the present paper, however, we
will not dicuss this issue further and instead focus on a possible
generalization of the classification of solutions to non-regular
leaves. 

When discussing the solutions for almost topological Poisson Sigma
Models we already observed that the connection has to be transversal
Lie algebra valued, which in the case of regular leaves is always an
abelian algebra.  To generalize this result we first recall how the
transversal Lie algebra of a point  of a leaf  can be
constructed:

 
 The transversal Lie algebra 
 of a point  in a leaf  of a
 Poisson manifold  is the conormal space
 
, identified with the
 annihilator of the tangent space , with the following Lie
 bracket: For two elements  we choose functions
  and  which vanish in a neighborhood of  in the leaf 
 such that  and . The bracket
 
 is then well defined and defines the transversal Lie algebra .

We will later use another way to identify  as a submanifold of
the cotangent bundle of :

   As a manifold, the transversal Lie algebra  is the kernel of
 the Poisson tensor  in .

 
 For any cotangent vector  the vector
  is tangential to  such that
  for all  proving
 that  is contained in the kernel of . Equality of the
 vector spaces then follows from a dimensional argument.

We are going to discuss the transversal Lie algebra for gauge theories
where  as in Sec. .

   If  is the dual of a Lie algebra, then the transversal
 Lie algebra  of a point  is the isotropy algebra of the
 co-adjoint action of  at .

 
 As a subspace of the cotangent bundle of ,  is
 naturally identified with a subspace of
 . Furthermore, it follows from the definition
 that  is also a subalgebra of : if 
 and  are in the
 kernel of , we have




 which implies




 where the last bracket denotes the usual bracket in the Lie algebra
  and  are identified with the generators of
 .

 The condition for  of Lemma  now reads




 for all  which concludes the proof.

If  is semisimple, we can identify  with  and
the point  with an element of . The transversal Lie
algebra  then is the subalgebra of  fulfilling
 for all .

We are now ready to exploit this information in the context of
solutions to gauge theories. We already know that solutions for the
field  are given by arbitrary maps of  into a leaf  of
. Locally, the map  can be deformed by gauge
transformations such that its image is a single point ;
therefore, the field equation  implies that all
solutions for  have to commute with  and thus, according
to Lemma , have values in the transversal Lie
algebra of . Furthermore, the local component 1-forms  such
that  of all those connections can be written as
 with  1-forms  where  is the
codimension of the leaf and  are  Casimir functions specifying
the leaf. If the image of  is not just a single point, we need an
additional contribution 
for the connection such that . Then,
 would provide a solution to 
. If we can find such a form , any solution to the
first field equation can be written as  plus a transversal Lie
algebra valued connection. This demonstrates that the role of the
transversal Lie algebra is unchanged if we have a non-regular
leaf. Now it is easy to see that 
with  compatible with  is appropriate because




provided that 
 (where  can be regarded as a tangential
index since it is contracted with ). Note that for this
equation  only needs to give the leaf symplectic structure when
restricted to the leaf itself which is weaker than the condition for a
compatible presymplectic form. However, one also has to assure that
 has the correct curvature in order for  to solve the second
field equation. For regular leaves this requires  to be
constructed with a compatible presymplectic form as we have seen.

The last calculations suggest that the classification of solutions to
Poisson Sigma Models as found in this paper generalizes to arbitrary
leaves where the transversal Lie algebra plays the role of the
connection 1-forms . (This is also suggested by a
reinterpretation of the solutions as Lie algebroid morphisms
.) Only the explicit form
() of a solution cannot be used if there is no substitute
for the compatible presymplectic form . One example where one
can easily find an alternative form for a non-regular leaf is the
origin as a degenerate leaf in a semisimple Lie algebra: Here we can
choose  since all maps  into this leaf have only one image
point, which would correspond to a form  which is not compatible
with  in a neighborhood of the leaf. In this case, the
transversal Lie algebra agrees with the Lie algebra itself such that
all solutions for  are given by Lie algebra valued connections with
the correct curvature (zero for  theories or given by the volume
form for Yang-Mills theories). Thus, the methods of the present paper
give us the well-known results also for a degenerate leaf, in which
case we obtain irreducible connections and a vanishing .

In fact, this conclusion does not only apply to  and Yang-Mills,
which have a linear Poisson tensor, but to a general Poisson Sigma
Model as well provided that the image of  is contractible in the
leaf . In this case, one can choose the gauge in which the image of
 is a single point where the previous remarks can be used. The
-components tangential to the leaf in the given point must be zero
in this gauge owing to the first field equation, while the remaining
components are subject to the second field equation with structure
constants   of the transversal Lie algebra. Thus,
up to gauge transformations,
 has to be a flat transversal Lie algebra valued connection
whenever the  in () is of trivial
homotopy-so that  can be gauged to be constant. The remaining
gauge freedom then gives the usual gauge transformations of a connection.

In this special case, the field equations of a general Poisson Sigma
Model can be reduced to those of -theory, and also the formulas we
obtained in Sec.  for the dimensions of subspaces
 corresponding to different classes of leaves (regular or
non-regular) can be used. Regular leaves  always
contribute solutions which form a subspace of dimension
 while a degenerate leaf
 yields .
Since  for a
Poisson tensor of non-constant rank, the contribution of a degenerate leaf
will always dominate the solution space provided that the rank of the
fundamental group of  is large enough. Similarly, one can see that
the dimension of the solution space for any leaf  (not necessarily
regular or degenerate) is approximately given by 
 for large rank of the fundamental group (this is the
contribution of connections taking values in the transversal Lie
algebra of dimension , while the contribution of
-solutions is not proportional to the rank of the fundamental group
and thus sub-dominant). Therefore, regular leaves will not give a
dense subset of the solution space for large fundamental group of
, even when there are no degenerate leaves. In other words, the
leaves of the lowest dimension dominate the solution
space. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank A. Cattaneo, A. Kotov, and J. Stasheff for
discussions. T.S. is grateful to the Erwin Schrodinger Institute in
Vienna for hospitality in the period when this work was begun, and
M. B. to A. Wipf and the TPI in Jena for hospitality. The work of
M. B. was supported in part by NSF grant PHY00-90091 and the Eberly
research funds of Penn State.

 10 

P. Schaller and T. Strobl,
Poisson structure induced (topological) field theories,
Mod. Phys. Lett. , A9:3129-3136, 1994.

N. Ikeda,
Two-dimensional gravity and nonlinear gauge theory,
Ann. Phys. , 235:435-464, 1994.

A. S. Cattaneo and G. Felder,
P oisson sigma models and symplectic groupoids,
math.SG/0003023.

Ct. Klimcik and T. Strobl,
WZW -P oisson manifolds,
J. Geom. Phys. , 43:341-344, 2002.

A. Yu. Alekseev, P. Schaller, and T. Strobl,
The topological   WZW  model in the generalized momentum
  representation,
Phys. Rev. , D52:7146-7160, 1995.

P. Schaller and T. Strobl,
Introduction to Poisson-  models,
In H. Grosse and L. Pittner, editors, Low-Dimensional Models in
  Statistical Physics and Quantum Field Theory , volume 469 of Lecture
  Notes in Physics , page 321 (Springer, Berlin, 1996).

T. Klo sch and T. Strobl,
Classical and quantum gravity in (1+1)-dimensions. P art 1: A 
  unifying approach,
Class. Quant. Grav. , 13:965-984, 1996.
Erratum ibid. 14 (1997) 825.

T. Strobl,
Gravity in T wo S pacetime D imensions ,
Habilitationsschrift, Rheinisch-Westfalische Technische Hochschule
  Aachen, 1999.

P. Schaller and T. Strobl,
P oisson sigma models: A  generalization of 2d gravity
  Y ang-M ills systems, hep-th/9411163.

T. Strobl,
2d quantum dilaton gravity as/versus a finite dimensional quantum
  mechanical systems,
Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. , 57:330-333, 1997.

N. M. J. Woodhouse,
Geometric quantization, Oxford mathematical monographs,
New York, Clarendon, 1992.

F. Bayen, M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, A. Lichnerowicz, and D. Sternheimer,
Deformation theory and quantization. 1. deformations of symplectic
  structures,
Ann. Phys. , 111:61, 1978.

F. Bayen, M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, A. Lichnerowicz, and D. Sternheimer,
Deformation theory and quantization. 2. physical applications,
Ann. Phys. , 111:111, 1978.

M. Kontsevich,
Deformation quantization of poisson manifolds, I,
q-alg/9709040.

A. S. Cattaneo and G. Felder,
A path integral approach to the K ontsevich quantization formula,
Commun. Math. Phys. , 212:591, 2000.

V. Schomerus,
D-branes and deformation quantization,
JHEP , 06:030, 1999.

N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
String theory and noncommutative geometry,
JHEP , 09:032, 1999.

J. E. Moyal,
Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory,
Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. , 45:99-124, 1949.

M. Bojowald and T. Strobl,
Poisson geometry in constrained systems,
hep-th/0112074.

T. Klo sch and T. Strobl,
Classical and quantum gravity in 1+1 dimensions. P art 2: T he
  universal coverings,
Class. Quant. Grav. , 13:2395-2422, 1996.

T. Klo sch and T. Strobl,
Classical and quantum gravity in (1+1)-dimensions. P art 3:
  S olutions of arbitrary topology,
Class. Quant. Grav. , 14:1689-1723, 1997.

T. Klo sch and T. Strobl,
A global view of kinks in 1+1 gravity,
Phys. Rev. , D57:1034-1044, 1998.

J.-S. Park,
Topological open p-branes,
hep-th/0012141.

P. Severa and A. Weinstein,
Poisson geometry with a 3-form background,
Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. , 144:145-154, 2001.

M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim,
Quantization of gauge systems,
Princeton University Press, 1992.

P. Schaller and T. Strobl,
Diffeomorphisms versus nonabelian gauge transformations: An example
  of (1+1)-dimensional gravity,
Phys. Lett. , B337:266-270, 1994.

R. Fulp, T. Lada, and J. Stasheff,
Noether's variational theorem II and the BV formalism,
math.QA/0204079.

M. Bojowald, A. Kotov, and T. Strobl,
in preparation.

T. Strobl,
Gravity from Lie algebroid morphisms,
in preparation.

A. Weinstein,
The local structure of P oisson manifolds,
J. Diff. Geom. , 18:523-557, 1983.

W. M. Goldman,
The symplectic nature of fundamental groups of surfaces,
Adv. Math. , 54:200-225, 1984.

I. Vaisman,
Lectures on the Geometry of Poisson Manifolds ,
Birkhauser, Basel, 1994.

M. Crainic and R. L. Fernandes,
I ntegrability of L ie brackets,
Annals of Mathematics , 157:575, 2003.

M. Crainic and R. L. Fernandes,
I ntegrability of P oisson brackets, math.DG/0210152.

A. Cannas da Silva and A. Weinstein,
G eometric M odels for N oncommutative A lgebras , volume 10
  of Berkeley Mathematics Lecture Notes ,
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1999,
available at http://www.math.berkeley.edu/~alanw/.


