
















plain 
Newton Law in Brane-World Scenario with  Induced Gravity:
Singular Quantum Mechanical Approach 
D. K. Park(e-mail:
dkpark@hep.kyungnam.ac.kr) 
  

Department of Physics, Kyungnam University, Masan, 631-701, Korea 
 
 
From the viewpoint of the singular quantum mechanics the effect of the 
energy-dependent coupling constant for -function potential is 
examined. The energy-dependence of the coupling constant naturally generates
the time-derivative in the boundary condition of the Euclidean propagator.
This is explicitly confirmed by making use of the simple  model.
The result is applied to the linearized gravity fluctuation equation 
for the brane-world scenario with  induced gravity.  
Our approach generates  Newton potential at a certain intermediate
range of distance between two test massive sources. For other range of distance
 Newton potential is recovered.




The original brane-world scenarios are designed to solve the gauge-hierarchy
problem, one of the longstanding puzzle in physics, by introducing large
extra dimensions or warped extra 
dimension.
Especially, Randall-Sundrum(RS) scenario may also provide a mechanism for
the localization of the gravity on the single positive-tension 
brane. As a result much attention is paid to understand the 
higher-order corrections of Newton potential on the brane by employing the 
various brane-world pictures. Furthermore, these activities may motivate the 
experimental investigation for the short range gravitational 
effect.

For the case of  bulk with a flat brane as RS scenario the computation
of Newton law carried out in original RS paper is improved by 
examining the brane-bending effect or by computing
the one-loop corrections to the gravitational propagator. 
These improvements introduce a mutiplication factor in the subleading term
of Newton potential
contributed from Kaluza-Klein excitations. In addition, the linearized 
gravity 
fluctuation equation is also treated from the viewpoint of the singular
quantum mechanics(SQM). In SQM it is well-known that 
when the potential is too singular, Hamiltonian loses its self-adjoint 
property, and thus the conservation of the probability met a serious
problem.
In order to overcome this difficulty we should maintain the self-adjoint
property of Hamiltonian by extending its domain of definition appropriately,
which is refered to a self-adjoint extension. It is known 
that this mathematical approach is effectively identical with the 
physically-oriented
coupling constant renormalization scheme. The method has 
been applied to the gravitation fluctuation equations of RS single
brane and two brane scenarios for the compromise of the gravitational 
localization with a small cosmological 
constant. It also generates the logarithmic correction
in the short range of Newton potential.

Newton law with a different setup is also examined. The gravitational 
potential for the flat brane in  bulk and for the curved  brane in 
 or  bulk are examined. For the case of the flat
brane in  bulk the sign of the subleading correction is changed to be
negative. The physical implication of this sign change is discussed in
Ref. in the context of /CFT correspondence.

Another type of the scenario which attracts an attention recently is a 
brane-world with a  induced Einstein term where the brane has its
own gravity term ab initio . For the case of the flat bulk in this 
picture the gravitational potential becomes  type  at the short
range, i.e.   and 5d type  at the long
range, i.e.  , where  is a ratio of 
Planck scale with that of : .
This fact can be used for explaining the acceleration of the 
universe.
Newton law with  induced gravity in the  background is also 
examined. In this case there is an intermediate range
of distance where  gravitational potential plays a dominant role.
At other ranges  gravitational potential is recovered.

The most remarkable feature of the linearized fluctuation equation for the
case of  bulk with the induced Einstein term is the fact that 
the coupling constant of the -function potential is dependent on 
energy(or mass) as following:
 
where
 
and . If we regard Eq.() as a 
Schro dinger equation, we should rely on the SQM with an energy-dependent 
coupling constant of -function potential. 
Upon our knowledge the effect of the energy-dependent coupling constant was
not fully examined in the context of SQM. 
The purpose of this letter
is to analyze Eq.() from the viewpoint of SQM.

To understand the effect of the energy-dependent coupling constant in 
quantum mechanics let us consider the Schro dinger equation
, where
 
Let  and  be the
Euclidean propagators for  and  respectively. Then, it is well-known
that  satisfies the following integral equation
 
If we take a Laplace transform
 
in Eq.(), one can easily derive
 
Solving Eq.() one can express the fixed-energy amplitude
 from ;
 

As an example let us consider a simple  free particle case for .
Then, the fixed-energy amplitude for  is simply
 
where the subscript 'F' stands for the free particle.
Thus, Eq.() can be re-written as
 

If  is independent of , one can easily take an inverse Laplace
transform to Eq.() using the formulae
 
where  is an usual error function:
 
After some manipulations one can show the Euclidean propagator in this case is 
simply
 
where  is a propagator for a  free-particle system;
 
One can show that  and  satisfy the usual
boundary condition for the -function potential;
 

Next, let us consider  case. Then, Eq.()
shows that the fixed-energy amplitude  becomes
 
From Eq.() one can show  satisfies the 
following boundary condition at ;
 
Eq.() enables us to derive a boundary condition for the 
corresponding 
Euclidean propagator  to be satisfied at . Taking an 
inverse Laplace transform in Eq.() leads to 
 
where .
Since  becomes 
 
for , Eq.() reduces to 
 
Thus the energy-dependence of the coupling constant yields an time-derivative
at the boundary condition of the propagator. This may be understood
from the usual energy-time uncertainty principle. The explicit form of 
the Euclidean
propagator in this case can be derived by taking an inverse Laplace transform
to Eq.();
 
where  is given in Eq.(). It is straightforward to 
show that  really satisfies the boundary condition 
(). 

Now, let us go back to the gravitational fluctuation equation ().
Firstly, let us comment briefly how Eq.() is derived. The 
Einstein equation we consider is 
 
where  and  are  and  curvature scalar respectively.
Of course  and  are  cosmological constant and brane 
tension. In fact, Eq.() can be derived by varying the 
Einstein-Hilbert action
 
The solution of Eq.() we have interest is same with that of the
usual RS scenario
 
with the fine-tuning conditions  and .
The coincidence of the classical solution with that of the usual RS scenario
is in fact evident because the 
-brane in Eq.() is flat and hence the  induced gravity 
does not play any role. However, this induced gravity yields an important
effect when we consider the linearized gravitational fluctuation 
 defined as 
 
Inserting Eq.() into the Einstein equation ()
with redefinition ,
, and , one can derive
Eq.() straightforwardly. Of course we should use RS gauge
 in the course of calculation.

The fixed-energy amplitude  for  is 
examined in detail in Ref.. In fact, 
 is crucially dependent on the boundary condition
at , where , which is parametrized by  in
Ref.. Here, we choose only  case which means the
Dirichlet and the Neumann boundary conditions are included with equal weight.
In this case the fixed-energy amplitude  on the brane
simply reduces to 
 where
 
and  is an usual modified Bessel function. Of course, 
 and  represent the zero mode and  
Kaluaza-Klein excitations of the RS scenario respectively. 

The general formula Eq.() enables us to derive a 
fixed-energy amplitude
 for Hamiltonian  defined in Eq.()
as following:
 
Thus, the fixed-energy amplitude at the location of the brane for the system
involving the  induced gravity is 
 
where .
The fixed-energy we derived in Eq.() is proportional to the
momentum-dependent Green function  which is expressed
at Eq.(2.10) of Ref.. If we adjust our conventions with those
of Ref., the relation between them is simply
. This simple relation makes
us to analyze Newton law of the gravitation localized on the brane.

Newton potential localized on the brane is generally obtained from the 
space-time dependent Green function as following 
where the subscript 'R' stands for the retarded Green function.
Using a Fourier transform of 
 
one can show the potential  in Eq.() reduces to 
  
Since the continuum states start from the asymptotic value of the 
quantum-mechanical potential, the singular -function potential can
not generate any mass gap. Thus we can conclude  in Eq.().
The factor  in Eq.() is crucial to extract 
an information on the long-range
and short-range behaviors of the gravitational potential . To show
this more explicitly we re-express  as following
 

If , the high oscillation of  results in a negligible
contribution to the integral from large . Thus, one can approximate
 and  as
 
Then it is straightforward to show that the potential becomes
 
where the infinitesimal parameter  is introduced for the 
regularization. Performing the integration in Eq.() makes
 to be
 
Thus the potential exhibits the  behavior at the long-range.

If , the large  region mainly contributes to the integral of 
Eq.(). Thus, one can use the asymptotic expansion of 
 and ;
 
Then it is straightforward to compute  whose final approximate expression
is 
 
where  and,  and  are 
usual sine and cosine integral functions.
If ,  simply reduce to 
 
Thus if , one can use the asymptotic expansion of 
 
 
which results in
 
Therefore, in the region ,  displays the  
gravitational
behavior. If , Eq.() shows  reduces to
 
Thus at this region  recovers the  behavior.

The exact computation of Newton potential in the full range of  with 
arbitrary  seems to be interesting. It may need an highly nontrivial
numerical method because our computation requires a regularization. 
We hope to return to this issue in the near future.
Another point we should stress
is that our result comes from 
. In 
Ref., however,  is crucially
dependent on the boundary conditions, which is parametrized by . It is 
interesting to study an effect of the induced gravity when the general 
boundary conditions are employed. From the viewpoint of SQM
Eq.() is a formal solution for the fixed-energy amplitude
because  is in general ill-defined at the higher
dimensional theory. Thus one should adopt an appropriate regularization scheme
for obtaining the finite result. It seems to be interesting
to study further the effect of the energy-dependent coupling constant from
the aspect of pure SQM. 







Acknowledgement:  
This work was supported by the Kyungnam University
Research Fund, 2002.



 99 

 N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett. 
B 429  (1998) 263 [hep-ph/9803315].

 L. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos 
and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett.
B 436  (1998) 257 [hep-ph/9804398].

 N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. 
D 59  (1999) 086004 [hep-ph/9807344].

 L. Randall and R. Sundrum, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83  (1999) 3370 [hep-ph/9905221].

 L. Randall and R. Sundrum,  
Phys. Rev. Lett. B 83  (1999) 4690 [hep-th/9906064].

 C. D. Hoyle, U. Schmidt, B. R. Heckel, E. G. Adelberger, 
J. H. Gundlach, D. J. Kapner and H. E. Swanson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 
(2001) 1418 [hep-ph/0011014].

 J. Garriga and T. Tanaka, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84  (2000) 2778 [hep-th/9911055].

 S. B. Giddings, E. Katz, and L. Randall,  
JHEP 0003  (2000) 023 [hep-th/0002091].

 M. J. Duff and J. T. Liu,  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85  (2000) 2052 
[hep-th/0003237].

 D. K. Park and S. Tamaryan,  
Phys. Lett. B532  (2002) 305 [hep-th/0108068].

 D. K. Park and H. S. Kim, 
Nucl. Phys. 
B 636  (2002) 179 [hep-th/0204122].

 A. Z. Capri, Nonrelativistic Quantum Mechanics  
(Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA, 1985).

 M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods of Modern Mathematical 
Physics  (Academic, New York, 1975).

 R. Jackiw, in M. A. Be g Memorial Volume , edited 
by A. Ali and P. Hoodbhoy (World Scientific, Singapore, 1991).

 D. K. Park, J. Math. Phys. 36  (1995) 5453 
[hep-th/9405020].

 D. K. Park and S. Tamaryan, Phys. Lett. B 554  (2003)
92 [hep-th/0212023].

 S. Nojiri and S. D. Odintsov, Phys. Lett. B 548  (2002)
215 [hep-th/0209066].

 A. Strominger, JHEP 0110  (2001) 034 [hep-th/0106113].

 G. Dvali, G. Gabadadze and M. Porrati, Phys. Lett. 
B 485  (2000) 208 [hep-th/0005016].

 V. A. Rubakov, hep-th/0303125.

 E. Kiritsis, N. Tetradis and T. N. Tomaras, JHEP 0203 
(2002) 019 [hep-th/0202037].

 M. Ito, Phys. Lett. B 554  (2003) 180 [hep-th/0211268].





 M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical
Functions  (Dover, New York, NY, 1972).














































