Quantum Mechanics in Infinite Symplectic Volume 
Jose M. Isidro

Instituto de Fisica Corpuscular (CSIC-UVEG)

Apartado de Correos 22085, Valencia 46071, Spain

jmisidro@ific.uv.es  


 
We quantise complex, infinite-dimensional projective space .
We apply the result to quantise a complex, finite-dimensional, classical phase space 
 whose symplectic volume is infinite, by holomorphically embedding it into 
. The embedding is univocally determined by requiring it to be an isometry 
between the Bergman metric on  and the Fubiny-Study metric on .
Then the Hilbert-space bundle over  is the pullback, by the 
embedding, of the Hilbert-space bundle over . 

Keywords: Quantum mechanics, infinite-dimensional projective space, holomorphic vector bundles.

2001 Pacs codes: 03.65.Bz, 03.65.Ca, 03.65.-w. 

2000 MSC codes: 81S10, 81P05.




di-men-sion 
di-men-sio-nal 




Introduction 

Notations 

Throughout this article,  will denote a complex -dimensional, connected, 
classical phase space, endowed with a symplectic form  
and a complex structure . We will assume that  and  
are compatible, so holomorphic coordinate charts on  will also 
be Darboux charts. Upon quantisation,  will denote a complex, 
separable Hilbert space of quantum states. We will assume  to have an infinite 
symplectic volume,
 
so  will be infinite-dimensional. Vector bundles over  with fibre 
 will be called quantum Hilbert-space bundles , or -bundles 
for short, and denoted .


Summary of results 

Classical phase space is the space of all solutions to the classical equations 
of motion (modulo gauge transformations that may eventually exist). As such it provides 
a natural starting point for quantisation. Although quantisation is a well-established procedure, 
recent developments in string and M-theory call for a revision of our understanding of 
classical  vs. quantum . With this aim in mind we have analysed 
the quantisation of a complex, compact  in ref.. Compactness ensures that 
the symplectic volume of  is finite and, therefore, the Hilbert space of quantum states 
is finite-dimensional. Based on the example when  we have analysed 
the different equivalence classes of (finite-dimensional) Hilbert-space bundles over . 

It remains to study the case when  has an infinite symplectic volume,
which we do in the present article extending the technique presented in ref..
This corresponds, e.g. , to phase spaces such as , the cotangent 
bundle to some configuration space . The latter may well be compact, but its 
cotangent bundle is definitely noncompact. (Noncompactness of  is a necessary, 
though not sufficient, condition for its symplectic volume to be infinite). 
Of course, the quantisation of  has been known for long; there is a 
Hilbert space  where quantum states are square-integrable functions 
on . We do not intend to alter this picture. Rather, our aim is 
to generalise it using the language fibre bundles over  
. In this 
language, the picture described above usually corresponds to the trivial bundle 
. The notion of quantum-mechanical duality, as elaborated 
in ref., suggests considering nonflat (and therefore nontrivial) Hilbert-space 
bundles over . This is what we do here.

Our approach may be summarised as follows. We first quantise a particular example of a complex, 
noncompact , the infinite-dimensional complex projective space . 
Being infinite-dimensional, it cannot be the phase space of a finite number of degrees of freedom. 
However  is easily quantised following ref.. For this
we consider a holomorphic atlas on . Over each coordinate chart 
we erect a certain vector-space fibre; fibres are patched together across overlapping charts 
according to a set of transition functions. In this way a fibre bundle is constructed whose fibre 
is a Hilbert space of quantum states. The latter fall into two categories. 
One is the vacuum, the other its excitations. 
It turns out that all quantum states (except the vacuum) are holomorphic tangent vectors 
to . This identifies the transition functions as jacobian matrices, 
and the corresponding subbundle as the holomorphic tangent bundle . 
The vacuum  appears as the fibrewise generator of a holomorphic line bundle 
. Now  is contractible, hence both 
 and  are trivial, as well as their sum, which is 
the complete quantum Hilbert-space bundle :
 

Next an -dimensional, complex phase space  with infinite symplectic 
volume is quantised by holomorphically embedding it into 
. The embedding  
is univocally determined by the condition that it be an isometry between 
the Bergman metric on  and the Fubini-Study metric on . 
Then the bundle  is the pullback by  of the 
bundle . 
In particular,  is infinite-dimensional as required by the 
infinite symplectic volume of .

The differential geometry of  was studied long ago in ref.,
and its deformation quantisation more recently in the nice paper. 
We have addressed duality in quantum mechanics from different perspectives 
in previous publications. For background material see, 
e.g. , refs.. 
Finally we would also like to mention refs..


The space of rays in Hilbert space 

Realise  as the space of infinite sequences of complex numbers  that 
are square-summable, . 
The  provide a set of holomorphic coordinates on . 
The space of rays  is
 

The  provide a set of projective  coordinates on .
Now assume that , and define  for . Then 
 for every fixed 
value of . As  varies, these  cover one copy of  
that we denote by . The open set , endowed with 
the coordinate functions , , 
where a check over an index indicates omission, provides a holomorphic coordinate chart 
on  for every fixed .
A holomorphic atlas is obtained as the collection of all pairs  
, for  There are nonempty -fold overlaps  
for all values of  Holomorphic tangent vectors and holomorphic 1-forms 
on  are spanned by  and . 
When  above, these vectors and covectors transform according to an 
(infinite-dimensional) jacobian matrix and its transpose.

 is a Kahler manifold. On the coordinate chart 
, the Kahler potential reads
  
and the corresponding metric  reads on this chart
 
Being infinite-dimensional,  is noncompact. It is simply connected:
 
It is contractible to a point, so its Picard group is trivial:
 
It has trivial homology in odd real dimension,
 
while it is nontrivial in even dimension,
 


Quantisation of  

Since  is trivial, there exists a unique equivalence class 
of holomorphic lines bundles over ; using the notations of ref. 
let us denote it by . The latter is a trivial bundle, 
where the fibre  is generated by the vacuum state .
Triviality implies that  transforms with the identity when changing coordinates 
on . Let , , , 
be creation and annihilation operators on the chart , for  fixed. 
Following ref. we identify  and 
. We can now construct the -bundle over 
. To this end we will describe the fibre over each coordinate chart 
, plus the transition functions on the 2-fold overlaps , 
for all . 

The Hilbert-space fibre over  is  itself, the latter being the 
-linear span of the infinite set of linearly independent vectors 
 
Reasoning as in ref. one proves 
that, on the 2-fold overlaps , the fibre  can be chosen 
in either of two equivalent ways.   is either the -linear span of the vectors 
, , for
, or the -linear span of the vectors , 
, for 


Arguments identical to those of ref. prove that all the states of eqn. (), 
except the vacuum , are (co)tangent vectors to  on the 
chart , and thus transition functions are jacobian matrices. 
Identifying the tangent and cotangent bundles we can write
 
Contractibility of  implies that the tangent bundle 
 is also trivial, hence the complete 
-bundle is trivial:
 
Of course, triviality of  could have been established 
more simply by observing that  is contractible. However the previous 
reasoning was needed in order to elucidate its structure as the direct sum (), 
which proves that all quantum states except the vacuum are tangent vectors to .


Quantisation of  

Sections ,  present a summary, drawn from ref., 
on how to embed  holomorphically within . 
This procedure is applied in section  in order to quantise .
For background material see, e.g. , ref..


The Bergman metric on  

Denote by  the set of holomorphic, square-integrable -forms on .
 is a separable, complex Hilbert space (finite-dimensional when  is compact).
Let  denote a complete orthonormal basis for , and let  be (local) 
holomorphic coordinates on . Then
 
is a holomorphic -form on , where 
is complex manifold conjugate to . The form  is 
independent of the choice of an orthonormal basis for ; it is called 
the kernel form  of . If  is the point of  
corresponding to a point , the set of pairs 
 is naturally identified with 
. In this way  can be considered as a -form on 
. One can prove that  is invariant under the group 
of holomorphic transformations of .

Next assume that, given any point , there exists an 
 such that . That is, the kernel form 
 of  is everywhere nonzero on :
 
Let us write, in local holomorphic coordinates  on ,  ,
 
for a certain everywhere nonzero function . 
Define a hermitean form 
 
One can prove that  is independent of the choice of coordinates 
on . Moreover, it is positive semidefinite and invariant under 
the holomorphic transformations of .

Let us make the additional assumption that  is such that  
is positive definite,
 
Then  defines a (Kahler) metric  called the Bergman metric  
on .


Embedding  within  

Let  be the Hilbert space dual to . Given , let its expansion 
in local coordinates be
 
for a certain function . Let  denote the mapping that sends  
into  defined by
 
Then  for all  if and only if property () holds. 
Assuming that the latter is satisfied, and denoting by  the natural projection from 
 onto , the composite map  
 
is well defined on , independent of the coordinates, and holomorphic. 

One can prove the following results. When property () is true, the 
quadratic differential form  of eqn. () is the pullback, 
by , of the canonical Kahler metric  of eqn. ():
 
Moreover, the differential of  is nonsingular at every point 
of  if and only if property () is satisfied. 
These two results give us a geometric interpretation of the Bergman metric. 
Namely, if properties () and () hold, 
then  is an isometric immersion of  into .

The map  is locally one-to-one in the sense that every point of  
has a neighbourhood that is mapped injectively into . 
However,  is not necessarily injective in the large. Conditions can 
be found that ensure injectivity of  in the large. Assume 
that, if ,  are any two distinct points of , an 
 can be found such that
 
Then  is injective. Therefore, if  satisfies assumptions (), 
() and (), it can be holomorphically and isometrically embedded 
into .


Quantisation of  as a submanifold of  


Finally we quantise a noncompact  with infinite symplectic volume.
At any point of  there are only  linearly independent, holomorphic tangent vectors. 
Applied to , the construction of ref. provides a finite-dimensional 
, contrary to eqn. (). Therefore we try an alternative route.

We need an infinite-dimensional -bundle over . 
For this purpose we assume embedding  holomorphically 
and injectively within  as in eqn. (). 
Then the bundle  of eqn. () can 
be pulled back to  by the embedding . We take this to define 
the bundle :
 
Even though  is trivial, it may contain nonflat (hence nontrivial) 
subbundles, thus allowing for nontrivial dualities.

A detailed analysis of  requires specifying  explicitly.
However some properties can be stated in general. Thus, e.g. ,
the kernel form is the quantum-mechanical propagator 
. On  it reads 
 
where  is some normalisation. The Bergman metric () derived from this kernel 
is the standard Hermitean metric on . The embedding  naturally relates physical 
information (the propagator) and geometric information (the metric on ). In retrospective, 
this justifies our quantisation of  by embedding it within . 
An important physical input is the relation between the symplectic volume of  
and the number of linearly independent quantum states.  It would be 
interesting to enquire into a possible geometric origin for this fact.


Acknowledgements 


It is a great pleasure to thank J. de Azcarraga, U. Bruzzo and M. Schlichenmaier 
for encouragement and discussions. This work has been partially supported by research grant 
BFM2002-03681 from Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia and EU FEDER funds.


 99 


C. Vafa, hep-th/9702201 .

J.M. Isidro, hep-th/0304175 .

M. Reuter, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A22  (1998) 3835.

S. Kobayashi, Trans. Am. Math. Soc.  92  (1959) 267.

H. Garcia-Compean, J. Plebanski, M. Przanowski and F. 
Turrubiates, J. Phys.  A35  (2002) 4301.

J.M. Isidro, 
Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A16  (2001) 3853;
J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.  35  (2002) 3305;
Phys. Lett.  A301  (2002) 210;
quant-ph/0304143 .

S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry , Wiley, 
New York (1996).

J. de Azcarraga and J. Izquierdo, Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, 
Cohomology and some Applications in Physics , Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1995).

M. Schlichenmaier, An Introduction to Riemann Surfaces, Algebraic Curves 
and Moduli Spaces , Springer Lecture Notes in Physics 322 , Berlin (1989).

Geometry and Physics of Branes , eds. U. Bruzzo, V. Gorini and U. 
Moschella, Institute of Physics, Bristol (2002).

  
A. Faraggi and M. Matone, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A15  (2000) 1869;

G. Bertoldi, A. Faraggi and M. Matone, Class. Quant. Grav.  17  (2000) 3965.

J. Anandan, Int. J. Theor. Phys.  41  (2002) 199.

K. Fujii, J. Math. Phys.  41  (2000) 4406; Rept. Math. Phys.  
48  (2001) 75.

N. Kuiper, Topology  3  (1965) 19.

A. Perelomov, Generalized Coherent States and their Applications , Springer Texts and
Monographs in Physics, Berlin (1986).

W. Dittrich and M. Reuter, Classical and Quantum Dynamics , Springer, 
Berlin (2001).












