 
 

0cm      
0cm     

0pt         
0pt            
20cm        
16cm         
 


  
  
 
 
1202           
C             
G   
I   
J   
N   
N   
R   
S   
R   
T   
Z   
1316         
A         
B   
C   
D   
E   
F   
G   
H   
I   
J   
K   
L   
M   
N   
O   
P   
Q   
R   
S   
T   
U   
V   
W   
X   
Y   
Z   
 

   
f   
g   
h   
E   


  
 
.                
(                
[                
               
.               
)               
]               
              
         

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 


 
 
 
UTF 451/UTM 640  




 
 

 



Holography,  symmetry, Virasoro algebra and all that in Rindler spacetime  




 

 

 

Valter Moretti and Nicola Pinamonti  


 Department of Mathematics, E-mail: moretti@science.unitn.it
 
 I.N.F.N. Gruppo Collegato di Trento
 
 Department of Physics, E-mail: pinamont@science.unitn.it
 

 

University of Trento,
 
Faculty of Science,

via Sommarive 14,
 
I-38050 Povo (TN),
 
Italy. 


 

 






April 2003  



 

Abstract: 
It is shown that it is possible to define quantum field theory of a massless scalar free field on
the event horizon of a -Rindler spacetime. Free quantum field theory on the horizon enjoys diffeomorphism
invariance and turns out to be  unitarily and algebraically equivalent to the analogous theory of a scalar
field propagating inside Rindler spacetime, nomatter the value of the mass of the field in the bulk. More precisely, 
there exists a unitary transformation that realizes the bulk-boundary correspondence upon an
appropriate choice for Fock representation spaces. 
Secondly, the found correspondence is a subcase of  an analogous algebraic correspondence described by injective 
-homomorphisms of the abstract algebras
of observables generated by abstract quantum free-field operators.  These field operators are smeared with 
suitable test functions in the bulk and exact 1-forms on the horizon.
In this sense  the correspondence is independent from the chosen vacua. 
It is proven that, under that correspondence the "hidden"  quantum symmetry found in a previous
work gets a clear geometric meaning, it being associated with a group of 
diffeomorphisms of the horizon itself.  Finally it is found that there is a possible enlargement of the quantum symmetry 
on the horizon to a quantum Virasoro symmetry associated with vector fields on the event horizon. 
       
Introduction. 

Many papers have tackled the problem of the microscopic origin of black-hole entropy. In that context
holographic principle arose by the idea  
that gravity near the horizon should be described by a low dimensional theory with a higher dimensional group
of symmetry. 
After that, the correspondence between quantum field theories of different dimensions was conjectured by 
Maldacena in his celebrated work about  correspondence. Using the machinery of 
string theory, he argued that there is a correspondence between quantum field theory in
a, asymptotically ,   dimensional spacetime  - the "bulk"- and a conformal theory in a 
dimensional manifold - the (conformal) "boundary" at spacelike infinity -. 
Notice that Maldacena's holographic principle encompasses asymptotically- black
hole spacetimes.  

Afterwards Witten described the above correspondence  in terms of relations
of observables of the two theories.
Results arisen by those works were proven rigorously by Rehren for free quantum fields in a  background,
exstablishing the existence  
of a correspondence between bulk observables and boundary observables (usually called algebraic holography)
without employing 
string technology. 
A crucial point to explain the correspondence in Rehren's version is that, in   space, the 
conformal group which 
acts in  dimensions can be realized as the group of the isometries of the  bulk.
In this way,  from a pure geometric point of view, the nature of the bulk-boundary correspondence has a
straightforward explanation. 
Finally, Strominger proposed to enlarge the extent by showing that there
is an analogous correspondence between  space and a possible conformal field theory on its timelike
boundary. In another work, making use of the optical metric, the near horizon limit of a massless
theory in Schwarzschild-like spacetime has been intepreted as a theory in a asymptotic  spacetime
giving rise to holographic properties. 
 
In Schwarzschild spacetime embedded in Kruskal manifold, the proper boundary (dropping the boundary at
infinity) is made of the event horizon of the black hole. With that notion of boundary
a natural question arises "what about a bulk-boundary correspondence in a manifold containing a
Schwarzschild-like black hole?" 
Obviously a first and intriguing problem, tackled in section 3, is the definition of a quantum field theory
on a manifold - as an event horizon - whose metric is degenerate. 
To approach the general issue in the simplest version,  we notice that two-dimensional Rindler spacetime embedded in Minkowski spacetime approximates the nontrivial part
of the spacetime structure  near a bifurcate horizon as that of a Schwartzschild black hole embedded in Kruskal spacetime.
The remaining transverse manifold is not so relevant in several interesting quantum effects as Hawking's radiation and 
it seems that it can be dropped in the simplest approximation.
In that context,  we have argued in a recent work that free quantum field theory  in
two-dimensional Rindler space  presents a "hidden"  symmetry. In other words the theory turns out
to be invariant under a unitary representation of  but such a quantum symmetry cannot be induced
by the geometric background which enjoys a different group of isometries. 
 is the group of symmetry of the zero-dimensional conformal field theory in the sense of, so,  as
for the case of AdS spacetime, it suggests the existence of a possible correspondence between quantum field
theory in 
Rindler space  and a conformal field theory defined on its event horizon. 
In fact, as it is shown within this work,
the found hidden symmetry becomes manifest when one examines, after
an appropriate definition,  quantum field theory on the event horizon. That theory enjoys diffeomorphism invariance and 
the  symmetry represents, in the quantum context, the 
geometric invariance of the theory under a little group of diffeomorphisms of the horizon. (We stress that invariance under
isometries make not sense since the metric is degenerate.)
We address to section 3 for thecnical details concerning the structure of quantum field theory on the horizon
that, in a sense, is the limit of the bulk theory 
toward the orizon. We only say
here that, generalizing the symplectic approach valid in the bulk,  
the theory can be built up by defining a suitable quantum field operator smeared with exact -forms, which are 
defined on the event horizon, to assure the invariance under diffeomorphisms; 
moreover the causal propagator (which involves bosonic commutation rules)
is naturally defined in spite of the absence,
shared with other holographic
approaches in other contexts,
 of any natural evolution equation. 
The appearance of a manifest quantum  symmetry on the horizon  is only a part of the results established in this paper. 
In fact, the manifest  symmetry on the horizon is a nothing but a simple result 
which follows form a holographic boundary-bulk
correspondence established in this paper for  Rindler spacetime either in terms of unitary equivalences 
and in terms of -algebra homomorphisms of free field observables.
Investigation of quantum field theory on the horizon also reveals
 the existence of a 
larger manifest quantum symmetry given by a Virasoro algebra without central charge.
(Technical investigation of such a larger symmetry is left to a forthcoming work). This operator
algebra has a clear geometric interpretation in terms of vector fields defined on the horizon
and  generating 
the group of (orientation preserving) diffeomorphisms of the horizon itself.
Some overlap with our results is present in the literature. Guido, Longo, Roberts and Verch
 discussed in some detail the extent to which an algebraic QFT on a spacetime with a bifurcate Killing
horizon induces a conformal QFT on that bifurcate Killing horizon.
Along a similar theme, Schroer and Wiesbrock have studied the relationship between QFTs on horizons
and QFTs on the ambient spacetime. They even use the term "hidden
symmetry" a sense similar as we do here and we done in. In related follow-up works by Schroer and by Schroer and Fassarella the relation to holography 
and diffeomorphism covariance is also discussed.




This work is organized as follows: next section is devoted to review and briefly improve a few results established in 
concerning hidden  symmetry for a free quantum scalar field propagating in  Rindler spacetime.
In the third section we present the main achievement of this work: We build up a quantum field theory for a massless scalar 
field on the
horizon which, in a sense, is the limit toward the horizon of the analogous  theory developed for a (also massive) field propagating 
in the bulk. 
Moreover we show that any free quantum field theories in the bulk and on the horizon are unitarily
and algebraically equivalent (nomatter the value of the mass). In other words there exists a unitary transformation
that realizes the bulk-boundary correspondence upon an appropriate choice for Fock representation spaces. 
In particular, the vacuum expectation values of observables of the free-field theory 
are invariant under the unitary equivalence. 
Actually, as we said, the found correspondence is valid in an algebraic sense too, i.e. it is described by injective 
-homomorphisms of the abstract algebras
of observables constructed by products of free-field operators smeared by suitable test functions/-forms.
In this sense  the correspondence is independent from the
chosen vacua. In the forth section we show that, as we expected, hidden  invariance found inbecomes manifast on the horizon. But that is not the whole story:
In the fifty section, we show that, the horizon manifest  symmetry can be enlarged to a
Virasoro one (technical investigation on this topic well be developed in a forthcoming work).
In the last section we make some remarks and comments on the extension of our result to more complicated
spacetimes containing a bifurcate event horizon.


Hidden  symmetry near a bifurcate Killing horizon. 

2.1 .Rindler space . In  we have proven that quantum mechanics in a 2D-spacetime which approximates 
the spacetime near a bifurcate Killing horizon  enjoys  hidden   invariance.
This has been done by using and technically improving some general results on  invariance
in quantum mechanics.
Let us review part of the results achieved in from the point of view of 
quantum field theory in curved spacetime (essentially in the formulation presented in but using
-algebras instead of -algebras). 


Remark . We illustrate  the  construction of quantum field theory in the considered background
 in some details because the general framework will be useful later in developing quantum field theory on a
horizon and holography.   


Consider a Schwarzschild-like metric
  
where  denotes angular coordinates. Let  denote the radius of the 
black hole.
As the horizon is bifurcate,  and we can use the following approximation
in the limit 
  
where  and . Dropping the angular 
part , the metric  becomes that of the spacetime   called  (right) Rindler wedge 
   which is part of Minkowski spacetime: 
  
with global coordinates , .
That spacetime is static with respect to the timelike Killing vector 
and spacelike surfaces at constant . Later we shall make use of Rindler light coordinates 
 which cover  and satisfy
 u := t-(y)  , v := t+(y)  
 where t,y(0,+). 2.2 .One-particle Hilbert space .
As  is globally hyperbolic, in particular -constant surfaces are Cauchy surfaces, 
quantum field theory can be implemented without difficulties.
There is no guarantee for the validity of the  approach 
to quantum field theory 
for static spacetimes based on the quadratic form induced by the 
stress energy tensor presented in 
since  has no positive lower bound. 
However we build up quantum field theory of a real scalar field  with mass  propagating 
in   by following a more direct  stationary-mode-decomposition approach.
In fact, a posteriori  it is possible to show that our procedure
produces the same quantization as that in.
The Klein-Gordon equation reads
  
If ,   denotes the vector space
of real wavefunctions , i.e.,  real solutions   which have Cauchy data with compact support on a Cauchy surface.
If , () reduces to 
 
and the space of real wavefunctions we want to consider is defined as
 
where  and    respectively are the space of real 
 solutions of 
 and 
with compactly-supported Cauchy data. 
The compactness requirement does not depend on the 
Cauchy surface. 
There are solutions of () with 
which do not belong to 
in spite of  having compactly-supported Cauchy data(With the notation used in (), it is sufficient to fix 
compact-support Cauchy data  on a -constant Cauchy 
surface  such that .) .
Define in    the following symplectic form , which does not depend on the used spacelike
 Cauchy surface    with induced measure   and  unit normal vector  pointing toward the
future
  
 The definition is well-behaved  for a pair of complex-valued wavefunctions too, and  also if one of these has 
no compactly-supported Cauchy data.
Equipped with these tools we can define  the one-particle 
Hilbert space  associated with the Killing field . 
To this end, consider the two classes of, , -stationary solutions of () 
where  is the usual Bessel-McDonald function:
  
where  . 
Modes  are associated with particles crossing the future horizon 
at ,  modes  
are associated with particles crossing  the past horizon 
at . 

We have a pair of proposition whose proof is straightforward by using properties of , Fourier transform and
Lebedev transform.



Proposition 2.1. (Completeness of modes) .
If  and , the function on 
 
satisfies 
, and , 
 for some   (space of complex-valuated  Schwartz' functions on the whole ).
 Moreover,
 
If  and , the functions on  with  
 
satisfy  , 
,  where .
 Moreover, for 
   

Proposition 2.2. (Associated Hilbert spaces) . If , 
define the one-to-one associated positive-frequency 
wavefunction  for  and  respectively 
  
With that definition, for  it results   whereas
 
is well-defined(At least for , positive/negative frequency wavefunctions 
cannot have Cauchy data with compact support
due to known analiticity properties of Fourier transform.)  (at least on -constant surfaces) and, respectively
for  and 
  The one-particle Hilbert  space  is defined as the Hilbert completion 
of the space of finite complex linear combinations of functions , , 
equipped with the extension of the scalar product () to complex linear combinations of arguments. It results
 if  or, if ,
 with
, . 



2.3 .Quantum field operators: Symplectic approach .
As usual, the whole quantum field is represented in the symmetrized Fock space  - that is  
 in the massless case -
and referred to a vacuum state  - namely 
in the massless case - said the Rindler vacuum state .  does not  belong  Hilbert space 
of Minkowski particles in the sense that quantum field theory in Rindler space
and Minkowski one are not unitarily equivalent. 
The  quantum field   associated with the real scalar field  in ()
is the linear map 
 where  and  and 
 respectively denote the annihilation (the conjugation being used 
 just the get a liner map 
) and construction operator associated with the one-particle state .
The right-hand side of () is an essentially-self-adjoint  operator defined in the dense invariant subspace 

spanned by all states containing a finite  arbitrarily large number of particles with states 
given by positive-frequency  wavefunctions. 
() is formally equivalent via  ()
to the non-rigorous but popular definition
 
The given procedure can be generalized to any Klein-Gordon scalar field propagating in a (not necessarily static) 
globally hyperbolic
spacetime provided a suitable vacuum state is given. Let 
denote
 the space of real compactly-supported smooth functions in  and  
  the union of the causal past  and causal future  of a set .
As   is globally hyperbolic there is a uniquely determined causal propagator  
 of the  Klein-Gordon operator  of the field .  enjoys the following properties.
It is linear and surjective, ,  only if  for some  and  
satisfies for all , 
 
  being the measure induced by the metric in .
() suggests to define a  quantum-field operator 
smeared  with functions  of   as the linear map
 
It is possible to smear the field operator
by means of compactly-supported complex-valued  functions, whose space will be denoted by ,
simply by defining  when . 
()  entails 
) 
that is  the   rigorous version of the formal identity . 
As a further result  if
the supports of  and  are spatially separated) , that is
 (which is equivalent to ).

All that we said holds for . Let us specialize to the massless 
case giving further details.   In Rindler light coordinates  () the  decomposition 
 (see 2.2) reads, if ,
 
 where  and 
 are  compactly supported. Trivial consequences are that  vanishes on the past horizon , and 
  vanishes on the future horizon  (see 3.1)
 and  . In the considered case
  
 where, in terms of bi-distributions interpreted as in (),   
 The maps 
 
 from  to, respectively,  are surjective and 
  if and only if, respectively,  or 
 for some .

 In the Fock space associated with Rindler vacuum ,  we have the natural decomposition 
     and the
  the two kinds of field operators commute, i.e.

. 




2.4 . symmetry .
If  and thus  , the one-particle (Rindler) Hamiltonian 
 is the self-adjoint operator 
 
If  and thus , the Hamiltonian  reads
  ,  being  the operator defined in the right-hand side of () 
referred to  and  the identity operator  being referred to .

In it was argued that the one-particle system enjoys invariance under a unitary representation of 
as consequence of the form of the spectrum of  which is  with no degeneracy for  and double degeneracy
if . Let us state and prove rigorously some of the statements of in a form which is relevant for 
the remaining part of this work. First of all one has to fix a real constant , with the physical dimensions 
 energy , that is necessary for dimensional
reasons in defining the relevant domain of operators as it will be clear from the proof of Theorem 2.1. We assume 
to use the same value of  throughout this work.    
Fix reals  and define the dense subspace  spanned 
by vectors:
 
where   are modified Laguerre's polynomials. 
Notice that . Moreover,  is invariant under the linearly-independent symmetric operators
defined on :
  
which enjoy the commutation relations of the Lie algebra of , ,
 
 are 
operatorial realizations of the basis elements of  
 
As a consequence, one expects that operators in () generate a strongly-continuous unitary representation of . 
Let  indicate the space of finite
real linear combinations of operators in (), let  be the unique Lie algebra isomorphism
with , , 
 and let  denote the universal covering of . 

 
Theorem 2.1 . The operators of  are essentially self-adjoint, 
 in particular, and: 

(a)   is irreducible under the unique unitary strongly-continuous representation of
, 
such that  for all , . If (and only if) ,
 is a representation of  and is faithful only if .  does not depend on .

(b)   is a group of symmetries  of the quantum system, that is, 
for every  and , there is 
 such that
 
 for every observable (i.e., self-adjoint operator) . If
 , with , 
 
 
 (c)  For every , consider the linearly independent
elements of  
  
The time-dependent observables generated by those operators
 are constants of motion , i.e.  
  

Proof . 
(a)   () is a  Hilbert base of 
eigenvectors of the operator .
 Moreover   is essentially selfadjoint in  
 because  are analytic vectors for  since
   from () where . 
 Since  is  essentially self-adjoint, general results due to Nelson (Theorem 5.2, Corollary 9.1, Lemma 9.1 and Lemma 5.1 
 in)
 imply that the operators in , are essentially self-adjoint on  moreover they imply
 the existence and uniqueness of a unitary representation on  of the
 unique simply connected group with Lie algebra given by the space generated by  (that is
 ) such that 
 for all . 
 The derivative in the left-hand side is evaluated in the strong operator topology sense 
 on a suitable subspace  (Garding space) and gives a restriction of the Stone generator of the 
 strongly continuous unitary one-parameter subgroup . As  
 contains a dense set of analytical vectors for the elements of  ,  
 is essentially self-adjoint and thus its closure coincides with the usual Stone generator and .
 As , the unique self-adjoint
 extension of , , must coincide with  itself.
 Suppose that  is the orthogonal projector onto an invariant subspace for each .  must commute with
  
 in particular. Using Stone's theorem and the fact
 that the spectrum of  is not degenerate, one has that (in strong operator topology sense) 
 
 where . Similarly  must commute with every element of , 
  in particular.
 Using the fact that, for every  with , 
  and 
  
 for some reals  
, one proves that , that is  and so the representation is irreducible.
 The proof of the fact that the representation of   
 reduces to a representation of  iff  
 and that the representation is faithful only for  
 is based on the representation of the subgroup  
 which is isomorphic to  and is responsible for the fact that 
  is multiply connected.
 The proof has been sketched in section 6.2 and the footnote 4 in. 
 The self-adjoint extensions of the elements in  do not depend on the value of 
 - and thus it happens for the representation  itself since every 
 is the finite product of elements of some one-parameter subgroups - 
  because,
 if , there is a subspace  containing, with obvious notation, both  
 and    where each element of  (which is essentially self adjoint on both 
  
 and  ) determines the same symmetric extension
 nomater if one starts by  or . That extension is essentially self-adjoint since
  is a dense set of analytic vectors in .
 To prove (b)  and (c)  notice that .
 So,  if ,
  fulfils () by application of the representation .
 Define , 
 , . These matrices satisfies the commutation rules
  () for every .
  Using () and uniqueness theorems for matrix-valued differential equations one   
  gets, for ,
  

  which is  () if . 
 Applying  on both sides one gets
 

which is equivalent to 
.
Stone's theorem entails () by strongly differentiating both sides in .
  

  
  
The generalization to the case  is trivial: The theorem  holds true separately in each 
space  of .


Remarks .
(1)  From now on we assume to work in Heisenberg representation .
Within this picture, by (), , ,  coincide with the Heisenberg evolution of, respectively,
, ,  at time .  
Moreover, in this picture,   must not seen as the time evolution (at time ) of the  
state  (given  at time ), but it must considered as a different state at all. 
This turns out to be in accordance with the relationship between states and wavefunctions (see 2.5):   and 
 are two different wavefunctions. 
This point of view will be useful shortly in a context where
time evolution makes no sense at all.

(2)  The found  symmetry is only due to the shape of spectrum of 
which is . The absence of degeneracy implies that the representation is irreducible.
From  a physical point of view,  invariance under the conformal group   
could look very unexpected if  since the theory admits the scale . However, that scale 
does not affect the spectrum of . In physical terms this is due to the gravitational
energy which is encompassed by  itself since Rindler frame represents the 
spacetime experienced by an accelerated observer. 

(3)  It is clear that the found  symmetry can straightforwardly 
be extended to the free-field quantization by defining multi-particle operators generated by .

(4)  Generators , differently  from  and , define a basis of the Lie algebra of
a subgroup of , , made of real  upper triangular 
matrices with unitary determinant and positive trace. 
() holds for , ,
giving rise to another smaller symmetry of the system. The subgroup
generated by  trivially enjoys the same fact.


2.5 .Hidden and manifest symmetries .
 A differentiable group of geometric  symmetries of a classical Klein-Gordon field  in  (however everything we say can be extended 
to any globally hyperbolic spacetime along the procedures presented in) 
is defined as follows. Take a differentiable, locally-bijective, representation, ,
of a connected Lie group, ,
where 
are isometries. The representation automatically induces a group of transformations
 
of scalar fields  (or ),  with .
As   are (orientation-preserving) 
isometries,  define geometric symmetries  of the field in the sense that they transform elements of 
into elements of  
not affecting the symplectic form. If quantization is implemented,
solutions of the equation of motion in  
are  associated with  one-particle quantum states through the decompositions 
(),().
Consider a group of  quantum symmetries in the sense of (), 
described by a strongly-continuous representation of a Lie group  in terms of
 unitary operators . 
In this picture,  the one-parameter unitary group generated by the Hamiltonian
 is assumed to be a subgroup of . If
 the symmetry "does not depend on time", i.e.,  in (),
that assumption can be dropped or, equivalently,
 the subgroup generated by the Hamiltonian can be considered in the center of  (i.e. 
it commutes with the other elements of the group).
 If  is related, 
by means of (), () and (),
to a group of geometric symmetries , that is
 for all  and ,
we say that the symmetry is manifest . Otherwise
we say that the symmetry is hidden .
In Rindler space, the quantum symmetry group  give rise to  manifest symmetry
 because it is associated
with the geometric group of symmetries ,
induced by the one-parameter group of isometries generated by
the  Killing vector . The extent changes dramatically
if considering the whole  symmetry.
The space of Killing fields of  has a basis 
  with
,
 and
. 
( and  are the spatial and temporal coordinate of a Minkowski frame with
.) 
It is trivially proven that no Killing field   enjoys, with respect to , the commutation rule that 
enjoys with respect to  in () so that no Killing field corresponding to 
makes sense. Summarizing,  cannot support isometry representations of  (or
)
or the subgroup  generated by . 
Hence the whole  symmetry and that associated with 
are hidden . 

Conformal field on the horizon. 

3.1 .Restriction to horizons . In, a similar analysis is performed for   spacetime
since the spectrum of the Hamiltonian of a particle has the same structure as that in
Rindler space.  However as a remarkable difference   is a manifest  symmetry of a quantum particle 
moving in  because  admits a representation in terms of  isometries.

Coming back to Rindler space viewed as a (open) submanifold of Minkowski spacetime, a natural question arises: 
"Regardless the found  symmetry
is hidden, does it  become manifest if one considers quantum field theory in an appropriate subregion of ? "

We shall see that investigation on this  natural question has several implications 
with holography because it naturally leads  to the formulation of a quantum field theory on the horizon 
which is algebraically and unitarily related with that formulated in the bulk,
but also it suggests that the symmetry of the theory is greater than  it being described by
 a Virasoro algebra . 

It is clear from 2.5 that the only region which could give a positive answer to the question is
the boundary  of Rindler wedge, i.e. a bifurcate event horizon 
made of three disjoint parts
.
S  (a point in our  case) is the spacelike submanifold of Minkowski spacetime where 
the limit of the Killing field  vanishes whereas  
the lightlike submanifold of Minkowski spacetime  
and  (the former in the causal future of the latter)
are the future  and the past  horizon respectively, where the limit of 
 becomes lightlike but not  vanishes. 
Since  the induced  metric on  is degenerate,  the diffeomorphisms of  
can be viewed as isometries and the question about a possible manifest   symmetry on the
horizon must be interpreted in that sense: The unitary representation has to be associated with a group of
diffeomorphisms induced by a Lie algebra of vector fields defined on the horizon.

To go on, let us investigate the limit of wavefunctions when the horizon is approached by Rindler-time evolution. 
To this end, consider the Rindler light coordinates ().
  is represented by ,  whereas 
 is given by , . 
 Coordinates   actually cover the  Rindler space only, but, separately, the limit of  is well defined on the lightlike submanifold 
 and  
the limit of  is well defined on the submanifold  and they define well-behaved global coordinate 
frames on these submanifolds(It holds in the  case. For greater dimension,  (resp. ) 
 together with other "transverse" coordinates
defines global coordinates on  (resp. ) as well.) .
This can be proven by passing to Minkowski light coordinates  which
 satisfy ,   in . So, from now  and  are also interpreted
  as coordinates on 
 and  respectively. 
We have the following remarkable technical result (where,
if , "" means 
 " complex conjugation of  ")  


Proposition 3.1 . Take , with associated (Rindler) positive frequency parts
 or 
as in () and () and
consider the evolution of  in the whole Minkowski spacetime. 
In coordinate , the restriction of  to  reads  respectively
for  and , 
 
In coordinate , the restriction of  to  reads  respectively
for  and ,
 
 The function  (that is restricted to  in () and ()) can be defined on the whole   as
  
 It belongs to  and satisfies   and  
  for all . 


Proof . As  is part of a Cauchy surface in Minkowski spacetime,
 can uniquely be extended into a smooth solution of Klein Gordon equation in 
Minkowski spacetime, therefore it makes sense to consider its restriction to  or . As  is smooth, those restrictions can be
computed by taking the limit of the function represented in light Rindler coordinates.
First consider the case  and .
 One has 
 and 
. Insert these functions in () and 
extend each integrations on the whole  axis by defining  for .
Using the properties of 
stated in Proposition 2.1 before () one sees that  
can be decomposed as a sum of two functions (one in the variable  and the other in the variable ) 
which are the real part of the Fourier transform of a couple of  functions. 
Taking the limit
 the function containing only modes out  vanishes as a consequence of Rieman-Lebesgue lemma and 
() with  arises. The case  and  is strongly analogous.
The case  is based on the following expansion at  with  fixed in 
 
where, for  fixed,  and  for some
real finite , whereas 
for  fixed in ,  and  are bounded.
Inserting the expansion above in the expression () and taking the limit as 
in (), Riemann-Lebesgue's
lemma together with some trivial properties of  function () produces  ()
for . The function ()  is nothing but sign 
 and so  for 
is trivially true.
 is smooth along the real axis with a simple pole 
in  that is canceled out by the zero of  that is smooth in the whole . 
Thus
  .  for  is trivially valid by continuity.
 is a straightforward consequence of 
for .
The  case  can be proven similarly. 



From a pure mathematical point of view perhaps straightforwardly extending known results (see Chap. 5 of), 
Proposition 3.1 shows that a solution in  of the massive Klein-Gordon equation in  Rindler space are completely 
determined  by its values on  either  the  future or  the past horizon. Whereas, in the massless case,
a solution  is completely determined  by its values on both  the future and  the past horizon.

As  we can write  where the phase 
is real-valued.
The restriction of  to the horizon  (the other case is analogous)
depends from the mass of the field through the phase  only. As a trivial result 
we see that two (free scalar QFT) theories in  with different strictly-positive masses  and 
 Rindler vacua 
turn out to be  unitarily equivalent.  This is due to the 
unitary operator  naturally defined by the requirement 
 and induced by  the scalar-product-preserving map between positive frequency wavefunctions 


where  and .
Similarly, each theory is unitarily equivalent to the massless theory built up using only in  modes. 
Avoiding any choice for the mass, one is naturally lead to consider the class of the "fields defined on the
horizon" 
 
as the object which makes possibles all those crossed unitary identifications and exists 
independently from the quantum fields defined in the bulk  with their own masses. 
We want to try to consider this object as a quantum  field in a sense we 
go to specify. 


3.2 .Quantum field theory on F  and P  . Following the procedure presented in 2.2 and 2.3 we want to show 
that it is possible to define a quantum field theory on  which matches with that defined in the bulk.
(That idea is not new in the literature and it has been used in important works as).
First of all define the space of "wavefunctions" . A suitable definition which will be useful
later,  is the following:   is the space 
of the real-valued Schwartz' functions on 
where  is identified with  itself by means of the coordinate . 
Actually the name "wavefunction" is not appropriate because there is no wave equation 
to fulfill in our context. 
As a consequence the correct point of view to interpret the formalism is the  Heisenberg's picture. 
   has a natural nondegenerate symplectic form which is invariant under 
the diffeomorphisms
 of  which preserve its orientation :
   
To define the one-particle Hilbert space, consider the modes
  
Analogous definitions can be given with analogous notations for the past event horizon 
using modes as in () with  replaced for .
The following pair of propositions can be simply proven using Fourier transform theory for 
Schwartz' functions.


Proposition 3.2. (Completeness of modes) .

If  belongs to , the function   
 
satisfies  , 
, where .
 Moreover, for  (),
 
Similar results hold replacing  for  everywhere.  


Proposition 3.3. (Associated Hilbert spaces) . 
If  belongs to either ,
define the one-to-one associated positive-frequency 
wavefunction  
  
With that definition and for  in ,  
it results  whereas
 
is well-defined and
  The one-particle Hilbert  space 
 is defined as the Hilbert completion 
of the space of finite complex linear combinations of functions , for all 
 in , 
equipped with the extension of the scalar product () to complex linear combinations of arguments. It results
.
Similar results and definitions hold replacing  for  everywhere. 



Definition 3.1 . (Quantum field operators on horizons) .
Consider the symmetrized Fock space 
with vacuum state  and scalar product .
The quantum field operator on  ,  is the 
symmetric-operator valued function
 
 where .  and 
 respectively denote the annihilation and construction operator associated with the one-particle state 
which are defined in the dense invariant subspace 
spanned by all states containing a finite,  arbitrarily large, number of particles with states 
given by positive-frequency  wavefunctions. An analogous definition is given replacing  for  everywhere. 



Operators 
and 
 are essentially self-adjoint on 
 and  respectively
 since their elements are analytic vectors.
 
 We want to define an analogous procedure to that in the bulk (see ()) for smearing field operators by means of "functions"
instead of  "wavefunctions". The issue is however relevant because it  permits to introduce the analogue  of the causal propagator 
in spite of having no equation of motion in .
The idea is that something like () should work also in our context. 
A clear difficulty is that  there is no a diffeomorphism invariant measure which can be used in the
analogue of () in place of . On the other hand  integration of -forms is 
diffeomorphism invariant on (oriented manifolds). Therefore we aspect that the space of "functions"
used to smear quantum fields should properly be a space of -forms rather than functions.
To go on we notice that a posteriori   has to fulfill something like .
By a formal but straightforward computation which uses  and the analogue of () 
with  replaced for , one finds that 
. This -parametrized distribution
actually defines a well-behaved transformation from the space 
of  exact (smooth) -forms in  with compact support
to the space of smooth functions on . As the functions  vanish (with all of  their derivatives) 
as ,
if 
 
In the following,  is the real space 
of the  -forms  such that .




Definition 3.2 . (Causal propagator and associated quantum field on horizons) .
With the given notations, the causal propagator  in , is  the mapping

with
 
and  the  quantum-field operator on F  smeared  with forms  
of     
is the mapping
 
Analogous definitions are given replacing  for  and  for  everywhere. 




The given definitions are good generalizations of the analogous tools in usual quantum field theory 
 (see () and () in particular)
as stated in the following pair of propositions whose proof is trivial.


Proposition 3.4. 
If , 
 is the  unique element of 
such that . Moreover,
if 

 
An analogous result holds replacing  for  everywhere. 



Proposition 3.5. 
If 
and 

 
In particular  if .
An analogous result holds replacing  for  everywhere. 




3.3 .The algebraic approach . To state holographic theorems
it is necessary to re-formulate quantum field theory in an algebraic approach either in the bulk 
and on the horizon.  In globally hyperbolic spacetimes, 
linear QFT can be formulated independently from a preferred vacuum state and Fock representation.
It is worthwhile stressing that physics implies the existence of meaningful 
quantum states
which cannot be represented in the same Hilbert (Fock) representation of the algebra of observables. In this sense the algebraic
approach is more fundamental than the usual Fock approach in QFT in curved spacetime.
 Let us summarize the procedure in  
 which, at least for , could be replaced by any
globally hyperbolic spacetime.
The basic tool is an abstract  -algebra, ,  
made of  the linear combinations of products of 
 formal field operators
 () and the unit ,
 which enjoy the same properties of operators 
(and the identity operator ).
From a physical point of view, the Hermitian elements of  
represent the local observables  of the free-field theory.
For , the required properties are:

(1)  for all ,
 (2) 
for all , , 
 (3) 
for all ,
and
  (4)  if (and only if)  for some .
 
 is rigorously realized as follows. Consider the complex unital algebra ,
freely generated by the unit , and abstract objects  and  for all  
.  The involution  on  
is the unique antilinear involutive function 
such that , . 
Let   be the double-side ideal 
whose elements are linear combinations of products containing at least one of the following factors
 , ,  ,
and    for  , .
 
 is defined as the  space of equivalence classes with respect to the equivalence relation
in ,  iff  and  is equipped with the 
-algebra structure induced by  through . 
If, with little misuse of notation,   and  respectively  denote the classes  and , the 
properties (1),(2),(3), (4) are fulfilled.

If , there are two relevant algebras   and .
 is the unital -algebra  generated by , 
 and  for every 
whereas   is the unital -algebra  generated by , 
 and  for every .
By definition these algebras satisfy the constraints (1),(2),(3) and (4) with the difference that, in (3),  must be replaced for
 or  respectively and, in (4),  must be replaced by  or 
 respectively. The rigorous definitions can be given similarly to the case , by starting from freely generated algebras 
and passing to quotient algebras.
We recall  that if  , 
are -algebras with field  and units , ,  
denotes (see p.143 of) the -algebra whose associated vector-space structure is the tensor product , 
the  unit is  ,
the involution and the algebra product are respectively  given by  and  

with obvious notation.
Assuming () as the definition of , the whole field algebra  is defined  as
. 
That unital -algebra  satisfies (1),(2),(3) and (4).

An algebraic state  on a -algebra   with unit , is a linear map  that is
 normalized (i.e. ) and positive
(i.e.  for ). The celebrated GNS theorem (e.g., see) states that
for every algebraic state  on  there is a  triple 
 such that  the following facts hold.
  is a Hilbert space,  is a -algebra 
representation  of  in terms of operators on  which are
defined on a dense invariant subspace 
 and such that .
Finally  is spanned by all the vectors , ,
and  for all ,  
denoting the scalar product in
. If   
is another similar triple associated with the same , there is a unitary operator 
  such that  and .
If , by direct inspection one finds that  quantum field theory in  in the Fock-space 
with  as vacuum state
coincides with that in a GNS representation
of  associated with the (quasifree ) algebraic state 
 completely determined by

 via Wick expansion of symmetrized -point functions. 
Moreover  it results . 

 All the procedure can be used to give an algebraic approach for QFT on  (or P ): Define 

and define  when . 
Finally, consider the abstract  -algebra  
with unit , 
 generated by , ,  for all
,
such that,  for all  and  :  

(1) ,
 (2)  and
  
(3) .

(The rigorous definition is given in terms of quotient algebras as usual.)
From a physical point of view the (Hermitean) elements of   represents the 
(quasi) local observables  of the free-field theory on the future horizon.
By direct inspection one finds that quantum field theory in  in the Fock-space referred to the vacuum state 
coincides with that in a GNS representation of  -algebra  
associated with  a the (quasifree) algebraic state 
 completely determined, via Wick expansion, by


and .

Everything can similarly be stated for quantum filed theory on  with trivial changes
in notations.









3.4 . Two holographic theorems . Here we  prove two holographic  theorems for the observables of 
free fields, one in the algebraic approach and the latter 
in the Hilbert-space formulation under the choice of suitable vacuum states. 
The former theorem says that, in the massive case, there is a one-to-one transformation 
from the algebra of the fields in the bulk  
 - that is the local observables of the free field in the bulk -
 to a subalgebra of fields on the future horizon 
- that is the observables of the free field in the future horizon -.
The mapping preserves the structure of -algebra and thus the two classes of obsevables can be identified completely
nomatter the value of the mass of the field in the bulk and the fact that there is no mass associated with the field on the horizon.
Remarkably, this identification does not requires any choice for reference vacuum states since it is given at a pure algebraic level. 
 To build up the said mapping,
 take any compactly supported function  in the bulk, consider the generated wavefunction 
(that is assumed to be defined in the whole Minkowski space), restrict  on  obtaining a horizon wavefunction 
  
and associate 
with that function the unique form  with . 
Finally define . Next step  is to extend 
  to the whole algebra  by requiring that 
 the -algebra structure is preserved 
that is,  is mapped in ,  is mapped into , products of fields 
are mapped into   and so on. In the massless case, the procedure is similar but one 
has to consider also the past evolution of wavefunctions toward the past event horizon .
The theorem says that the required extensions into  algebra homomorphisms actually exists, are uniquely determined and injective
so that the observable algebra in  the bulk can be seen as a observable subalgebra on the horizon.



Theorem 3.1 . (Algebraic holography ) In a -Rindler space 
viewed as immersed in a corresponding  Minkowski spacetime,
consider quantum field theory of a scalar field with mass  satisfying Klein-Gordon equation 
(). Consider the algebra
 (including 
,  if ) 
of local observables in the bulk 
and the algebras  and   of the observables on the horizons  and . 
The following statements hold.

(a)  If ,
 there is a  unital--algebra  homomorphism
 uniquely determined by
 
 denoting the limit of  on .
 turns out to be  injective.

An analogous statement holds replacing  for .

(b)  If , there are two  unital--algebra  homomorphisms
  and 

uniquely determined by
 
 and  turn out to be  injective.

(c)   
is  the subalgebra generated by  and abstracts field operators smeared by the elements of 
 with compact support.
The analogous statement holds for . 



Proof . 
(a)   The uniqueness of the homomorphism is trivially proven  by noticing that the elements of 
 are of the form 
where the overall summation as well as every partial summation is finite. As  is a 
homomorphism, 
 
Moreover 
and thus the values  with  real
determine the homomorphism provided it exists. 
Let us prove the existence of the homomorphism.
Take  and consider  and the associated function 
. It holds 
with  such that  as stated in Proposition 2.1 
and  (with ) and 
as stated in Proposition 3.1. As a consequence 
where  and .
Passing to the function  in Proposition 3.1 and using these results
one gets 

As  belongs to Schwartz' space,   belongs to the same  space because Fourier transform
preserves Schwartz' space. Moreover  is real since . We have found that  
 and thus  
is an element of . Using  the result is preserved trivially
by the linear decomposition in real and imaginary part. Assume once again that .  
Notice that  contains the same information as 
 because  .
In turn  determines the function  which determines . As we said in 2.3 ,  determines  up to 
a term  with . We conclude that   if and only if  with 
. The same result arises for functions  
by linearity and from the fact that  transforms real functions into real functions.
We have found that there is a well-defined linear map 
 that transforms real functions in real forms and such that  if and only if
.
Now we define  and  and 
.
That map extends straightforwardly from the 
-algebra  freely generated by , ,  (with involution uniquely determined as said in 
2.4) to the analogous free -algebra 
on  giving rise to a -algebra homomorphism . However it is not injective since it results 

whenever , and more generally injectivity failure arises for any pair of elements of the algebra which are different 
to each other because of the presence of
factors  and  with . The injectivity is however restored if we take the quotient -algebra 
 
in  with respect to the both-side ideal containing linear combinations of products with at least 
one factor  or  for any  and redefine the injective 
map  as 
the map induced by  through the canonical projection of  onto  .
By construction  is an injective -algebra isomorphism. In this context and from now on, 
it is convenient to think the objects  as smeared by the equivalence class  rather than  itself, where
 belong to the complex vector space obtained by taking the quotient of  
with respect to the subspace . The map  is a well-defined injective
vector space isomorphism that preserves the complex conjugation.
To conclude we have to extract the algebras  and  by the procedure outlined in 2.4,
 based on the projection on suitable quotient spaces,
and prove that the -homeomorphism  induces a -homeomorphism 
. To this end we have to consider the double-side ideal 
   
whose elements are linear combinations of products containing at least one of the following factors
 , ,  ,
for  , .
 
 is defined as the  space of equivalence classes with respect to the equivalence relation
in ,  iff  and  is equipped with the 
-algebra structure induced by  through the canonical projection. 
The analogous procedure must be used for  with respect to 
an analogous ideal  in order to produce .
Then the injective -homomorphism  induces a injective -homomorphism 
 if the equivalence relations induced by  and  are
 preserved by  itself, i.e.  if and only if 
 .
We leave the simple but tedious proof of this fact to the reader, proving the only non trivial point which concerns 
factors . It is simply found that, among other trivially fulfilled conditions,
the preservation of the equivalence relation 
arises if 
. Which is equivalent to
. (Notice that, by the known properties of the causal propagator 
both sides are invariant under the addition of 
a term   to  or .)   is equivalent to, with obvious notations,
 . It is sufficient to prove that identity  for real .
 By Propositions 2.2 and 3.3  one finds 
 and 

. Passing in energy representation, where the scalar product
 is simply that of  in both spaces,
   and  are represented by some  and 
  respectively whereas, by Proposition 3.1,  and  are represented by 
   and  respectively. Since 
  it results  that entails 
  and concludes the proof.
 (b)   Following a proof very similar to that as in the case
(b) (but simpler since the phases  disappear when one uses Proposition 3.1) one sees that 
 is isomorphic to  
under the unique extension, into a injective -algebra-with-unit homomorphism, of the 
map  with 
 and this is equivalent to the thesis 
because  
since  
and ,
for smooth compactly supported
 defined in  (these facts are consequences of Proposition 3.1). 
The case of   is strongly analogous. 
(c)  Consider the case of  the other being analogous. If  is smooth and compactly supported in , 
 is a compactly-supported function of  and thus 
 
is compactly supported on .
Conversely if  is  compactly supported  on ,  must 
be compactly supported and
 is smooth,  compactly supported in  for every smooth compactly supported function
  and  if .



Remarks . (1)  We stress that QFT on the horizon is the same nomatter the value of the
mass of the filed in the bulk: Different choices of the mass determine different injective -algebra homomorphisms
from the algebra in the bulk to  the same  algebra of observables on the horizon.

(2)  There are strong differences between the cases  and . If  is compactly supported in the bulk, 
the horizon restriction of  is compactly supported if  but that is not the case when . 
For that reason we have defined  (and ) as a space of  
rapidly decreasing functions (-forms) rather than
a space of compactly supported functions (-forms). Moreover, if ,  is isomorphic to 
a subalgebra of  (or equivalently ). Conversely, if , 
 is isomorphic to 
a subalgebra of  by means of the injective unital--algebra homomorphism 

.

(3)   The existence of the  -homorphisms
 and  implies that, for all  or 
 and respectively for  or , 
 
as a consequence the causal propagator and the symplectic forms are preserved too .


The second theorem concerns the unitary implementation of the -homomorphism given in 
Theorem 3.1. This theorem states that, if one realizes the algebras of observables 
and ,  in terms of proper field operators in the Fock spaces 
constructed over respectively, the Rindler vacuum  and , , then
the injective homomorphisms presented in Theorem 3.1 are implemented by unitary operators which
preserve the vacuum states. In other words, with the said choice of the vacuum states and Fock representation of the algebras
of observables , the theory in the bulk and that on the horizon are unitarily equivalent .
As an immediate consequence, it arises that the vacuum expectation values  are preserved passing from the theory 
 in the bulk  to the theory on the horizon  (or ).


Theorem 3.2 . (Unitary holography ). In the same hypotheses as in Theorem 3.1, consider 
the realization of the  algebra of the local observables of the bulk , 
in the Fock space  with Rindler vacuum  
 ( if )
 and the realizations of the algebras of observables of the horizons , 
 in the Fock spaces ,  of Definition 3.1
 with horizon vacua ,.  With these realizations, the homomorphisms  and 
 can be implemented by unitary transformations which preserves the vacuum states. More precisely:

 (a)  If ,  the map that associates a positive frequency wavefunction  in Rindler space with 
the element of ,   extends
 into the unitary operator  such that
  
 The analogous statement holds replacing  for .

 (b)  If , the maps which associate  positive frequency wavefunctions 
   and 
in Rindler space  with respectively elements of  and ,
 
 and ,
  extend into unitary operators 
 and , 
 such that 
    
 
 Proof . (a)  We consider the case of , the case
of  being similar.
Under the identifications  (Proposition 2.2 )
 and  (Proposition 3.3), consider the map
  where we have defined 
  
 for all .  is a unitary transformation by construction since 
 is a smooth function with  for all  as stated in Proposition 3.1.
That unitary transformation can be extended into a unitary transformation  
 by defining 
and  
for all ,
where  indicates the symmetrized tensor product of  copies of   
and  for .  preserves the vacuum states by construction
and induces a unital--algebra homomorphism  
such that  for every .
To conclude the proof, by the uniqueness of  proven in Theorem 3.1,
 it is sufficient to show that
 for every .
To this end, take  and consider the positive-frequency part 
of ,
. The construction used to define  implies that 
and  and thus, by Definitions 3.1 and 3.2, 
 where 
with 
. 
By  (a) of Proposition 3.1,  and thus it holds
    that concludes the proof.
(b)  The proof is strongly analogous to that in the massive case
with obvious changes. 


 
 Remark . Once again, the crucial difference between the massive and the massless case is that
   the Hilbert space of the bulk field is isomorphic to either the Fock spaces 

 and  if , whereas  
 it is isomorphic to  
if . In the latter case the unitary transformation
 ,
satisfies 
 and 
 
 for all .
 

Horizon manifest symmetry. 

4.1 .  unitary representations on the horizon . 
Consider QFT on the future event horizon  in the Fock representation of the algebra 
referred to the vacuum state . The one-particle space  is isomorphic to
. An irreducible unitary representation  ,  
, generated by the operators ()
,  and  with
  
can uniquely be defined in  as proven in Theorem 2.1. The operators () are defined 
on the dense invariant subspace  which has the 
same definition as .  
 If , that representation induces an analogous representation in the one-bulk-particle space 
  through unitary holography. That is

whose generators are
,  and
.
We stress  that  does not  coincides with the representation  given in Theorem 2.1
but it is unitarily equivalent to that and thus (a) of Theorem 2.1 can be restated with trivial changes. Moreover (see below) 

still coincides with the Hamiltonian  of the bulk theory. As a consequence also the analogues of points (b) and (c) in Theorem 2.1 
can be re-stated for the  representation  which, in turn, defines a -symmetry  
of the system in the bulk. We are interested on that  -symmetry  which is induced by the  
unitary representation on the horizon QFT via (unitary) holography nomatter
the mass of the field in the bulk. We stress that this -symmetry is hidden  in the bulk because 
the same argument used in 2.5  applies to this case too, however it could be manifest, in the sense of 2.5, when examined on the horizon.
That is the issue we want to discuss in the following.

Everything we have said for  can be re-stated for  with obvious changes.
If  and using (b) of Theorem 3.2, everything we said above concerning the representations of 
 in 
and those induced on  by means of  
can be restated concerning the triples 
, , 
and , ,  separately. Moreover by the comment
after Theorem 3.2, one sees that
a pair of  representations in  and 
naturally induces a reducible   on  by means of .

 


4.2 . Horizon analysis of the bulk symmetry associated with  . Let us focus attention on the first 
 generator  in the case .
  Concerning QFT on  and the case , there are completely analogous results.
   From now on we use the following conventions  referring to a  representation of 
  an algebra of observables  in a symmetrized  Fock space .
 If  is a self-adjoint operator in the one-particle Hilbert space 
  and , 
  where   is the operator naturally associated with
   in the Fock space . 
 In other words,  is the Heisenberg evolution  of  at time  with respect to
 the noninteracting multiparticle Hamiltonian  induced by the one-particle Hamiltonian .
 We have the following theorems.

 
 Theorem 4.1 . Unitary holography associates the self-adjoint operator  
  with the one-particle Hamiltonian in the bulk  (), i.e.,
   
  Defining , the following further statements hold.

  (a)  Referring to  Fock representations of algebras of observables 
and  on vacuum states 
 and , Heisenberg-like evolution is preserved by unitary holography:
 
 (b)   
 induces, via
 () a group of transformations
  of horizon 
 wavefunctions   such that
   
  That is the same group of transformations of functions induced by 
  the group of  diffeomorphisms of  generated by the vector field 
  .
 
 (c)  If  denotes the one-parameter group of Rindler-time
 displacements of Rindler wavefunctions (see 2.4),
   


Proof .
 Consider the self-adjoint operator on :
 
Since  and  in 
where  is  essentially self-adjoint,  it must hold .
The definition of  (its restriction to  is sufficient) given in
 (a) in Theorem 3.2, () and () entail (). (a)  is an immediate consequence of ().
(b)  
By Proposition 3.2 and (),  is the Fourier (anti)transform of a 
Schwartz' function  with  if  and
the application of  on  changes  into 
 which still is a Schwartz' function. Hence,
 is constructed by: (1) Fourier transforming
 into , (2) replacing  by  and (3) transforming back that function into 
 via Fourier transformation. 
By direct inspection one finds
  trivially.
  (c)  In 
  and , () states that both  and  are represented 
  by the same multiplicative operator  in the respective spaces. Then 
   () and () imply (). 


Remark . Since the one-parameter unitary group generated by 
turns out to be associated with a vector field of , , which
induces a group of (orientation-preserving) diffeomorphisms,
the bulk-symmetry generated by  via unitary holography is manifest 
also on the horizon. 


The machinery can be implemented at algebraic level. To this end, using the relation 
 (see Proposition 3.4) ,
define the one-parameter group of transformations of forms 
, where   
.
Finally, define the action of  on quantum fields as
 ,
for .  One has the following result.


 Theorem 4.2 . The transformations ,  
 uniquely extended into a group of 
 automorphisms of ,  such that:

 (a)  if  denotes the analogous group of automorphisms 
 of the bulk algebra 
 generated by Rindler time-displacements,  
 
(b)  In the Fock space realization of  referred to ,
  
 
 Sketch of proof .
,
 the preservation of the symplectic form under the action of  
and Proposition 3.4 entail 
. 
This property 
trivially extended to complex valued forms.   must be extended on the whole algebra

requiring the preservation of the unital -algebra structure.
The proof of the existence of such an extension
is based  on the  preservation of the causal propagator established above. 
If , () an immediate consequence of () and the definition of 
 in Theorem 3.2. Then () extends to the whole algebra since ,
 and  are homomorphisms.
() is an immediate consequence of the fact that

is the  Heisenberg-like evolution of  induced by the "Hamiltonian" 
and evaluated at "time" .
 

 

4.3 . Horizon analysis of the bulk symmetry associated with  . 
Let us examine the properties of the  unitary one-parameter group, 
 .


 Theorem 4.3 . The unitary one-parameter group, 
 
enjoys the following properties.

 (a)  If , for all 
 and ,
  
 (b)  By means of
 (), 
 induces a group  of transformations of horizon 
 wavefunctions  with 
   
  for all  and .
   is the same group of transformations 
  of functions associated with  
  the group of  diffeomorphisms of  induced by the vector field 
   . 
 


Sketch of proof . (a)  Consider the one-parameter group of unitary  
operators  with
 
, for  . For every ,
.
On the other hand, using the definition of  Schwartz space and Lebesgue's dominated-convergence 
theorem, it is simply proven that  as  and so 
 as 
 for every  which is dense in . As a consequence 
 
is weakly continuous and thus strongly continuous it being made of unitary operators and Stone's theorem
can be used. 
With a similar procedure (also using Lagrange's theorem to estimate an incremental ratio)
one gets that, if  and interpreting the derivative 
in the topology of ,
 can be computed pointwisely. A straightforward calculation
of the pointwise derivative gives .  
Stone's theorem implies that  generator  of  is well-defined
on  and coincides with  therein. Since  
is essentially self-adjoint
on that domain  it must be  and this proves (a).
(b)  Take , use the decomposition () as in the proof 
of Theorem 4.1,
and transform 
under the action of   taking () into account.
With a trivial change of variables in the decomposition () one sees that,  if 
 belongs to Schwartz' space,
the obtained transformed wavefunction is just  which still is in .  



Remark . Since the one-parameter unitary group generated by 
turns out to be associated with the  vector field of , , which
induces a group of (orientation-preserving) diffeomorphisms,
the bulk-symmetry generated by  via unitary holography is manifest 
on the horizon. 



Once again the machinery can be implemented at algebraic level. We consider the group associated with
 only. Define
 the one-parameter group of transformations of forms ,
, with  
. Finally,
extend  the action of  on quantum fields as
 ,
for .  The following result, whose proof is essentially the same as
that of the relevant part of Theorem 4.2, holds.



 Theorem 4.4 . Transformations 
 uniquely extended into a one-parameter group of 
 automorphisms of ,  such that
 in the Fock space realization of  referred to ,
  



4.4 . Horizon analysis of the unitary group generated by  .
The analysis of the action of the group generated by  is much more complicated than the
other considered cases. The point is the following.
A necessary condition to associate with a transformed state  ()
a  wavefunction  
of  by () (with  and taking the real part of the right-hand side)
is that   belong to the domain of 
. Indeed in the general case () must be interpreted as the Fourier-Plancherel
transform(That is the unique unitary extension of the Fourier transform defined on .)  
of the  function given by  if  and 
if . That
 requirement is, in fact, fulfilled  concerning  if 
because  and so
 the usual Fourier transformation is sufficient to interpret the formalism.
Concerning  the extent needs a careful treatment and the space  must, in fact, 
changed in order to assure that  belongs to the domain of 
. There are several possibilities to do it at least in the case  in the definition of .
To go on we need some preliminary results.
If , focus attention on  the operator analogous to  in the proof of Theorem 2.1,
.
It is known that  
(nomatter the value of
) with corresponding eigenvectors  (which do depend on ) given in ().
Thus defining 
 one also gets
.
 is the image under  of the discrete  subgroup 
with
 


Proposition 4.1 . Fix  in the definition () so that 
the representation of  is in fact a representation of . For every , 
 
 is nothing but the -Hankel unitary transform:
 
where the limit is computed in the norm of  and coincides with the  integral
over  if  belongs to 
and  belongs to . 




 Sketch of proof . By Stone's theorem, 
 identities in () are equivalent to analogue
  identities with self-adjoint operators , 
 and  replaced by the respectively generated one-parameter unitary groups. In that form,
 the thesis can be  proven, first for the corresponding one-parameter groups in , using simple analytic
 procedures based on the uniqueness theorem of the matrix-valued solutions of differential equations, and then
 the result can be extended to unitary operators using the representation introduced in Theorem 2.1.
 The second part arises straightforwardly from chapter 9 in with trivial adaptations of the definitions. 



Proposition 4.2 . Take  
using  notation as in (),
define 
and
 
(a)   is the transformation induced by  on wavefunctions, i.e.
()  holds by replacing  for  
and  for .

 (b)  If 
and  denotes the natural action of the local one-parameter group of diffeomorphisms generated
by  on , the first term in the right hand side of 
() is 
  

Sketch of proof .  By hypotheses  satisfies the conditions which enables us to 
represent  as in (). In that case, by the expansion of  at ,
one sees that the , and continuous on , function 
is   as  and 
thus it  belongs to the domain of .
Using Fubini-Tonelli's  and dominated convergence theorems we have that  reads,
(where the limit in the left-hand side is in the -convergence sense),



The limit in right-hand side  can explicitly be computed 
by using known results obtaining that it is . This result
produces
. 
Concerning the second statement, it is simply proven that, for , 

With our hypotheses for , the limit as  is well defined for every  
and proves the statemet in (b).

 
By direct inspection and using () one sees that, if , usually
,  but  in any cases,
the latter being  the Sobolev space of the   complex-valued functions which are 
with all of derivatives of every order. 

Now, using (),  the geometric action of
 
 can easily be computed for wavefunctions  of  
such that  and  still belongs to . 
Take such a , extract  and apply .
The resulting wavefunction
is an element of  by Proposition 4.2. The
application of the one-parameter group generated by , , 
gives rise to wavefunctions
(see Theorem 4.1)
 which still belongs to . 
Finally, since it is possible, apply  once again. 
All that procedure is equivalent to apply the group  
, on the initial .
By this way one gets that the following theorem.




Theorem 4.5 . Consider the horizon 
 wavefunctions  such that such that  and 
 still belongs to .
 The unitary group, 
 
 induces a class  
 of transformations of the said wavefunctions  by means of
 (), with
  
  The transformation of wavefunctions defined by the first term in the right-hand side of () is that generated by  
  the local  group of diffeomorphisms of  associated with the field
   . 

   
Remarks .  
(1)  In our hypotheses,  ,
but in general 
so that the class of transformations does not define a group of transformations of
wavefunctions in . It is worthwhile stressing that 
these transformations define a group when working on the space 
of complex wavefunctions 
whose positive-frequency and negative-frequency  parts
of Fourier transform are linear combinations of functions .
In fact 
 is invariant under (). On the other hand 
.

(2)  The integral curves of the field , ,
have domain which depends on the initial condition : That is 
, and  diverges if  approaches the singular point
(barring the initial condition  that produces a constant orbit).
Thus the  one-parameter group of (orientation-preserving) diffeomorphisms 
generated by  is only local . However, as the functions in 
vanish at infinity with all their derivatives, the singular point of the domain
is  harmless in ().
 
(3)  
It makes sense to extend the definition of symplectically-smeared 
field operator when  by means of Definition 3.1. Indeed 
the Fourier-Plancherel transform of ,  satisfies
, for 
 and so 

is a one-particle quantum state of  .
 With the same hypotheses  is well defined(In particular  as 
 for :
 by elementary calculus and Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, every  is uniformly continuous.
 If  as  for some , there are  and a sequence of intervals 
 with  and . Thus  
which is impossible.)  
 and enjoys the relevant properties stated in Proposition 3.4 and 3.5.  
  Then  enlarging  to include  elements  
 where  is real and  belongs to , one can define  as in Definition 3.2
 non affecting the relevant properties stated in Proposition 3.4 and 3.5. By this way, the algebraic approach can be 
 implemented  in terms of formal quantum fields smeared by functions of .


The action of the one-group generated by  can be implemented at algebraic level.
 If  (without the enlargement said in the remark (3) above), one can define
 
.
By direct inspection one sees that each  preserves the symplectic form 
and each  preserves the causal propagator . Notice that these results are not
evident a priori  since the action of  () is not that canonically induced by 
a vector field. 
 Finally,
extend  the action of  on quantum fields as
 ,
for .
  The following result, whose proof is essentially the same as
that of the relevant part of Theorem 4.2, holds.


 Theorem 4.6 . Transformations 
 uniquely extended into a one-parameter class of 
 automorphisms of ,  such that
 in the Fock space realization of  referred to ,
  
 
 
4.5 .The full  action . To conclude we show the general action 
of  on horizon wavefunctions. With a strightforward generalization of the notion of manifest symmetry
due to the appearance of the addend in the right-hand side of () below,
the symmetry associated with the whole group  can be considered as manifest .
We leave possible comments on the field algebra extension 
to the reader.  Remind that   and consider  
 
Referring to () and generators (), only one of the following facts hold for suitable  uniquely determined by
 in the examined cases: If ,  or, 
if , , or, if  and , ,
or, if  and , . Using these decompositions, part of Theorems 4.1, 4.3, 4.5 
and Proposition 4.2 the following final theorem can simply be proven.


Theorem 4.6 . Take  such that such that  and 
 still belongs to . If  has the form (),
let  denote the  right-hand side of ()
with  replaced for  where  
is defined as in (). For  it holds
 
The second term in the right-hand side disappears if either  or . Finally,
the transformation of wavefunctions defined by the first term in the right-hand side of () 
is that generated by  the local  group of diffeomorphisms of  generated by the basis of 
fields . 


Appearance of Horizon Virasoro symmetry. 
5.1 . A more general symmetry .
To conclude the work we show that, at least formally, the found  is embedded 
into a more general symmetry described by a Virasoro algebra (without central charge) which has a 
clear geometric meaning on the event horizon. 
First of all we notice that, from a pure geometric point of view, the  symmetry is associated
to the Lie algebra of fields , , . This suggests to focus
on the set of fields defined on , 
 with  
By direct inspection one gets that, if  denotes the Lie bracket of vector fields,
 
that is, the generators  span a Virasoro algebra without central charge. 
We remark that, in fact, the fields  with  are not smooth since a singularity arises at .
It is anyway interesting to investigate the issue of the quantum representation of that Lie algebra 
 in terms of  one-particle operators of a  quantum field defined on the event horizon. 
(These operators, if they exists, can straightforwardly
extended to multi-particle operators in the Fock space built up over the vacuum ).  


5.2 . Quantum Virasoro algebra .
We expect that the infinitesimal  action of the
transformation  induced by  on 
  reads 
 (nomatter the presence of further
terms in the expression of the finite  action as those in the right-hand side of ()).
First we consider the case . Take 
, expand it as in () and use the properties of the positive
frequency part:
, 
, where .
In this way, one sees that , with , can be decomposed as in ()
provided its positive frequency part reads  with
 
Notice that formally, ,  and .

Any  is at least symmetric in the dense subspace of 
containing functions of the form  where  is the restriction to 
of a Schwartz' function and  as  with .

Then consider the case . Take , with Fourier transform , such that 

 is  in , ,
 and so on, up to ,
are in .
 With the same procedure as above,
one sees that , with , can be decomposed as in ()
provided its positive frequency part reads  with
 
Any  is at least Hermitean in the subspace of  containing the functions 
 such that all the functions ,
with , for all integers  are restrictions to  of Schwartz functions.

Self-adjoint extensions of operators  if any, are the generators of  
one-parameters unitary groups associated with .
It is not very difficult to show that, from a very formal point of view, the operators above can equivalently be built up from 
following the procedure suggested by J.Kumar in by  interpreting 
 as  on a suitable space of functions. For , the action of 
can alternatively be written down as 
 
Finally, by direct inspection one sees that  Virasoro's commutation relations 
 
are satisfied 
wherever (in the said domains) both sides of the  identity make sense.
A rigorous investigation of the properties of the found Virasoro algebra  (e.g. essentially self-adjointness of the found
operators and the possible relevance, at quantum level, of the singularity of the fileds  with )
will be presented in a forthcoming paper. Here we  remark only that, from a pure physical point of view and 
barring perhaps complicated mathematical problems related with the infinite dimension of the algebra,
operators  (or better their self-adjoint extensions) describes a horizon manifest symmetry  of the free
quantum field in the sense of 2.5.
This is because Virasoro algebra is a Lie algebra which contains the Hamiltonian  as a generator.

Discussion, overview and open problems.  
In this paper we have rigorously proven that it is possible to define 
a diffeomorphism invariant quantum field theory for a massless free scalar field defined on the event horizon of a 
Rindler spacetime.  Actually all the procedure could be implemented in a manifold diffeomorphic to  
without fixing any metric structure.  The diffeomorphism invariance is a consequence of the fact that 
the field operators and the symplectic form act on exact -forms instead of 
smooth smearing functions and thus they do not need a metric invariant measure. 
Moreover, when the theory is realized on the (future and/or past)
event horizon in Rindler spacetime, there is a natural injective -algebra homomorphism
from any quantum field theory of a (generally massive) scalar field propagating in the bulk.
This holographic identification can be implemented in terms of unitary equivalences if the algebras of the fields
are represented in suitable Fock spaces. In this case the vacuum state in the bulk is that 
associated to Fulling-Unruh quantization. 
In a approximated picture where Rindler space corresponds to the spacetime near the horizon 
of a Schwartzschild black hole,  Fulling-Unruh
particles are just the Poincare-invariant particles we experience everydays.
Conversely, if the Rindler background is taken seriously as part of the actual
spacetime (Minkowski spacetime) without approximation, Rindler vacuum  has to be thought as
the vacuum state of an acceleratd observer in Minkowski spacetime and Rindler particles have nothing to do
with ordinary Poicare invariant particles.

Another achieved result is that the hidden  symmetry  
of the bulk theory corresponds to an analogous symmetry 
for the horizon theory and this horizon symmetry has a clear geometric interpretation in terms of invariance 
under diffeomorphisms. Barring technical open issues to be fixed in a future work, we have also found
strong evidence of the fact that the  quantum symmetry can be enlarged  to include
a full Virasoro algebra of self-adjoint generators. The geometric meaning of that enlarged 
symmetry is anyhow evident in terms of generators of one-parameters group of local diffeomorphisms
of the horizon. In fact, we have found  the expression of
the quantum analogues of these generators in terms of differential operators without giving a rigorous investigation on 
their self-adjoint extensions. That will be the subject of a future work.

All the work has been developed in the case of a two-diemensional spacetime. 
Nevertheless  we expect that the result obtained for
this simple case can be generalized to encompass some four-dimensional cases. Considering 
a four-dimensional Schwartzschild black hole manifold within the near horizon approximation,
angular degrees of freedom are embodied in the solutions of Klein-Gordon equation by 
multiplication of a two-dimensional solutions and a spherical harmonic . 
All field states are elements of an appropriate tensor product of Hilbert spaces.
For instance, in the massive case, the final space is the direct sum of spaces 
with . (The "square angular momentum" eigenvalue  defines an effective mass of the field when 
considered at fixed value of . In this way the massless theory behaves as the massive one when .)
 With simple adaptations 
 (e.g., the appropriate causal propagator on  reads 

and  the horizon field operator 
 has to be smeared with -forms as
)
 all the results found in this paper can be re-stated 
for that apparently more general case. The same conclusion can be achieved when considering 
a four dimensional Rindler spacetime.

Some comments can be supplied for the case of the exact Schwartzschild
spacetime dropping the near-horixon approximation in spite of the absence  of exact solutions
of the Klein Gordon equation. 
By the analysis of the effective potential - which depends on the angular momentum -
of a either massive or 
massless particle propagating in the external region of the black hole spacetime, one sees that
the energy spectrum is   once again for any values of the angular momentum. 
If the particle is massive no degeneracy affects a value  of the energy if the mass 
is greater than , otherwise twice degeneracy arises. That is the only possible case 
for a massless particle. Therefore we expect that our results, with appropriate adaptations,
may hold for the massless case but they could need some substantial change
dealing with the massive case.

Another interesting topic that deserves investigation is if, and how,  the holographic procedure can 
be extended in order to 
encompass a larger algebra of fields  containing Wick monomials "" which naturally arise 
dealing with perturbative interacting quantum field theory.

Acknowledgments 
The authors are grateful to Sisto Baldo and Sandro Mattarei for some useful discussions and technical 
suggestions. We are also grateful to Rainer Verch who pointed out relevant references to us.


 999 

G. 't Hooft, Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity ,
preprint: gr-qc/9310026  (1993).

G. 't Hooft, The scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole, an overview ,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A11 , 4623-4688 (1996).

L. Susskind, The World as a Hologram ,
J. Math. Phys. 36 , 6377-6396 (1995).


J. Maldacena,
The Large N Limit of Superconformal Field Theories and Supergravity ,
Adv. Theor Math. Phys. 2 , 231 (1998).

E. Witten,
Anti-de Sitter space and holography ,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 , 253-291 (1998). 

 
K. H. Rehren,
Algebraic Holography ,
Annales Henri Poincare 1  607-623 (2000). 

K. H. Rehren
Local Quantum Observables in the Anti-deSitter - Conformal QFT Correspondence ,
Phys. Lett. B493  383-388  (2000).

A. Strominger,
The dS/CFT Correspondence ,
JHEP 0110  034 (2001).


I. Sachs, S. N. Solodukhin,
Horizon Holography ,
Phys. Rev. D64  124023 (2001).



V. Moretti, N. Pinamonti, 
Aspects of hidden and manifest symmetry in 2d near-horizon black-hole backgrounds , 
Nuc. Phys. B647  131 (2002).


V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and  G. Furlan, Conformal Invariance In Quantum
  Mechanics , 
Nuovo Cim. A34   569 (1976).


 D. Guido, R. Longo, J. E. Robertz, R.Verch
Charged sectors, spin and statistics in Quantum Field Theory on Curved Spacetimes 
Rev.Math Phys. 13  1203 (2001)

 
B.Schroer and H-W. Wiesbrock
Looking beyond the thermal horizon: Hidden symmetries in chiral modes 
Rev.Math. Phys. 12   461 (2000)

 B. Schroer
Lightfront Formalism versus HolographyChiral Scanning 
hep-th/0108203

B. Schroer and L. Fassarella
Wigner particle theory and Local Quantum Physics 
 hep-th/0106064 

B. S. Kay and R. M. Wald, Theorems on the uniqueness and thermal properties of stationary, nonsingular,
quasifree states on spacetimes with a bifurcate Killing horizon ,
Phys.Rep. 207 , 49,  (1991)

R. M. Wald, Quantum field theory in curved spacetime and black hole thermodynamics ,
Chicago University Press, Chicago (1994).

 S.A. Fulling,
Aspects of Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime ,
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989). 

 N.N. Lebedev, Special functions and their applications , Dover Publications, Inc, New
York, 1972. 

I. S. Gradshteyn, I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products ,
 Academic Press, New York, 1995.

 E. Nelson, Analytic vectors , Ann. Math. 70  572 (1959).  

 G.L. Sewell, Quantum fields on manifolds: PCT and gravitationally induced thermal states 
Ann. Phys. (NY) 141  201 (1982).

 N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra II  (second edition), Freeman and Co., New York,
1989.

  N. I. Akhiezer, Lectures on Integral Transforms ,
Translations of Mathematical Monographs, Vol 70., American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1988.

 J. Kumar, Riders of the loest  , JHEP05 (2000), 035.

                                     






