150mm
230mm
-20mm
5mm



 Consistent noncommutative quantum gauge theories? 
A.A.Slavnov 
 Steklov Mathematical
Institute, 
Gubkina st. 8, GSP-1, 117966 Moscow, Russia    

A new noncommutative model invariant with respect to  gauge group
 is proposed. The model is free of nonintegrable infrared
 singularities. Its commutative classical limit describes a free
 scalar field. Generalization to  models is also
 considered.


Introduction 

Perturbative aspects of noncommutative quantum theories were recently
 a subject of numerous investigations.
These studies revealed some peculiar feathures of noncom-
mutative
models.  Noncommutativity introduces naturally nonlocality of interaction,
which serves as an ultraviolet regulator. However the regularization is
not complete and ultraviolet divergencies do not disappear completely.
Planar diagrams of a noncommutative theory require renormalization similar
to the procedure used in commutative models. Nonplanar diagrams become
ultraviolet convergent due to the presence of phase factors, however
the corresponding integrals have pole singularities in external
momenta leading to infrared divergency of higher order diagrams
(,,,,).  In
particular these infrared singularities are present in noncommutative
 gauge theory, and although planar diagrams may be renormalized in a
gauge invariant way, the model is inconsistent
(,,).

Another unusual property of noncommutative gauge theories is related to
the fact that noncommutative  algebra is not closed and one is
forced to consider  models which include a  sector and
hence are also inconsistent (,).

One could try to cure this desease by introducing nonlocal counterterms
which cancel the infrared singularities. However it would
lead to a drastic modification of the original action and nobody was able
to prove that such a procedure may be carried out in a consistent and
gauge invariant way.

Experience obtained in commutative theories suggests that appearance of
diver-
gencies, which cannot be removed by renormalizing charges, masses
and wave func-
tions is a signal that the underlying classical theory is
not complete and should be modified in such a way that possible divergent
structures have the same form as the terms present in the classical
action.

Motivated by this observation we propose a modified noncommutative 
invariant action which does not lead to infrared divergencies. All
divergencies are ultraviolet and may be removed by a standard
renormalization procedure. The classical theory in the limit
when the noncommutativity parameter  tends to zero
 reduces, contrary to naive
expectations, not to free electrodynamics, but to a free scalar field
theory. A similar procedure may be applied to  noncommutative gauge
models, where the commutative classical limit describes 
vector bosons and  scalar particle.

Noncommutative gauge invariant models. 

We start by reminding the basic facts about the conventional
noncommutative  theory.

The model is described by the action
 
 
The star product is defined as follows
 
where  is a real antisymmetric matrix and  is a
 noncommutativity parameter. In the limit  the action
 () obviously reduces to the free electromagnetic action.

 The gauge transformations look similar to nonabelian gauge
 transformations
  
Note that although for a general skewsymmetric matrix 
the interaction () is nonlocal, models with 
 introduce only spatial nonlocality and the standard Hamiltonian formalism
 may be applied. In what folows we assume that  and
 Hamiltonian formalism may be used. Without loss of generality one
 may take 
.

One sees that the  noncommutative theory is nonabelian, and the
 Feynman rules look similar to the usual Yang-Mills theory. In particular
 Faddeev-Popov ghosts, parametrizing , where
  is the covariant derivative, are present. The free propagators
 coincide with the propagators of Yang-Mills theory, and the vertex
 functions are obtained substituting Lie algebra structure
 constants by the phase factors. For example the three point gauge vertex
 with momenta  and indices  looks as follows
  
 Here we use the notation .

 The gauge field polarization operator has ultraviolet divergent part
 corresponding to the planar diagrams, and the convergent nonplanar
 part, which contains the term singular at . Explicit calculation
 gives  
 where  denotes less singular terms. One sees that 
 has a pole singularity at  and the limit
  does not exist. The diagrams which have several
 insertions of  into gauge field lines are infrared
 divergent.

 Similar singularities appear in the three point function, which looks as
 follows
  
 where  again stands for less singular terms and  means
  symmetrization
  

In general infrared pole singularities arise in the diagrams which in the
  absence of phase factors would be quadratically or linearly ultraviolet
 divergent. Logarihmically divergent diagrams produce only logarithmic
 infrared singularities which do not spoil integrability. In the
 commutative case gauge invariance prevents the appearance of linear and
 quadratic divergencies, but in the noncommutative theory they do appear.
 The only possible exception known so far is presented by supersymmetric
 gauge theories (,,).

To avoid infrared divergencies one may try to subtract nonlocal
counterterms (, ). However the meaning of such subtraction
 is not clear, as it does not correspond to renormalization of any
 parameter present in the original Lagrangian and the subtraction
 procedure is ambigous. Moreover, as was mentioned above, nobody proved
 that such subtraction can be done in a consistent and gauge invariant
 way.

 We consider the appearance of singular terms proportional to 
 as a signal that original action must be
 modified to include the terms of this type.

The action () is not
 the only gauge invariant expression one can write in the noncommutative
  theory. The most general gauge invariant action, which
 corresponds to a power counting renormalizable theory, posesses passive
 Lorentz invariance (i.e. is invariant if the tensor 
 also undergoes Lorentz transformations), and introduces nonlocality only
 via star product has a form  

 Here  and  are arbitrary parameters and the
 Lagrange multiplier  trans-
forms according to adjoint
 representation of the gauge group.

 We choose  . Then obviously the last term is irrelevant and one
 may put .  The action () describes a
 constrained system and to study its physical content one has to formulate
 the Hamiltonian dynamics.  A natural requirement for a noncommutative
 theory is the condition that in the limit  the Lorentz
 invariance is restored. The commutative limit of the action () is 
   
We remind that we consider the case when the only nonzero 
elements of the matrix  are 
. In this case 
.

At first sight the Lorentz invariance is broken even in the commutative 
limit. The proper Hamiltonian analysis shows however that the 
action() describes a usual free scalar field.

Let us rewrite the equation () as the action of a generalized
Hamiltonian system:
  
 To fix the gauge we choose the Coulomb condition . Apart 
 from the first class constraint  the 
action () includes the additional constraint 
. The commutator of this constraint with the 
Hamiltonian is different from zero:
  
That means the secondary constraint must be included and the complete 
action looks as follows
 

Let us parametrize the field  and momentum  as follows
  The Coulomb gauge condition and the 
constraint  insure that .  The 
remaining constraints nullify the corresponding momenta.

After solution of the constraints and gauge condition the eq.() 
may be written in the following form 
 
which is the Lorentz invariant action for the scalar field. Contrary to 
 naive expecta-
tions the limit  of the modified 
electromagnetic action describes a scalar field.

Now we turn to the analysis of infrared singularities. We ignore 
 possible local determinants which appear due to the second class 
 constraints, assuming that some gauge invariant regularization (e.g. 
 dimensional) is used, in which these factors are absent. The Feynman 
 rules differ from the usual noncommutative 
  theory by the presence of propagators of -fields, mixed 
 propagators  and the new vertex 
. The corresponding elements 
 of diagram technique are:

The propagator 
   

The propagator 
  

The vertex 
  

The propagator of the Yang-Mills field is also modified. In the diagonal 
Feynman gauge it is
  

 We start with the one loop polarization operator. To study the leading 
 singularities we may put the external momentum equal to zero everywhere 
except for the phase factors. Thus we have
  
where  is a rational function with the dimention . To 
separate the infrared singular contribution one presents the phase 
factor as 
  
The constant term corresponds to the planar contribution and produces 
ultraviolet divergency which is removed by the usual wave function 
renormalization, whereas the term proportional to 
 gives the infrared singular contribution   
The polarization operator must satisfy ST-identities, which in this case 
reduce to transversality condition
  
Hence the pole singularity is proportional to 
.  Recalling that the free propagator () of the 
Yang-Mills field  is transversal with respect to 
, we conclude that the infrared singularity is 
irrelevant if the polarization operator is connected to other part of 
a diagram by the gauge field propagator.
 The next possible singular term is  and 
does not lead to nonintegrable singularity.

In our model there is also a mixed propagator . 
 Due to this mixing the singular part of  may contribute to 
 the amplitude with four external gauge field lines, obtained by 
connecting the polarization operator  with the 
vertices () by the mixed propagators. The corresponding 
contribution is proportional to 
 
and does not lead to infrared divergencies at small . Note that the 
limit  is also nonsingular.

There are also one-loop polarization operators , 
corresponding to diagrams with one external -line and one 
-line, and  , corresponding to diagrams with two 
-lines. All these diagrams in the absence of phase factors 
diverge at most logarithmically and therefore are infrared safe.

 However if the the polarization operator of -field,  
required renormalization, that would mean that the action () was not 
complete and new counterterms  have to be introduced.

Moreover the complete -field propagator may include subsequent 
 insertions of several polarization operators 
 connected by the mixed propagator . For example
  Obviously 
a diagram containing such propagator may produce infrared singularities 
 due to accumulation of the  poles.

Let us study the infrared behaviour of  more closely. In the 
 lowest order the polarization operator  is equal to
  Performing the 
multiplication explicitely we can rewrite this expression in the form 
 
According to our choice of  in this equation 
. The most singular terms vanish after summation over 
, providing absolute convergence of the integral ().
 
To estimate the infrared behaviour of  let us take 
 . Rescaling the integration variables 
 we get
 
where the function  has a logarithmic singularity at the 
origin . Therefore up to 
 logarithmic corrections  vanishes at  as . It 
 compensates the infrared singularity of the operator  and 
guarantees the infrared convergence. 

A general polarization operator  may be analyzed in a similar way.
It may be presented in the following form
  We consider the case 
when the outer vertices are connected with the internal part of the 
 diagram by the gauge field propagators.  There are also the diagrams 
 where some of these propagators are replaced by the mixed propagators 
 . They are considered in a similar way and we shall not 
 present the analysis here. The function  in 
 the eq.() may be separated into parts symmetric and 
 antisymmetric with respect to  and . The 
 antisymmetric parts are proportional to  and 
  respectively. 
 Performing the summation over all indices one sees that the first 
 nonvanishing term is proportional to . 
 Therefore the integral is absolutely convergent and to study its 
behaviour at  we may put  in the integrand.
In this way one sees that the  and its first derivative over 
 vanish at . Possible asymptotics of  at 
 have the form 
 
 Therefore  for small  is proportional to 
.  By dimensinal reasons at , 
, in accordance with the lowest order result.
 
 Insertion of the mixed polarization operator  does not 
 change our analysis. This operator vanishes at  as . At the 
 same time the mixed propagator  has a singularity 
. So the product is not singular. It is important to note that 
 to have two insertions of  which might produce 
 nonintegrable infrared singularity one needs at least one insertion of 
 the operator , which cancels the singularity.

Now we turn to the study of three point gauge field vertex. It satisfies 
the ST-identity, which we take in the original form ():
  
Here  is the Green function of ghost field in the external 
gauge field.
 
 We start again with the one-loop diagrams. To pass to the proper vertex 
  function we must amputate external propagators, which include both 
  -propagators and mixed propagators . 
  However mixed propagators and mixed proper vertex functions do not have 
  pole singularities and being interested in the leading singular terms, 
 we may drop them. The gauge-ghost vertices and ghost propagators which 
 enter the r.h.s. of eq.() also have no pole singularities as in 
 the absence of phase factors the corresponding integrals diverge 
 logarithmically.  Keeping only the terms which may have pole 
 singularities we rewrite the eq() in the form   
where  is the pole singular part of the 
one-loop proper vertex function. In deriving this equation we used the 
transversality of the free gauge field propagators with respect to 
 and established earlier fact that the singular part of 
 is proportional to 
. By the same reasonings as above the 
singular part of  depends only on 
.  The only possible structure which has a proper 
symmetry and dimension, and satisfies the identity () is 
 
 Due to transversality of the free gauge field propagator 
 does not contribute to the vertex function with 
  three external gauge lines. It might give a nonzero contribution to the 
  diagram with four external gauge lines obtained by connecting 
   with the vertex () by the 
  mixed propagators . However as in the case of the 
  two point polarization operator this diagram does not produce 
  infrared singularities. 
  Proper vertex functions with at least one external -line in 
  the absence of the phase factors diverge logarithmically and do 
  not produce infrared divergencies.
  
To analyze higher loop diagrams one should perform carefully the
renormalization and check if our estimates remain valid. It is not done 
in the present paper. Assuming that renormalization does not introduce new 
problems we may basically repeat our arguments for arbitrary multiloop 
diagrams.

 The singular part of the polarization operator again may be 
calculated by taking external momentum equal to zero everywhere except for 
the phase factors.  (Of course we assume that necessary ultraviolet 
subtractions of divergent subgraphs are done in accordance with 
-operation). Therefore the singular part of polarization operator at 
arbitrary order depends only on .  Gauge invariance and 
dimensional reasons fix the form of the singular part to 
.  Hence the arguments given above to 
prove the absence of infrared singularities may be applied directly.

The singular part of the three point function depends only on 
 and by gauge invariance must satisfy the identity (). 
An analogue of the eq.() for a singular part of 
 will now include the terms
  
  We proved that the two point Green functions and proper 
one-loop three-point Green functions have no pole singularities at zero 
momenta.  Assuming that it is true for 
all , we see that these terms do not produce singular contributions 
to  and its structure is also given by the 
eq.(). It completes the induction.

A similar modification allows to formulate a consistent noncommutative 
  gauge theory. The standard noncommutative  Yang-Mills action 
is
  
 where
   
 and  belongs to  Lie algebra. Due to noncommutativity of 
the star product this action mixes the  and the  gauge 
bosons, leading to UV/IR mixing analogous to the pure  case. The one 
loop diagrams in this theory were analyzed in (). It 
appears that the planar diagrams in this theory may be 
renormalized in a gauge invariant way. Nonplanar 
diagrams with the  boson external lines are infrared 
singular, whereas the nonplanar diagrams with only  
boson external lines do not exibit infrared singularities.

The infrared pole singularities may be eliminated in analogy with the 
 case.
 
 Let us consider the modified  action:
   
 where the Lagrange multiplier  belongs to the adjoint 
 representation of the  group, and  is the 
 curvature tensor.
 
 The free action consists of the usual  part and modified  
 action considered above. So the spectrum includes vector  bosons 
and the scalar particle assosiated with the  group. The analysis of 
infrared singularities given above was based on the gauge invariance, 
power counting and the explicit form of  propagators. Therefore 
it may be applied directly to the diagrams with at least one 
external  line and leads to the same conclusion. These diagrams are 
free of infrared pole singularities. The one loop diagrams with only 
 external lines were shown to be infrared safe. If this 
property holds at higher loops, the noncommutative  theory has the 
same infrared properties as the commutative one and is renormalizable. 
 
Discussion 

In this paper I wanted to show that consistent 
 noncommutative quantum gauge theories free of infrared singularities may 
 exist even in the absense of supersymmetry.  The crucial observation 
 which allows to construct such models is a possibility to describe by 
  noncommutative gauge models not only vector but also scalar fields. 
 
Several questions may be raised in this connection. 
 
 We did not 
 consider carefully the ultraviolet renormalization of the theory. 
 It seems very plausible that the ultraviolet 
 renormalization preserves the invariance of the model and does not 
 change our estimates of asymptotics, but it would be good to demonstrate 
 it explicitely.
 
 We concentrated in this paper on pole singularities, which lead to 
 infrared divergency. However the logarithmic singularities, which do not 
 cause infrared problems, may be present. Commutative limit of 
 quantum theory deserves further investigation.
 
 Our proof of existence of the noncommutative quantum  model 
  assumed the absence of infrared singularities in the diagrams with 
  pure  external lines. To my knowleadge explicit proof of this 
  fact has been given for one-loop diagrams (). Although it is 
  likely to be true for a general diagram, a careful study 
  would be useful.
  

 Acknowledgements.  

This work was initiated while the author was visiting the University of 
 Heraklyon. I thank E.Kiritsis and the theoreical group for hospitality. I 
 am grateful to D.Maison and J.Wess for hospitality at 
 Max-Planck-Institute in Munich and Humboldt Foun-
dation for a generous 
 support. My thanks to A.Koshelev for helpful discussions.The work was 
 supported in part by Russian Basic Research Foundation under grant 
 02-01-00126, and grant for the support of leading scientific schools.  
  99  T.Filk, Phys.Lett. B376 
 (1996) 53.  T.Krajewsky, R.Wulkenhaar, 
 Int.J.Mod.Phys. A15 (2000) 1011. 
   S.Minwalla, M.Van Raamsdonk, N.Seiberg, 
 JHEP 9906 (1999) 007. 
   I.Ya.Aref'eva, 
 D.M.Belov, A.S.Koshelev, Phys.Lett. B476 (2000) 431.  
 H.Grosse, T.Krajewski, R.Wulkenhaar, hep-th/0001182
 C.P.Martin, D.Sanchez-Ruiz, Phys.Rev.Lett. 83 (1999) 476. 
  M.Hayakawa, Phys.Lett. B478 (2000) 394. 
   A.Matusis, L.Susskind, N.Tombas, JHEP 0012 
 (2000) 002.  
 I.Ya.Aref'eva, D.M.Belov,  A.S.Koshelev, O.A.Rytchkov,  
Nucl.Phys. B406 (1993) 90.   A.Armoni, Nucl.Phys. B593 (2001) 
 229.   L.Bonora, M.Salizzoni, Phys.Lett. B504 (2001) 80.  
  M.M.Sheikh-Jabbari, JHEP 9905 (1999) 015.   
 D.Zanon, Phys.Lett.  B502 (2001) 265.   I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones, 
New J.Phys.31 (2001) 19.   A.A.Slavnov, 
Theor.Math.Phys.  10 (1972) 99.   
































