
 



















































C  
N  
Z  
R  
P  
F  
F   
B   
E   
G   
A  
A   
*  
N  
d  
D  
x  
y  
Q  
J  
e  
  
   
   

M  
N  
R  
D  
F  
J  
P   
L  
V  
O  
Z  
E  
G  
H  
C  
B  
S  
A  
K  




 1l   

i 
z  
[ #1, #2] 
 #1, #2 
tr  

a  
b  
z  
Z  
  
  
j  
i  
  
d 







149mm
220mm -.5in




 
  RUNHETC-2003-10

 
Exact solutions for supersymmetric stationary black hole
composites 


Brandon Bates   and Frederik Denef   

 Department of Physics, Columbia University 

New York, NY 10027, USA 

bdbates@phys.columbia.edu  

 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University 

Piscataway, NJ 08855-8019, USA 

denef@physics.rutgers.edu 
 

 
Abstract 
Four dimensional  supergravity has regular,
stationary, asymptotically flat BPS solutions with intrinsic
angular momentum, describing bound states of separate extremal
black holes with mutually nonlocal charges. Though the existence
and some properties of these solutions were established some time
ago, fully explicit analytic solutions were lacking thus far. In
this note, we fill this gap. We show in general that explicit
solutions can be constructed whenever an explicit formula is known
in the theory at hand for the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy of a
single black hole as a function of its charges, and illustrate
this with some simple examples. We also give an example of
moduli-dependent black hole entropy.





Introduction 

The analysis of BPS states in various compactifications of string
theory has been of fundamental importance in exploring
non-perturbative phenomena, dualities and quantum geometry. In
particular in type II theory compactified on a Calabi-Yau
threefold, where BPS states have a description as D-branes wrapped
on various supersymmetric cycles (and generalizations thereof),
this study has revealed some remarkable physical and mathematical
structures. The low energy effective theory of such a Calabi-Yau
compactification is a four-dimensional  supergravity
theory, coupled to a number of massless abelian vector- and
hypermultiplets, and in this theory BPS states have a description
complementary to the D-brane picture as solutions to the field
equations preserving  supersymmetry. The simplest solutions
of this kind are spherically symmetric black holes, first studied
in. As noted in, not all charges support such
solutions. This is natural, since also in the full string theory,
the BPS spectrum is only a subset of the full charge lattice.
However, it turns out that the true BPS spectrum and the spectrum
of spherically symmetric black holes do not match
, the latter being too small. To reconcile the
two, one has to drop the restricion to spherically symmetric
solutions with a single charge center, and consider multicentered
composites as well. Indeed, 
supergravity has regular BPS "bound state" solutions describing configurations
of distinct (typically mutually nonlocal) charges at rest at
certain equilibrium separations from each other. These solutions
are in general stationary but non-static, as they can carry an
intrinsic angular momentum, much like the monopole-electron system
in ordinary Maxwell electrodynamics. Furthermore their existence
is subject to certain moduli-dependent stability conditions,
matching similar conditions appearing in the D-brane description
of BPS states. With these ingredients,
supergravity predictions for the BPS spectrum
of the full string theory were given in.

The equations of motion for general stationary BPS configurations
were derived in. In
, non-static black hole composites were
considered as solutions, and some of their properties were
analyzed directly from the equations, assuming existence. A proof
of existence was later given in, however without
giving explicit analytic expressions for the metric, scalars and
vectors. In what follows, we will show how such closed form
expressions can be found. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, it turns
out that the full solution can be built from a single function,
namely the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy (i.e. the horizon area) of
a single BPS black hole as a function of its charges. If the
latter is known analytically, the same is true for the complete
space-time geometry and all fields involved, for arbitrary values
of the moduli at spatial infinity.

Some examples of non-static multicentered solutions were studied earlier in,
for supergravity with -corrections, focusing mainly on how to take the curvature
corrrections into account in an iterative approximation scheme. The zeroth order part
of those results can be obtained as a special case of the general construction outlined
in this note. An explicit expression for the off-diagonal part of the metric was not given in
. We show how this part can be obtained in closed form without too much additional
effort, and note that requiring its regularity leads to constraints on the positions of the
centers and to certain stability conditions, confirming general expectations.

Notation and setup 

General formalism 

We will assume that the supergravity theory under consideration
arises from compactification of type IIB string theory on a
Calabi-Yau threefold, thus giving a concrete
geometric interpretations to the various quantities involved. The
generalization to arbitrary supergravity theories determined by
abstract special geometry data will be obvious.

Compactification of IIB on a Calabi-Yau manifold  gives as
four-dimensional low energy theory  supergravity coupled
to  massless abelian vectormultiplets and 
 massless hypermultiplets, where the 
are the Hodge numbers of . The hypermultiplet fields will play
no role in the following and are set to arbitrary constant values.

The complex scalars in the vector multiplets are the complex
structure moduli of . The geometry of the corresponding scalar
moduli space , parametrized with  coordinates , is
special Kahler . In what follows we recall some general
facts and useful formulas in special geometry (in the IIB
geometric setting).

The basic objects in special geometry are  a vector space , here
identified with the  dimensional vector space of harmonic
3-forms , for which we pick an arbitrary basis ;
 an antisymmetric bilinear form 
, here identified with the intersection
product on ,
 
and  a -valued holomorphic function(single-valued only
on the covering space  of ) ,
here identified with the holomorphic 3-form on ,
 
with  and  the
3-cycle Poincare  dual to . The vector  is
called the holomorphic period vector.

The special Kahler metric  on
 is derived from the Kahler potential
 
It is useful to introduce also the normalized  3-form and
period vector
 
Note that  has non-holomorphic dependence on the moduli
through . The Kahler covariant derivative  is defined
on these normalized objects as 
. Then ,
and since , one has ,
. Furthermore
 


The low energy dynamics of the vector fields is also determined by
special geometry. The type IIB self-dual five-form field strength
 descends to the four dimensional electromagnetic field
strengths  and
their magnetic duals  by the decomposition
, where 
 is a fixed standard 
-symplectic basis(i.e. 
and .)  of harmonic 3-forms on .
The fields  and 
are not independent: they are related by the self-duality
constraint on .In the four dimensional context, we refer to the -valued field
 as the total electromagnetic field strength.

The lattice of electric and magnetic charges is identified with
. The origin of
a charge  in type IIB string theory (at ) is a
D3-brane wrapped around the cycle Poincare dual to .

Example: diagonal   
Let  be the diagonal  with modulus ,
that is, , where
 is the 2-torus with standard complex structure parameter
 (valued in the upper half plane). This gives a
consistent truncation of the full  theory, if
moreover we only consider charges 
invariant under the permutation symmetry of the three 2-tori.

Type IIB string theory on  is mirror (or
T-dual(By T-dualizing along the horizontal direction in
each ) ) to IIA on ,
with  the 2-torus with area  and -field
flux  (which together determine the complexified
Kahler class of ). There are four charges 
 invariant under the permutation symmetry, mirror to
D0-, D2-, D4- and D6-branes on the IIA side. Denoting the standard
complex coordinate in the -th  by ,
these charges are explicitly:
 
The holomorphic 3-form on  is 
. With respect to the (D0,D2,D4,D6)-basis, the period vector
is . So the D0-brane is mirror to a
D3-brane wrapped in the -directions, and so on. The
intersection matrix is
 
the special Kahler potential on moduli space is ,
and the corresponding metric is .


BPS equations of motion  
In this section we recall the BPS field equations for a general
stationary black hole composite. The 
supergravity plus vector multiplet action is, in units with ,
 
The action for a probe BPS particle of charge  is
 
where .
providing a source for the fields in ().
A BPS metric is of the form
 
where  and , together with the moduli fields , are
time-independent solutions of the following equations:
 
with  an unknown real function,  a given
-valued harmonic function (on flat coordinate space
), and  the Hodge star operator on flat  . For
 charges  located at coordinates ,
, in asymptotically flat space, one has:
 
The boundary condition on  at  is that it equals
the phase of the total central charge, , with
 and
.

The total electromagnetic field  is
furthermore given by
 
where  is a Dirac magnetic monopole type vector potential obtained from
 

Not all positions of the charges are allowed, as equation ()
leads to an integrability condition, obtained by acting with 
 on both sides of the equation: for all

 
In the case of just two charges  and , this
simplifies to
 
Obviously, the separation has to be positive, so positivity of the
right hand side gives a necessary condition on the moduli at
spatial infinity for existence of a solution. It is indeed common
in  theories for BPS states to exist only in certain
regions of moduli space. When one goes from a region where the
state exist to one where it doesn't, the BPS state decays into its
constituents, which is energetically only possible on a wall of
marginal stability, where the phases of the central charges of the
constituents align, that is . From
() it follows indeed that the separation diverges when
such a wall is approached.

Solutions 

Solutions for  and : general case 

We now turn to the construction of explicit solutions. We start by
showing that if we use certain preferred holomorphic coordinates
on , solutions to () can be expressed in
terms of a single function  on , proportional to
the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy function. Consider first more
generally for an arbitrary  the equation
 
in  unknown complex variables,  and . Expressed in
components by computing intersection products with a basis
, this becomes
 
These are  real equations, so we can in general expect a
finite number of solutions ,  for a given . Now
note that by taking the intersection product of () with
 and using , we
get , while taking
intersection products with  and using 

 results in , which in
turn implies . Similarly
. Defining the
function(If the solution ,  is not
unique,  will be multi-valued. This will generically be the case
when  has conifold-type singularities. Also, for a range values of
, there may be no solution at all.) 
 
we have
* 
Therefore we find that a solution to () for a given 
satisfies
 
and, since :
 
where the -index refers to some suitably chosen basis element.
Locally,  of the  can be used as holomorphic coordinates
on . They are the usual "special" coordinates of
special geometry. Thus, () together with ()
gives the values for  and the moduli solving () in
terms of a single function  (which of course may still be hard
to compute). Note that  is a homogeneous function of degree
two, i.e. , since ()
implies
 

Now we apply all this to solve the BPS field equation (),
which is of the form () with  and
, so
 
If  is multi-valued, the relevant branch is selected by
continuity and the fact that the solution is unambiguous at
infinity (since it is given by the boundary conditions).
An obvious necessary
condition for existence of the solution is furthermore that  stays within the
domain of  everywhere.

To connect  to the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, consider the
case of a single charge  at the origin, i.e. 
. Then we find for the horizon area of the BPS black hole thus
produced, from () and the degree two homogeneity
property of :
 
and therefore for the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy function 
 
So we see that if  is explicitly known, the full solution
(for  and the moduli in special coordinates) can be constructed
explicitly as well. As a side remark, note that homogeneity of 
and () similarly imply that the moduli at the horizon
 are fixed to the value obtained by replacing 
in the expression for , and in particular are independent of
the moduli at infinity (apart for possible -branch selection).
This is the well-known attractor mechanism of  BPS black
holes.

Computing  in  supergravity theories analytically
can be quite involved, and has only been done in limits where the
periods become polynomial in the special coordinates (e.g. large
complex structure (radius) limits in compactification of IIB (IIA)
on a Calabi-Yau). This usually proceeds through
solving an equation of the form () (with ),
and along the way one derives the corresponding expressions for
the  as well. In practice it is often more convenient to
directly use those formulas rather than computing the  from
 using (). The only point of this section is then
the prescription that the full solution is obtained from the
horizon computations essentially by substituting the harmonic
function  for the charge .

Alternatively, in some cases, one can compute the entropy function
microscopically. Then this section gives a
recipe to construct the full supergravity solution just from this
piece of microscopic information. In fact, using (),
one can in principle reconstruct the full special geometry from
knowledge of the entropy function alone.

Solutions for  and : diagonal  example 

In the case of the diagonal  example of section
, the function  is given by ,
with  the discriminant function:
 
where we have denoted the components of  with respect to the
-basis as , so 
. For the corresponding modulus 
 we get (using () or directly from):
 
For charges 
at positions , the harmonic function  of ()
is, with :
 
where
 
and 
 with 
. The metric factor
 of the solution is then obtained as 
 with the -dependent  from
() plugged into (), and the modulus field
 similarly from ().

Note that for the solution to exist, we need 
everywhere. In particular this requires  for
all charges . Recall furthermore that the constraint
() has to be satisfied.

A simple spherically symmetric example is provided by considering
a charge , , with
. Then we get 
, , with
, 
, reproducing the usual D0-D4 BPS black hole solution
with zero -field.

 
  file=tauplot.eps,height=8cm,angle=0,trim=0 0 0 0 
  Left:  Profile of  in the upper half plane
  for the 2-centered example described in the text.
  The shaded region is the domain of allowed values of .
  The red curve is the line of marginal stability. Right:   as a
  function of  with the two charges located on the -axis. 
  
As a specific example of a two-centered solution, consider the
charges  and . Notice that
 while , so
a two-centered solution can indeed exist whereas a single centered
one cannot. From (), we find for the separation of the
charges
 
with . Therefore a necessary
condition for existence of the solution is
 
The zero locus of the left hand side consists of two branches, one
with  (shown in fig. ) and the other with
. On the  branch, we have ,
and on the  branch, we have . As
discussed at the end of section , on general
grounds, only the latter branch can be a boundary between a region
where the BPS state exists and a region where it does not.
Therefore, the only region in which the BPS bound state can exist
is the region inside the branch with .(When one
tries to construct a solution with  at  inside the
other branch, one finds that  becomes negative and the solution
breaks down.) 


To be completely explicit, let us pick the point , ,
which lies inside the stable domain. The separation of the charges
is then , and
 
The corresponding image of the map  is plotted in fig.
. It has the profile of a "fattened split flow", as
anticipated in, with starting point
 and its two legs at  and 
ending on the attractor points of respectively  and
, i.e.  and .

Solutions for  

We now turn to the solution of (). First we consider the
case of two centers, which generalizes straightforwardly to the
case of an arbitrary number of centers thanks to the linearity of
(). Let the position of the centers be 
and , and denote 
. Then according to the integrability condition
(), we have 
, so () becomes
) 
Introducing spherical coordinates , and using the
identities
 
and
 
we get for ():
 
where ,  are the angles with the -axis in a
spherical coordinate system with origin at  resp. 
(related to the central spherical coordinates by 
).
Integrating this equation gives for  (up to 
 gauge transformations):
 
Note that the correct cancellations of terms occur on all segments
of the -axis to make this solution non-singular. If we had not
implemented the integrability constraint (), this would
not have been the case, and we would have had a physical
singularity on the -axis.

Asymptotically for , we have 

, which implies that the angular momentum of this
spacetime is , in agreement with the general
result of.

In the case of an arbitrary number of centers , satisfying
the constraint (), we get the following for
():
 
where . Clearly the solution to this
equation can be written as
 
with  the two-center solution of ()
for the centers  and .

Solution for : general case 

Using () with , and ,
expression () for the total electromagnetic
field  can be written as follows:
 
where, introducing spherical coordinates  around each center ,
 
For a probe particle with charge  in this background,
the second term in () becomes
 
Note also that () and () imply that the
potential for a static probe is
 
where . The probe is therefore in (BPS)
equilibrium wherever .

Dependence of entropy on moduli 

The existence of multi-centered black hole bound states implies
that entropy is not determined by charge only. If, say, a certain
charge supports a spherically symmetric black hole solution, and
in a certain region of moduli space also a multi-centered black
hole solution, the entropy associated to the charge will jump when
crossing into that region.

Here we give an explicit example of this phenomenon. Consider the
charges , , , with
. The corresponding periods are 
, , the discriminants are
 
and the attractor points
 
If , a single-centered black hole solution always exists.
To find the region in the upper half plane where a two-centered
solution exists as well, we compute the  line of
marginal stability , .
Writing :
 
so the marginal stability line is the hyperbole branch
 
The condition for stability is
 
Because , this implies that the
stable region is the region to the right of the MS line. In type
IIA language, this means we have to turn on a sufficiently large
B-field to have a stable two-centered BPS solution.(or
more generally a multicentered solution consisting of a core black
hole of charge  and a cloud of charge  particles
(i.e. D0-branes) on a sphere with radius equal to the equilibrium
distance.)  Note that , so
the two-centered solution with charges  and , if it
exists, has in fact more entropy than the single centered
solution.

The microscopic prediction which follows from this is that the
moduli space of this D-brane system will develop a new branch at a
certain critical value of the B-field (in IIA), with an
exponentially larger cohomology than the original branch.

Conclusions 

We have shown how non-static multi-centered BPS solutions of
 supergravity can be constructed analytically. In
particular we argued that this can be done explicitly whenever the
BPS entropy as a function of charge is known explicitly. This
allowed us to verify directly some properties of these solutions
inferred earlier in. We also gave an
explicit example of moduli-dependent entropy.

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank Bobby Acharya, Mike Douglas, Brian Greene
and Greg Moore for stimulating discussions.


 99 

S. Ferrara, R. Kallosh and A. Strominger,  extremal
black
  holes , 52 1995 5412  [9508072 ].

G. Moore, Arithmetic and attractors , 9807087 .

M.R. Douglas, Topics in D-geometry , 17 2000 1057 
[9910170 ].

F. Denef, Supergravity flows and D-brane stability ,
08 2000 050  [0005049 ].

M.R. Douglas, B. Fiol and C. Romelsberger, Stability and BPS
  branes , 0002037 .

M.R. Douglas, B. Fiol and C. Romelsberger, The spectrum of
BPS branes on a noncompact Calabi-Yau , 0003263 .

M. Douglas, D-branes, categories and 
supersymmetry , 42 2001 2818  [0011017 ].

F. Denef, B. Greene and M. Raugas, Split attractor flows and
the spectrum of BPS D-branes on the Quintic ,
0105 2001 012 , [0101135 ].

K. Behrndt, D. Lust and W.A. Sabra, Stationary solutions
of  supergravity , 510 1998 264  [9705169 ].

G.L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt,
Stationary BPS Solutions in N=2 Supergravity with
-Interactions , 0012 2000 019  [0009234 ].

G.L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt,
Examples of stationary BPS solutions in N=2 supergravity
theories with -interactions , Fortsch.Phys.  49 
(2001) 557 [0012232 ].

F. Denef, On the correspondence between D-branes and
stationary supergravity solutions of type II Calabi-Yau
compactifications , 0010222 .

 B. de Wit and A. Van Proeyen, Potentials and symmetries of
general gauged N=2 supergravity - Yang-Mills models ,
245 1984 89 ;

 B. Craps, F. Roose, W. Troost and A. Van Proeyen, What is special
  Kahler geometry? , 503 1997 565  [9703082 ].

 M. Shmakova, Calabi-Yau Black Holes , 56 1997 540 
[9612076 ].

 A. Strominger and C. Vafa,
Microscopic Origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking Entropy ,
379 1996 99  [9601029 ].

 C. Vafa,
Black holes and Calabi-Yau threefolds , 2 1998 207 
[9711067 ].

J. M. Maldacena, A. Strominger and E. Witten, Black hole
entropy in M-theory , 9712 1997 002  [9711053 ].

 C. Misner, K. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation , Freeman and co (1973), chapter 21.


