 
 
  KUNS-1838


 

  
Twisted Moduli Stabilization 
 

in  Type I String Models 


Tetsutaro Higaki(E-mail address:
  tetsu@gauge.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp)   and  
Tatsuo Kobayashi(E-mail address:
  kobayash@gauge.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp) 
 


Department of Physics, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan 




 
We consider the model with the dilaton and twisted moduli fields, 
which is inspired by type I string models.
Stabilization of their vacuum expectation values is studied.
We find the stabilization of the twisted moduli field 
has different aspects from the dilaton stabilization.




Introduction 

Superstring theory is the promising candidate for 
unified theory including gravity.
It has no free parameter and 
gauge couplings, Yukawa couplings and others of 
low energy effective field theory 
are determined by vacuum expectation values (VEVs) 
of dilaton/moduli fields.
Thus, it is important to stabilize these VEVs.
Indeed, several stabilization mechanisms have been proposed.



The dilaton/moduli fields have no potential perturbatively. 
Only non-perturbative effects lift their potential.
Gaugino condensations are non-perturbative effects, 
which are plausible to generate a non-perturbative superpotential 
of dilaton/moduli fields.
However, one can not stabilize the VEV of the dilaton field 
to a fine value in 
the model with a superpotential generated by 
a single gaugino condensation and the tree-level Kahler 
potential.
One of the simple extensions is the model with 
double gaugino condensations and the tree-level 
Kahler potential, i.e. the so-called 
racetrack model-, 
while non-perturbative 
Kahler potential has also been 
considered.
In fact, one can stabilize the VEV of the dilaton field to 
a finite value depending on beta function coefficients 
of gauge couplings relevant to gaugino condensations.


Twisted moduli fields appear in orbifold/orientifold models.
These are localized at fixed points.
In type I models, twisted moduli fields are gauge singlets, 
while they are charged in heterotic models.
Gauge kinetic functions depend on twisted moduli 
in type I models.
They play a role in 4D Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation 
e.g. for anomalous , 
while the dilaton field plays the same role 
in heterotic models.(See also Ref. 
for anomalous U(1) in heterotic models.) 
Thus, their VEVs determine the magnitude of Fayet-Iliopoulos 
terms.
The prediction of the gauge couplings depends on the VEV of twisted 
moduli fields.
The mirage unification of gauge couplings is 
one possibility to explain the experimental 
values of gauge couplings with lower string scale.
Hence, the magnitude of twisted moduli field VEVs is 
phenomenologically important.



In this paper, we will consider the model with dilaton and twisted 
moduli fields, which is inspired by type I string models, and 
study stabilization of dilaton 
and twisted moduli fields.
For similar purpose, models with twisted moduli fields 
have been studied in Refs. .
The Kahler potential of the twisted moduli fields 
is not clear.
Here we will use the assumption of the canonical form, 
which has been studied in 
Ref. (See also 
Ref. .)  and show this form is important 
to stabilize the VEV of twisted moduli.
As another example, we will assume the  logarithmic form
of the Kahler potential  for the twisted moduli fields 
like the dilaton and other moduli fields.
That is an example of Kahler potentials, 
which have a different behavior from the canonical form.
However, we will show that even in the case with 
the logarithmic Kahler potential the positive exponent 
in the non-perturbative superpotential is useful  
for the stabilization of the twisted moduli fields.




This paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we review shortly the stabilization 
to the dilaton VEV in the racetrack model.
In section 3, we study the model with 
dilaton and twisted moduli fields.
In section 3.1 we shortly review about the twisted moduli fields.
In section 3.2 we consider the single gaugino condensation 
model and show how different the stabilization of 
twisted moduli fields is from 
the dilaton stabilization.
In section 3.3 we consider a specific double gaugino condensation 
model in order to study the simultaneous stabilization of 
the dilaton and twisted moduli fields.
In section 3.4 we give a comment about effects of 
twisted moduli fields on the dilaton VEV.
Seciton 4 is devoted to conclusion and discussions.




The racetrack model 



The tree-level Kahler potential of the dilaton field 
is obtained as 
 
The gauge kinetic function of heterotic models 
is obtained as 
 
up to Kac-Moody level, and the gauge coupling  is 
obtained as .
This is the same for the gauge multiplets originated from 
 branes in type I models.
Perturbatively, the dilaton field has a flat potential.
The single gaugino condensation induces 
the non-perturbative superpotential,
 
where  is a constant,  and  is the 
one-loop beta 
function coefficient, e.g.  for 
pure N=1  Yang-Milles theory.
With the above Kahler potential, the scalar potential  
is written as
 
where  denotes the first derivative of  by , 
i.e. . 
Here we have not taken into account -terms, 
although  has a -term potential in heterotic models if 
the model has anomalous .(In this case, 
the dilaton field  is relevant to 
Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation.) 
We have the following solutions of  :
 
or 
 



With the single gaugino condensation superpotential (), 
the solution () leads to , 
which is not a realistic VEV for  in the asymptotically free case.
The solution () leads to , 
but this corresponds to the maximum point of .
See Fig. 1, where the lower line shows the 
scalar potential against  in the case 
with  and .


In heterotic models, the requirement of 
 duality invariance of the overall moduli field  
leads to the following 
superpotential,
 
The corresponding scalar potential is written as 
 
with
 
Here we have used the Kahler potential of  as 
 
However, the inclusion of  does not help 
the stabilization of .
If , the situation is the same as the case 
without .
If , the scalar potential monotonically decreases 
as .
The upper line in Fig. 1 shows  for 
,  and .



 
V.eps  
The lower line corresponds to the scalar potential 
for  and  without .
The upper line corresponds to  for 
,  and . 





One mechanism to stabilize the VEV of  is to consider 
the superpotential with double gaugino condensations, 
 
With this superpotential, the solution () of 
 is given as 
 
If , the latter equation becomes 
the simple equation,
 
In the case with , 
the stabilized value of  is determined by 
.
Thus, the natural order of  is of .
If  and  are close each other, 
the VEV of  is enhanced.
For example, one can obtain  of  in two case; 
i)  the case with large beta-function coefficients(
In Ref.  large beta-function coefficients 
are studied from the viewpoint of F-theory.) 
 and ii) the case with fine-tuning values  
().
For the latter case, we have  
e.g. for   
and . 


Stabilization in model with twisted moduli 

Twisted moduli 

Twisted moduli fields  are localized 
at orbifold fixed points and these 
moduli fields are important from several phenomenological 
view points in 4D models obtained from type I 
and type II orientifold models.
For example, the gauge kinetic functions 
corresponding to gauge groups originated from  branes 
are written as
 
where  is a model-dependent 
constant.
Concerned about , here we take purely phenomenological 
standpoint, that is, we treat  as free parameters.  
Similarly, for the gauge groups originated from e.g. 
-branes, which are wrapped on the -th torus (), 
the corresponding gauge kinetic functions are written as 
 
where  is the moduli field corresponding to the
-th torus and its Kahler potential is obtained 
 
that is, its form is exactly the same as the Kahler potential of 
the dilaton field ().
Thus, we can discuss the stabilization of  due to 
gaugino condensation from -originated gauge groups in the same way 
as the stabilization of  due to condensation from 
 gaugino fields.
Here, we concentrate ourselves on the  stabilization.


One of important aspects is that 
the twisted moduli field  plays a role in 
4D Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation mechanism.
For example, under anomalous  symmetry, 
the twisted moduli fields are assumed to transform at one-loop level
 
with the transformation parameter .
The Fayet-Iliopoulos  term 
is written by the first derivative of Kahler potential 

,

where  is the Kahler potential of 
the twisted moduli field.
Thus, the magnitude of the Fayet-Iliopoulos  term is 
determined by the VEV of .


Unfortunately, the Kahler potential of , , is 
still unclear.
In the limit , the Kahler metric 
has  no singularity.
Hence, the Kahler potential  could be expanded as 
 
Actually, this form has been studied 
in Ref. .
Thus, we use the assumption of the Kahler potential as 
 in a half part of our 
analyses.
However, since its reliability for  may be unclear, 
we assume (We would like to thank Kiwoon Choi 
for suggesting this point.) 
 
as a trial form of the Kahler potential for .



We also give comments on the gauge coupling unification.
Within the framework of minimal supersymmetric standard model (MSSM), 
three gauge couplings of  
meet around  GeV.
Suppose that the three gauge groups are originated from 
different sets of -branes.
If one can stabilize , 
the gauge couplings are universal at the string scale .
That implies .
Otherwise, if  is sizable, 
the gauge couplings are, in general, non-universal at .
However, one of interesting possibilities to explain 
the experimental values of gauge couplings is the 
so-called "mirage unification".
The MSSM gauge coupling at  is obtained as 
 
where  are the one-loop beta-function coefficient 
for the MSSM.
Let us consider a specific model that the constants 
 
are proportional to .
In this scenario, the gauge couplings are 
non-universal at , but its prediction 
is the same as the universal gauge coupling around .
The string scale  can be low depending on 
.
Note that even a small value of  like 
 is important.

If the ratio of  to  satisfies  
 
that leads to the MSSM gauge couplings consistent with 
the experimental values.


Thus, it is important to study the stabilization of 
the twisted moduli field .
That is the issue we will study in the flowing sections.
We will also discuss how the twisted moduli field  
affects on the stabilization of the dilaton field .


Single gaugino condensation 



Here we study the case with single gaugino condensation, 
although one can not 
stabilize the dilaton field with the single gaugino 
condensation as seen section 2.
That will be useful for later discussions.
The Kahler potential is written as 
 
and the superpotential due to the gaugino condensation 
is obtained as
 
Using the Kahler potential and the superpotential, 
we can write the scalar potential as
 
where  denotes the inverse of 
the Kahler metric for  and .
Again, we do not take into account -terms.
Inclusion of -terms would be studied elsewhere.
For this scalar potential, one of solutions to 
the stationary condition  is 
 
that is,  
is one solution.


The case with  


To be concrete, we use the assumption of 
the Kahler potential .
In this case, it is convenient to define  as 
 
Then the scalar potential is written as 
 
where 
 
For the single gaugino condensation, we have 
 
The solutions of the stationary condition 
 are obtained as follows,
 
The former solution corresponds to Eq.().
The latter solutions are allowed only if 
 
By the definition (), this 
inequality is never satisfied for .
We have  for the former
solution  if 
 
By the definition (), this 
inequality is always satisfied for .
In addition, for the latter solution, we always have 
 if the solution 
is realized, i.e. .
In Fig. 2 the upper and lower lines show 
 
for  and , respectively.




 
V-m-1.eps  
The upper and lower lines show 
 
for  and , respectively. 

More explicitly, these solutions lead to the following values of 
,
 
In the case that the Kahler potential 
 is reliable, 
in particular , these results 
are valid.
Similar analyses can be done for the polynomial 
Kahler potential.
However, it is not clear that the expansion of the Kahler potential 
 is reliable 
for .
Thus, in the next subsection we will 
perform the same analysis by assuming 
 as a trial.
That is an example of Kahler potentials which have 
the behavior opposite to the canonical form at large .



The case with  

Here the same analysis as subsection 3.2.1 will be done 
with the assumption .
In this case, it is convenient to define 
 
Using this variable, we can write the scalar potential 
() 
 
The solutions of the stationary condition 
 are obtained 
 
The latter solution is allowed only if 
 


For , the region with  
corresponds to .
In this case, the second derivative of the scalar potential,
 is positive at  
if 
 
This is always satisfied by the definition () if 
.
At , we have 
  if 
 
This is never satisfied by the definition () if 
.
Fig. 3 shows  
for  and , respectively.
The scalar potential has a singularity at , 
which comes from the singularity of the Kahler potential 
at .
However, at the vicinity of  the Kahler potential
 as studied in the 
previous subsection is rather reliable than the 
Kahler potential .







 
V-m-2.eps  
The upper and lower lines show 
 
for  and , respectively. 


For , the region with  
corresponds to .
However, the second derivative of the scalar potential,
 is always negative at 
.
This situation is the same as the problem 
of the dilaton stabilization by the single 
gaugino condensation as seen in Section 2.


Thus, the model with  is interesting 
for , 
that is, the positive exponent of  in the superpotential 
is useful.
The solutions  and  
corresponds to 
 
respectively.


Assuming the Kahler potential 
 and , 
we have shown that the VEV of  can be stabilized 
with the VEV of  fixed.
The former case implies that the canonical Kahler potential 
is important for the stabilization of the twisted moduli.
Such analysis can be extended into the case with 
polynomial Kahler potential .
On the other hand, the latter case with 
 shows that even 
with the logarithmic Kahler potential, the positive 
exponent in the non-perturbative superpotential is 
useful to stabilize the VEV of twisted moduli fields.
It is speculative whether really 
 for large , but that is 
an example of Kahler potentials which have the behavior 
opposite to the canonical form at large .
For other forms of Kahler potential, the analysis can be 
extended.
The key-point in the stabilization of twisted moduli is that 
the polynomial form of Kahler potential is useful and 
the positive exponent of  in the superpotential is 
helpful.
These aspects differ from the dilaton stabilization.
The positive exponent of the dilaton field in the 
non-perturbative superpotential corresponds to the 
asymptotically non-free case (See Ref.  
for the dilaton
stabilization in the asymptotically non-free case.) .



Of course, the VEV of  is not stabilized in the 
case with the single gaugino condensation which discussed 
in this subsection.
In order to study the stabilization of  and  at the same time, 
we will consider the double gaugino condensations 
in the following subsections.


Mirage model 

Here we consider the superpotential generated from the 
double gaugino condensations, i.e., the racetrack model,
 


The mirage unification can occur in the case that 
 for the MSSM are proportional to the 
one-loop beta-function coefficients .
Here we consider a specific type of gaugino condensation models 
that  for the double gaugino condensations are 
proportional to their one-loop beta-function coefficients, 
that is, we can write 
 
where  is common for the double gaugino condensations for .
Then, the superpotential can be written as 
 
The corresponding scalar potential is written as 
 
The racetrack solution (,) corresponding to 
 is still a solution of 
 for the present scalar potential.
Here we restrict ourselves to this solution and 
the VEV of  itself is obtained by Eqs.(,).
The analysis on the scalar potential for the twisted moduli 
is almost the same as what has been done in section 3.2.
The present case corresponds to the case with 
 and .


To be concrete, we again use the assumption of 
 as the canonical form and logarithmic form.
First, in the case with  
the solutions of  are 
obtained as
 
For the former solution, we have 
 
because of .
If there are additional contributions increasing the value of 
, this solution could be a local minimum.
On the other hand, for the latter solution , 
we have  
as well as .
At this point, the -component of  is 
obtained as 
 


Similarly, we can analyse the potential minima for the 
assumed Kahler potential 
.
We are interested in the case with .
The solutions of  are 
obtained as
 
For the former solution,  ,  
we have  
because of .
Additional contributions increasing  
might make this point a local minimum.
For the solution ,
we have  
as well as .
At this point, the -component of  does not vanish.
Furthermore, stabilized values must satisfy the constraint 
.
For the above solution , 
we can write
 
Thus, the stabilized value of  () must satisfy 
.
Recall that the natural order of  is of  
unless  are close each other or 
 is large.



Generic racetrack model 


In the previous section, we considered the specific 
racetrack model, i.e. 
.
For generic case , 
analyses become complicated.
Here we give a comment on such generic case.

As solutions of , 
we again concentrate on the solution ().
That leads to the following equations,
 
 
Furthermore, if , we obtain 
 
The second term in the right hand side is the same as 
Eq.().
The first term is a new contribution from .
When , 
the first term vanishes and that is consistent with 
the subsection 3.3.
However, if , 
the VEV of  corresponds  effectively to  
a large difference of  in Eq.() as 
seen by replacing .
Thus, the value of  is important to 
the stabilized value of .



Suppose that the VEV of  is also stabilized 
by the following equation similar to Eq.()
 
Combined with Eq.(), for , 
we obtain 
 
For example, that leads to 
 
for , and 
 
for .
In the former (latter) case, the value of  is enhanced 
(suppressed) for fine-tuning , 
while it is suppressed (enhanced) for 
fine-tuning .
Eq.() becomes 
 
for , and 
 
for .
For the latter case, the first term in the right hand side 
would be important when  is enhanced by fine-tuning 
.
Thus, the value of  has the interesting effect 
on the stabilized value of .



Conclusion 


We have studied stabilization of the dilaton and twisted moduli 
by assuming the canonical and logarithmic forms for  
the Kahler potential of the twisted moduli field.
The canonical Kahler potential plays a role in 
the stabilization of the twisted moduli.
This analysis can be extended into the case with 
polynomial Kahler potential.
On the other hand, even with the logarithmic Kahler potential, 
the positive exponent of the twisted moduli field 
in the non-perturbative superpotential is 
significant.
The logarithmic form was used as an example of Kahler potentials 
which have different behavior from the canonical form.
That suggests that even for such case the positive 
exponent of the twisted moduli fields in the superpotentail 
would be helpful.
These aspects are different from the dilaton stabilization.


Simialrly, in the models that gauge kinetic functions depend 
linearly on two or more moduli fields, the positive exponent 
of those fields in the superpotential might be helpful 
for the moduli stabilization.


Also we have considered the specific racetrack model 
with  
in order to discuss stabilization of the 
dilaton and twisted moduli at the same time.
In generic case, the VEV of  affects 
the stabilized value of the dilaton VEV. 
This point is also important in the stabilization of 
the twisted moduli fields.


The knowledge on the Kahler potential of 
the twisted moduli field is necessary to investigate 
numerically reliable results.
We have not taken into account -terms.
Inclusion of -terms would be studied elsewhere.


The models have been studied lead to the negative cosmological 
constant.
That is a common problem as the dilaton stabilization.
The vanishing cosmological constant could be realized by 
the models with more gaugino condensations, 
non-perturbative Kahler potential 
or R-symmetry.



Acknowledgment 

The authors would like to thank 
Kiwoon Choi, Yoshiharu Kawamura and Hiroaki Nakano for useful discussions.
T. K. is supported in part by the Grant-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research from Ministry of Education, Science, 
Sports and Culture of Japan (14540256). 


 99 


N. V. Krasnikov,

Phys. Lett. B 193 , 37 (1987).




L. J. Dixon,

SLAC-PUB-5229

Invited talk given at 15th APS Div. of Particles and Fields
  General Mtg., Houston,TX, Jan 3-6, 1990 




T. R. Taylor,

Phys. Lett. B 252 , 59 (1990).



J. A. Casas, Z. Lalak, C. Munoz and G. G. Ross,


Nucl. Phys. B 347 , 243 (1990).




B. de Carlos, J. A. Casas and C. Munoz,

Nucl. Phys. B 399 , 623 (1993).





M. Dine and Y. Shirman,

Phys. Rev. D 63 , 046005 (2001).





T. Banks and M. Dine,

Phys. Rev. D 50 , 7454 (1994).





P. Binetruy, M. K. Gaillard and Y. Y. Wu,

Nucl. Phys. B 481 , 109 (1996).





J. A. Casas,

Phys. Lett. B 384 , 103 (1996).




G. Aldazabal, A. Font, L. E. Ibanez and G. Violero,

Nucl. Phys. B 536 , 29 (1998).




See for effective low-energy Lagrangian of Type I models 

L. E. Ibanez, C. Munoz and S. Rigolin,

Nucl. Phys. B 553 , 43 (1999) and references therein.




L. E. Ibanez, R. Rabadan and A. M. Uranga,

Nucl. Phys. B 542 , 112 (1999).




Z. Lalak, S. Lavignac and H. P. Nilles,

Nucl. Phys. B 559 , 48 (1999).



E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 149B  (1984) 351;

M. Dine, N. Seiberg and E. Witten, 
Nucl. Phys. B289  (1987) 589;

W. Lerche, B.E.W. Nilsson and A.N. Schellekens,
Nucl. Phys. B289  (1987) 609.

T. Kobayashi and H. Nakano, Nucl. Phys. B496  (1997) 103;

G.B. Cleaver and A.E. Faraggi, 
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A14  (1999) 2335.


L. E. Ibanez,

arXiv:hep-ph/9905349.



S. A. Abel and G. Servant,

Nucl. Phys. B 597 , 3 (2001).




R. Ciesielski and Z. Lalak,

JHEP 0212 , 028 (2002).





E. Poppitz,


Nucl. Phys. B 542 , 31 (1999).





C. A. Scrucca and M. Serone,

JHEP 0007 , 025 (2000).





S. Ferrara, D. Lust, A. D. Shapere and S. Theisen,

Phys. Lett. B 225 , 363 (1989).



S. Ferrara, N. Magnoli, T. R. Taylor and G. Veneziano,

Phys. Lett. B 245 , 409 (1990).



                                

A. Font, L. E. Ibanez, D. Lust and F. Quevedo,

Phys. Lett. B 245 , 401 (1990).




V. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis,

Phys. Lett. B 417 , 45 (1998).






I. Antoniadis, C. Bachas and E. Dudas,

Nucl. Phys. B 560 , 93 (1999).





C. P. Burgess, A. de la Macorra, I. Maksymyk and F. Quevedo,

Phys. Lett. B 410 , 181 (1997).




K. I. Izawa and T. Yanagida,

Prog. Theor. Phys.  101 , 171 (1999).














