
all 

-1mm
-1mm
-15mm
230mm
165mm




equation section 
thm Theorem [section]




 

 
 hep-th/0304263
 ITP-UH-01/03


 
 Seiberg-Witten Monopole Equations

 on Noncommutative  



 
  Alexander D. Popov, Armen G. Sergeev and Martin
  Wolf 


  Institut fur Theoretische Physik, Universitat
  Hannover
 Appelstrasse 2, 30167 Hannover, Germany


       Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics
 JINR, 141980
       Dubna, Russia


       Steklov Mathematical Institute
 Gubkina 8, 119991
       Moscow, Russia


       Institut fur Theoretische Physik, Technische
       Universitat Dresden
 01062 Dresden, Germany 


       E-mail: popov, wolf@itp.uni-hannover.de,
       sergeev@mi.ras.ru 



 
It is well known that, due to vanishing theorems, there
are no nontrivial finite action solutions to the Abelian
Seiberg-Witten (SW) monopole equations on Euclidean
four-dimensional space . We show that this is no
longer true for the noncommutative version of these equations,
i.e. on a noncommutative deformation  of 
 there exist smooth solutions to the SW equations 
having nonzero topological charge. We introduce
 action functionals for the noncommutative SW equations and 
construct explicit regular solutions. 
All our solutions have finite energy. We also suggest a possible 
interpretation of  
the obtained solutions as codimension four
vortex-like solitons representing - and 
-branes in a - brane system in
type II superstring theory.





Introduction 

The Seiberg-Witten (SW) monopole equationshave been derived in the context of twisted 
supersymmetric Yang-Mills (SYM) theory
 in some limit
of the coupling constant. Another limit of this theory yields
the anti-self-dual Yang-Mills (ASDYM) equations. Namely, the
ASDYM equations correspond to the weak coupling limit while
the SW equations are related to the strong coupling regime
obtained by the S-dualization (see e.g.
 and references
therein). Note that the SW equations are associated with the
Abelian group  and have a compact moduli space while the
ASDYM equations, considered in Donaldson-Witten (DW) theory
, possess
the non-Abelian gauge group  and a noncompact moduli
space. That is why SW theory is much easier to handle compared to DW
theory. A bridge between these theories is provided
by the non-Abelian SW equations (see e.g.
and references therein) whose moduli space contains both DW and
SW moduli spaces as singular submanifolds.

It is well known that, due to a vanishing theorem of
Lichnerowicz-Weitzenbock type, there are no nontrivial finite
action solutions to the Abelian SW equations on Riemannian
four-manifolds with non-negative scalar curvature and, in particular,
on  (cf.). This assertion is
also true for lower-dimensional reductions of the SW equations,
i.e. these reductions do also not exhibit regular solutions on
 with a nonzero topological charge.
Nevertheless, one may construct nontrivial non- solutions,
as it has been done e.g. in
.

Note that for vanishing spinor field the SW equations
specialize to the Abelian ASDYM equations 
which
have no nontrivial regular solutions (instantons) on
 either. However, Nekrasov and Schwarz
have demonstrated in that smooth Abelian
instanton solutions do exist on  - a
noncommutative deformation of  with constant
deformation parameters . Moreover, they have
proven that noncommutativity resolves the singularities
of the instanton moduli space. In the present paper we observe a
similar phenomenon for the SW equations on
 by constructing nontrivial regular
solutions to the noncommutative SW equations.

It is well known that the SW equations on Kahler surfaces are
similar to the vortex equations in two dimensions. Motivated by
this relation, we interpret regular (vortex-like) solutions to the
SW equations on  as 
- and -branes in a 
-
brane-antibrane system in type II superstring theory. This
interpretation can also be extended to the commutative case of the
SW equations on Kahler surfaces.

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
formulate the SW equations on  and fix our
notation. In section 3 we introduce the noncommutatively deformed
non-Abelian SW equations. We derive them from properly
deformed  self-duality type equations in eight dimensions
 by a dimensional reduction to four
dimensions (cf. ). The resulting 
,  and  noncommutative SW equations can 
also be produced from appropriate action
functionals by using a Bogomolny type transformation. We point out
that the ,
 and  noncommutative SW equations share
the same commutative limit. In section 4 we
present a number of regular solutions to the noncommutative SW
equations and discuss their -brane interpretation in a string
theoretic context. Section 5 concludes with a brief summary and
open problems. Finally, in an appendix we perform the Bogomolny
type transformation for the noncommutative  
SW action functional.



SW monopole equations on  

SW action functional. 
In this paper we consider the SW equations on the Euclidean space
, provided with the standard metric
, where . The
(energy) functional  for these equations has the
form (cf. e.g.)
 
Here  is a connection
one-form on  with pure imaginary smooth
coefficients and  is
a Weyl spinor given by a smooth complex-valued 
vector function on . We denote by
 the self-dual
part of the curvature  of  and by  the covariant
derivative associated with . Moreover, we use the abbreviation 

and set .

By exploiting a Bogomolny type formula, the energy functional can be
rewritten in the form
 
where
 
is the SW action functional and
 
is the topological charge. In the above formula () we
denote by  the Dirac operator associated with .
We also use the notation
 
where




is a map identifying the space  of
traceless Hermitian endomorphisms of  with the
space  of
imaginary-valued self-dual two-forms on . The
inverse of this map is given by the Clifford multiplication by
two-forms (see e.g.).

It is easy to see that the functionals () and
() are invariant under gauge transformations of the form
 
where .

SW monopole equations. 
Since the functional  is positive semi-definite and
 is a topological term, the Bogomolny formula ()
implies that the lower bound of the energy  is attained
on solutions to the equations
  
which are known as the SW monopole equations.
They are differential equations of first order and their
solutions, which minimize the energy functional ,
automatically satisfy the (second order) Euler-Lagrange equations
for the functionals  and .

Writing ,
one can see that the equations () are equivalent to (cf.
)
  
and
 

It is easy to prove that these equations have no nontrivial
solutions with finite action. Namely, we have the following theorem
(see e.g. ):


Theorem: 
 Suppose  and
  satisfy the
 equations (). Moreover, we assume that
  and . Then the only
 solution to () is the trivial solution 
 modulo the gauge transformations (). 


This theorem is also true for lower dimensional
reductions of the SW equations (defined on
), i.e. these reductions do not exhibit
regular nontrivial solutions either. However, as we have already
mentioned in the introduction, one can construct nontrivial
non- solutions 
.

Perturbed SW action functional and monopole equations. 
The gauge group action () on the space of pairs
 is free, unless . In order to avoid
solutions of the form , which may cause singularities in
the moduli space of solutions, we perturb the monopole equations
by adding an extra term to the first SW equation
  
where  is the self-dual part of a two-form
 (perturbation).
Solutions to these equations minimize the functional
 
In components equation () reads
 

The SW action functional, as in the unperturbed case, is related to
an energy functional
 
via a Bogomolny type formula
 
The topological charge  is given, as before, by formula
() and the Chern-Simons type term  is defined as
 



SW monopole equations on  



Non-Abelian SW monopole equations 

Noncommutative Euclidean space . 
Let  be the algebra of polynomial
functions on  (which is endowed with the canonical
metric
) and  be a real
invertible skew-symmetric  matrix with the inverse matrix
 defined by

for .
Then the deformed algebra  is defined
as
 
where  is the tensor algebra of 
and


denotes the two-sided ideal generated by
.
 For brevity we shall
denote  simply by
 and call it the noncommutative Euclidean
-dimensional space.

One way to realize the noncommutative extension ()
of the algebra  is by
deformation of the pointwise product between functions via the so-called
star (Moyal) product,
 
where .
In particular, it follows from () that
 

For later convenience we introduce complex coordinates on
,
 
and derivatives
 
Note that by an orthogonal change of coordinates one can always
transform  to its canonical (Darboux) form
whose only nonzero components are  with
. Then the commutation relations 
translate to
 
and all other commutators are equal to zero.

Self-duality type equations in eight dimensions. 
A standard way to obtain a noncommutative generalization of a
theory is to replace naively the ordinary commutative product
between field variables with the noncommutative star product.
However, it is well known that this method of translating a
commutative theory into a noncommutative one is not uniquely
defined when the matter fields are involved. For instance, the
scalar fields in noncommutative  gauge theory on
 can be regarded in three different ways, namely
as elements of a left module (over the algebra
), or as elements of a right
module, or they can transform in the adjoint representation. For
this reason we propose to derive the noncommutative SW equations
from noncommutative self-duality type Yang-Mills (YM) equations in
eight dimensions, which are uniquely defined. Eventually, we will 
discover the equations corresponding to the above mentioned naive 
substitution rule by a formal reduction of more general equations.
In the commutative case a similar idea has been worked out by
the authors of.

Let us consider pure  YM theory on
. In star-product formulation the
components  of the YM curvature  read
 
and take values in . Here  run
from  to .
Consider the generalized self-duality equations for YM fields in eight
dimensions(In the commutative case these equations were
introduced in  and discussed e.g. 
in .)  ,
 
where the totally antisymmetric tensor 
is determined by the octonionic structure constants  asWe use 
. 
 
Note that the tensor  and therefore
the equations () are invariant with respect to the
group  rather than . In fact, it is impossible  to
construct a totally antisymmetric tensor of rank four in eight
dimensions which is invariant under  rotations.

Using the definition (), we can write down the
generalized self-duality equations () in components
as follows:
 
With the help of () and the definitions
 
we rewrite () as
  
Note that , since the
components  are skew-Hermitian.

Reduction to four dimensions. 
Following Baulieu et al. , we assume that the
gauge potential components  for  do not
depend on the coordinates 
 and define  with
 and . Then the
equations () dimensionally reduce to
  
where the covariant derivative  is defined by
. In the
commutative limit these equations coincide with a non-Abelian
generalization of the SW equations, considered in
.
Note that the special case of these equations corresponding to
 was discussed
in .

Along with the unperturbed equations () we
shall also consider the perturbed equations 
(cf.). For that we introduce
an -valued two-form  and add its self-dual
part  to  ,
  



Abelian SW monopole equations 

In order to get Abelian SW equations from the non-Abelian ones, we
shall consider solutions of a particular type given by a suitable
ansatz. This will reduce the gauge group  to 
 and then, further down to .

Noncommutative  SW monopole equations. 
Let us consider the  subgroup of 
with the generators
 
and assume that the components of the gauge potential 
for  take the form(If not stated differently,
 run always from  to  in the sequel.) 
 
and 
.
Furthermore, we restrict  and  to the form
 
where .

Substituting () and () into the equations
(), after a straightforward calculation
we obtain the equations
  
as well as
 
where we have used the definition
 
Here  are the components of the curvature
associated with , i.e.
 

Analogously, by assuming that  with
 in
(), we obtain the perturbed equations
  
We consider the equations (), ()
and (), () as a
noncommutative extension of the unperturbed and perturbed
Abelian SW equations, respectively. Since there are two gauge 
potentials in the equations, we call them the noncommutative 
unperturbed and perturbed 
 SW equations.

It remains to find out what kind of gauge transformations leave
the  SW equations invariant. It is obvious
from the explicit form of these equations that  and
 are in the bi-fundamental representation of 
. Hence, the equations (), ()
and () are invariant under gauge transformations of
the form
 
where  and
.

In the commutative limit
the covariant derivative () turns into
 
i.e. the gauge potential  disappears from the 
equations (). In other words, one copy of 
decouples from  and the matter field 
interact only with the  part. 
Hence, in the commutative case  is charged with respect
to the diagonal  subgroup of  
corresponding to the gauge potential .
Furthermore, the commutator in the expression for the
(Abelian) curvature vanishes and hence as a
corollary we have 

.
In the commutative limit one may
choose the perturbations  so that
 
where 
is some other perturbation. Then
from equations ()
we obtain(Note that in the case of complex
valued-functions '' goes to '' in the commutative limit.) 
 
Thus, we recover the perturbed SW equations () and
() (written in complex coordinates). Of course, the
choice  corresponds to the unperturbed equations.

Remark. 
Consider the unperturbed equations () and ().
In the commutative limit we arrive at the standard unperturbed SW
equations for configurations () plus the Abelian
ASDYM equations for , i.e.
 
Taking the trivial solution  (recall that there are
no Abelian instantons on ) we remain with the
standard unperturbed SW equations. More generally, any pure gauge
configuration for  will do the same. The
noncommutative version of the latter statement is, however, nontrivial. 
If we choose  in () of the
form
 
with  then it will correspond
in the commutative limit to a pure gauge configuration but,
of course, it is
not pure gauge in the noncommutative case. Only in the
commutative limit the curvature  disappears and
we arrive at the unperturbed SW equations ().

Noncommutative  SW monopole equations. 
In equations () - () the field  
is regarded as an element of a -bimodule
transforming in the bi-fundamental representation of the gauge group
. However, in the noncommutative setup the matter
field  can also be thought of either as an element of a right
-module (the  case) or as an element
of a left -module (the  case). These
two cases can easily be read off the equations (), 
() and (), (), respectively.  
Namely, consider the equations(Formally, these equations
can be obtained from () - () by choosing 
 (i.e. ), 
taking  such that
,
,


and
 ,
where , and rescaling
.) 
  
as well as
 
where  and
the (right) covariant derivative reads
 
Note that the curvature  is now computed from 
, i.e.

.

Similarly, we may introduce the equations(These equations
can formally be obtained from () - () 
by choosing  (i.e. ) 
and putting
 

,
 ,
  and
,
where . Again
we should rescale .) 
  
and
 
where  
and
 
is the (left) derivative. Now the curvature  
is associated with the gauge potential 
, i.e.

.

We shall call () and () 
the perturbed noncommutative  and  
SW equations. 
Obviously, the unperturbed equations appear for .
Note that the systems () and ()  
are totally equivalent and
the only difference between them is an artefact of noncommutativity.
The commutative limits of both cases are, of course, identical and
produce (). Moreover, in the commutative 
case the gauge transformations () reduce
to the standard ones, i.e. one may choose the identity either for
 or for . 
 


Operator form of the Abelian SW monopole equations 

Weyl transform. 
Due to the nonlocal nature of the star product, explicit
calculations might be quite tedious. It is therefore convenient to
pass over to the operator formalism via the Weyl ordering
 given by
 
 
where   stands for the
Fourier transform of ,
 
Here  is the Schwartz space of fast
decreasing functions(However, in later considerations we
shall make suitable choices for  which are weaker.)  on
, '' denotes the trace in the operator
representation of the noncommutative algebra and
'' is the Pfaffian of
. Also, in these equations  is a
shorthand notation for . One can verify (see
e.g. ) that the following relations are true:
 

We may regard the coordinates  as operators which
act on some Fock space , specified in section
, and satisfy the commutation relations
. With a
proper choice of coordinates the parameters 
will have the canonical form (). For the complex
coordinates , also considered as operators in
, we then get
 
A straightforward calculation shows that coordinate
derivatives are now inner derivations of this algebra, i.e.
 
In the operator formulation, the perturbed noncommutative
 SW equations () and
() retain their form
  
and
 
where
 

In order to simplify our notation, from now on we omit
the hats over the operators.

 SW action functional.  
Having introduced the  
noncommutative extension of the SW equations (), 
we shall define an appropriate action functional. For
this purpose we switch back to real coordinates.

Let  and 
.(Note 
that '' is nothing but spinor conjugation.)  
Then the noncommutative deformation of the action functional 
() will have the form
 
where 
 
for any . Here,  
denotes the Dirac operator
depending on the two gauge potentials  and , i.e.
  
where the covariant derivatives  are given by ().
Note that the prefactors in () are adjusted in such a 
way that we recover () in the commutative limit.
It is not difficult to see that the (perturbed) 
SW equations following from () are given by the equations
 
whose solutions minimize the action functional ().
In components these equations coincide with ().

Assuming that  and  are of proper
trace-class,
e.g.  and , 
we can show that
  
where the functionals  and  are 
given by 
 
and
 
The topological term  reads
 
 
Here
 
 
'' denotes the Hodge operator and . 
The currents  
depend in a particular fashion on the fields  and , 
their derivatives and on the gauge potentials . 
The explicit derivation of () and the expressions for the 
currents  are given in appendix A. 
Note that similarly to the commutative case
the functionals  and  yield the same
equations of motion. The integration of () yields the 
topological charge 
 
for the considered field configuration 
 on .
 
Generalized coupled vortex equations. 
Let us put one component of  to zero, e.g. consider the
case  . (Note that in the 
case of Kahler manifolds ( is trivially Kahler) the
field  can be regarded as a scalar.) 
Moreover, we choose
 
where  are some Hermitian operators acting on 
. Then the energy functional () turns 
into
   
and  is given by
 
Also the currents  have a fairly simple 
form(Cf. appendix A.) 
  
where  is the Levi-Civita
symbol with . 

For our choices of  and  the
perturbed  SW equations in complex
coordinates read
  
In the commutative case these equations were considered e.g. in 
.

 SW action functionals.  
Having introduced the  SW functionals, we are
now interested in  proper functionals for the  cases
() and ().
Let us first discuss the perturbed  SW equations.
In this case the SW action functional takes the following form:
 
Note that now the Dirac operator depends only on  and 
the covariant derivatives are given by ().
Also here the prefactors have been chosen such that the correct 
commutative limit will be obtained.
As before, the functional  may be rewritten as
  
where  turns out to be   
 
The Chern-Simons term  reads
 
and the topological term  is given by
 
implying the charge
 

Again all equations simplify essentially if one chooses
 ,  and

, where  is some Hermitian 
operator. Then  and  are given by
 
) 
and
 
The current  reduces in this case to
 
Finally, the perturbed  SW equations read
  

In the commutative case these -vortex equations in four dimensions
were considered e.g. in.
Note that in a similar manner one can write down the functionals 
corresponding to the
 case (). Since they look essentially the same
as the above-introduced  functionals we refrain from writing 
down their explicit form.



Particular solutions 
Operator realization 

The form of the Heisenberg algebra type commutation relations 
() suggests that the algebra  may 
be represented by
a pair of harmonic oscillators in the two-oscillator Fock space

.
We introduce, as usual, annihilation and creation operators
, satisfying .
They act on  and are defined by the relations
  
where  form an
orthonormal basis in . The commutation relations
() imply that the operators 
have the form
     

We introduce so-called shift operators  acting on the
Fock spaces . They are partially isometric
operators sending the Fock space  to its subspace
, where we denote by

 the orthogonal projector onto
the ground state of  and
 is the complement projector. Then
 
The operator  may be given by the explicit formula
 
We will sometimes drop the index '' on the state  in
the following if the meaning is clear from the context.

The next step is to construct a shift operator 
on  such that
 
and  and .
A naive idea to take simply the tensor product 
 does not work. One possible realization of the required
operator  is given by the formula 
but there are also other realizations (see
e.g. ).

For later convenience we introduce the operators
 
Then a short calculation of the YM curvature yields
  
 
and the covariant derivatives become
 



Solutions to the perturbed SW equations 

 SW monopole equations. 
Let us consider the equations () rewritten in operator 
form. For the operators () we take (cf. e.g. 
)
 
where the shift operator  is given by (),
 and . Then the 
commutator  is readily
computed to be
 
where  is given by 
 
It easy to see that the second equations of () and
() are trivially satisfied. Choosing  
and
 
we can solve () and the first equation of 
() consistently, while the first equation of 
() implies that
 
Note that the moduli  in () can be
interpreted as position parameters (see e.g. 
).

Obviously, the components () of the
curvature and the 
field  are of proper trace-class. Moreover,
it can be easily checked that  is covariantly constant, i.e. 
along with , required by the SW
equations, we also have . This means
that the currents  () 
vanish identically. 
Thus, it is straightforward to evaluate the 
topological charge () for this configuration. What we 
find for the topological term () is
 
Using  , 
we get immediately a charge(Note that the definition
of the charge () differs by a factor of  in comparison
with the standard one.)  
 
Note that  given by ()
is also finite. Therefore, the considered
field configuration has finite energy 
 

Let us now consider a slight generalization of the ansatz 
(). We take first
  
and find that 
. Secondly, choosing
 
and the perturbations  such that
 
one can easily show that our equations are solved
consistently. Again, all our operators are of proper trace-class for
. In the case of  
one encounters a slight subtlety since
the field  is not of trace-class contrary to our assumption. 
However, potentially dangerous terms, like  
for instance(Cf. appendix A.) , which occured 
in (), are obviously zero when . 
Moreover, the field  is covariantly constant, as one can readily 
check.
Therefore, the currents  () 
are identically zero.  The topological term 
() for this configuration thus reads
 
which produces a topological charge 
.  
The functional  for this solutions
computes to 
 
where  is given by ().

 SW monopole equations. 
Consider now the equations () and choose
the ansatz
 
with  and . 
Then the first equation of () can be solved by 

,
while the other two equations are trivially
satisfied. The only nonvanishing components of 
the curvature are . Note that 
the expression for  is covariantly constant which  
implies the vanishing of the current (). 
The charge () 
is equal to  and the energy  is 
,
where  is given by ().
 
Consider again the equations (). Besides the
shift type solution for  we can also find a 
projector type solution. Namely, we choose
 with , 
 
and the 's as previously. 
With this choice the first two equations of 
() are trivially satisfied, while 
() yields the condition
. Hence, we have to set .
Again, the only nonvanishing components of the curvature are 
.
Moreover, we have 
 
which imply the vanishing of current the  
(). The 
topological charge  for this configuration
is .



Solutions to the unperturbed SW equations 

In this section we shall consider solutions to the unperturbed
SW equations. We concentrate on the case of the
unperturbed  equations, i.e. () with 
, as an illustrative example.

 SW monopole equations with .  
In this case we obtain the noncommutative Abelian ASDYM equations. 
Solutions to these equations, i.e. noncommutative Abelian instantons, 
have been known for quite some time . 
However, for the sake of completeness we briefly review their 
construction. Note that in the case  the current 
 is identically zero. 

In terms of the operators () the Abelian ASDYM equations read
    
Again we consider an ansatz for  of the form 
().
This ansatz yields solutions to the equations 
() if the deformation tensor 
is anti-self-dual what trivially follows from ().
The only nonvanishing 
components of the curvature are 
 implying that the charge () is equal
to . 
The moduli  entering the solution are
position parameters showing the location of
the noncommutative instantons 
(see also for a recent review).

It is also possible to consider
the case of ASDYM equations on a self-dual 
background for which 
. 
Let us assume that , which leads to the definitions 
 and
. We
choose the ansatz  
and assume that
, where 
.
Then the equation 
 is
trivially satisfied. A short calculation yields for 
the result  
The nonvanishing components of the curvature in this case are
 
 
 
Using these expressions, we compute the topological charge
() to be . A straightforward extension of the above 
ansatz allows
one to construct multi-instanton configurations, as well
.

Fock spaces with indefinite norm. 
Let us now discuss the case when  does not vanish
identically. For that we relax the condition of positivity
of the norm of the Fock spaces  and assume instead
that at least one of them has an indefinite norm
(cf. ). For instance, we can introduce a collection
of the creation and annihilation operators
, satisfying ,
, and defined by the relations
 
 
substituting (). The normalization condition is modified 
to 
.
The identity operator is given by
 
Moreover, we have to redefine the relations between
 and
 so that
        
   The definition of the shift operator  remains the
same, while for  we obtain
 
with the representation
 
For an operator 
 on
 with the properties  and 
, we can use the old expression (),
since the indefiniteness of the norm does not affect the
verification of these properties. Indeed,  contains only the
identity , given by (), and the
projector  on .

 SW monopole equations with .  
We start from () with . 
In this case the SW equations read
 
where the covariant derivative  
acts as 
. Suppose that  is positive normed
while  is endowed with an indefinite norm. 
Using the definition () and the ansatz  
,
we find again ().
Assuming that  with 
, we can solve the last equation of () 
if , i.e.
. For  this is satisfied because of our 
choice  and for  it implies 
. The second equation of () is again
identically satisfied, while the first one yields the condition 
, which makes 
sense due to the different signs of  and 
. The nonvanishing components of the curvature
are  and one can readily verify
that the current  from
() has no contributions to the topological charge 
().  
Moreover, the computation of the topological charge gives . 
Note that the 
introduction of an indefinite norm on  
was needed for having solutions to the equation

on the components of .

 SW monopole equations and vortices.  
Finally we discuss a case which is slightly different from the 
cases described above, in the sense that we fix the explicit form 
of the solutions on a two-dimensional subspace of 
 from the very beginning. 
This eventually results in the  vortex
equations on the complementary two-dimensional subspace.

Again, let  be positive normed and  
endowed with an indefinite norm, such that 
 and 
. 
Furthermore, we choose an ansatz for  of the form 

. A short
calculation yields the result 
.
Assuming that , 
we obtain 
. 
Similarly, we take . 
Then the equation  implies the 
condition , which is identically satisfied due 
to the relation . Moreover, the equation 
 is trivially satisfied. Using 
, we finally arrive at the 
equations(Note that these equations can also be obtained 
in the context of the perturbed SW equations if one chooses the 
perturbation proportional to . Then there is no necessity 
to introduce an indefinite normed space.)  
  
Rescaling 
and introducing ,
we obtain the equations 
 
on . 
For  they coincide with
the standard  vortex equations. The equations ()
with 
and their explicit solutions
were extensively discussed in the literature (see e.g. 
). 
Note that the choice of the projector  on  
ensures a finite charge for this solution. To exemplify this case let
us rewrite  via 
 with

. Moreover, suppose that .
Then one readily verifies that 
.
Therefore, we end up with 
and .
Note that . The topological charge () 
for this configuration is .

To summarize, we have described solutions on
. 
It is also allowed to put 
 to zero in order to have solutions on
. Then the second 
equation of () reduces to 
. Assuming 
that  has zeros at points  in the
complex plane, we obtain 
from the first equation of () with  
(see e.g. )
  
i.e. the standard Liouville type equation on 
. 
The moduli  are position parameters of the
-vortex solution on the -plane. It is well known that
this equation exhibits regular -vortex solution 
.



Noncommutative solitons and -branes 

Without refering to string theory the  and 
 SW monopole equations are simply understood as  
noncommutative generalizations of the Abelian SW equations. In this
section we shall discuss how one can interpret solutions to the
noncommutative SW equations as -brane configurations in a stringy
context.
 
Brane-antibrane effective action. 
In the simplest case of type II superstrings living in the target space
 a -brane with a world volume 
 may be defined via a
relative map
 
where  is a string world sheet with boundary .
One may also consider -branes (= anti--branes) which
are -branes with opposite orientation and Ramond-Ramond (RR) charge.

It is well known that there are stable BPS -branes in type IIA (even )
and type IIB (odd ) superstring theory. Besides that, it is also well
known that a system consisting of coincident -brane and 
-brane 
is unstable since open strings ending on these 
branes have a tachyonic mode () in the spectrum (see e.g. 
 
and references therein). This instability can be seen in 
the low energy effective action for the brane-antibrane pair. Namely, the
effective field theory describing light excitations of this system contains
two Abelian gauge potentials  and a complex scalar  (tachyon). 
The
latter one is associated with modes of the open string stretched between 
brane and antibrane, and is believed to be subject to a
"Mexican hat" potential. The tachyon carries charge one under the 
diagonal  subgroup of the group  with the
generator  corresponding to the gauge potential .
After turning on a constant -field (generating a noncommutativity
tensor  on ) the theory 
becomes
noncommutative and the tachyon field transforms in the bi-fundamental
representation of .

In perturbative string theory the first computations of the brane-antibrane
effective action were performed in. The resulting 
effective Lagrangian reads
 
where the covariant derivative is given by

, bar denotes complex conjugation,  is a 
constant and . This is not 
the full effective Lagrangian since the coupling between closed string
RR fields and open strings gives an additional term 
 called the Chern-Simons term 
. For 
constant components of the RR fields, which we now consider, this term
does not contribute to the equations of motion, and therefore
we will not discuss it
here. Note that the terms given by () and () 
are of such kind.

The tachyon potential given by () has the quartic form
 
Computations in level truncated superstring field theory yield the same
result. Any minimum  of
the tachyon 
potential describes the closed string vacuum (tachyon condensate).
The perturbative spectrum around this vacuum is conjectured not to
contain any open string excitations. As it was discussed in
, in the presence
of a -field background a noncommutative generalization of the 
effective theory () might be of the form
 
where 
.
Higher order corrections to the quartic tachyon potential are known
(see e.g.). The result is 
qualitatively similar
("Mexican hat" form with minima at ), and 
() is the leading order term. Note that a quartic form of
the potential was also obtained in
 for bound states in 
-
and - systems by using scattering calculations in string
theory, level truncated superstring field theory and by analyzing the
fluctuation spectrum around (noncommutative) vortex and instanton
solutions.

Quite different results have been obtained in boundary string field
theory (BSFT) (see e.g. 
and references therein). There (as in) 
the Lagrangian density is proportional to the tachyon potential
itself, and the potential has the form  with
a ring of minima at . 
It is believed that the level
truncation scheme and the BSFT approach can be related by a field 
redefinition involving all components of the string field 
.
Various 'improved versions' of the effective action of the 
brane-antibrane system have been introduced (see e.g. 
), and 
in the literature there is no final agreement on its form. Thus, the
action based on the Lagrangian () (or ()
in the presence of a -field) might be considered as an approximation
of the low energy effective action of the brane-antibrane system. 
In any case the discussed Yang-Mills-Higgs theory provides a simple
field theoretic model of the more complicated string field theory
description of brane-antibrane systems. 

Noncommutative vortices and ABS solitons.  
Recall that branes and antibranes have opposite RR charge and therefore
they can annihilate into the closed string vacuum state with  
and . 
However, instead of taking the vacuum solution,
one can choose as the ground state a (tachyon) soliton solution 
to the equations of motion for the Lagrangian (). 
Such kind
of solutions are interpreted as bound states of -branes and 
-branes, equivalent to -branes of lower dimensionality.
Here we discuss the main example of such solutions obtained via the
Atiyah-Bott-Shapiro (ABS) construction
. These ABS 
(noncommutative) solitons live in  dimensions, and for 
they coincide with noncommutative vortices on .
For  the ABS solitons are non-Abelian and therefore differ from
those (Abelian) SW solutions which also solve the field equations
following from ().

To describe the ABS solitons on  we consider
a non-Abelian generalization of the Langrangian () 
with  gauge group for  and the 
tachyon field  in the bi-fundamental representation 
of this group. This model describes two Hermitian rank  vector bundles
 with connection one-forms 
and  and is associated with a 
system of  -branes and  -branes with common
world volume . We assume that  and introduce
an ansatz for ABS solitons related to Clifford algebras.

Consider the Clifford algebra of the Euclidean space 
, generated by unity and elements 
such that
 
with . In the  matrix 
representation of this algebra the generators  can be chosen
of the form
 
where the 's are  gamma matrices with .
In this representation the spinor space  can be
decomposed into a direct sum  of semi-spinor spaces
 (the spaces of Weyl spinors). Note that for  we have  
and .

Considering the noncommutative deformation  of
 discussed in subsections 3.1 and 3.3, we introduce the
operators
 
where  is a short hand notation for .
The operator  defines a map
 
Here  is the Hilbert space realized as a representation
space of  oscillators defined by formulas similiar to 
() and (), and  are the semi-spinor 
spaces introduced above. In matrix realization  looks as
 
and hence, following the authors of
, 
we will not distinguish  and  in the sequel.

It is not difficult to see that
 
where  is the projector onto the kernel of .
This state is the tensor product of the oscillator ground state with
itself and
the lowest weight spinor of  (the fermion ground state). Also,
by introducing  with , we have
 
where  is the projector onto the kernel of 
, an -dimensional subspace in .
One can show that
  
and therefore the index of  is given by
 
The operators  and  are Toeplitz operators.

Now we reduce the equations of motion for the Lagrangian 
() to the space 
 by assuming that all fields depend only on
 and by taking  as the only nonvanishing 
components of the gauge potentials . To solve the reduced field
equations we consider  as  matrices with operator
entries and introduce the ansatz 
   
which solves the equation of motion for () 
.
More general solutions can also be constructed. For  the solution
() describes  vortices on 
.
In the case  it gives a solution for the
 Yang-Mills-Higgs model on .
Some noncommutative SW solutions (e.g. (), () 
with )
solve the above equations as well but for the gauge group
. These solutions can therefore be regarded as 
a new kind of tachyon solitons.

Noncommutative SW solitons. 
Note that the SW equations () with 
 coincide with the first order BPS equations for the
Lagrangian (), and therefore their solutions also satisfy 
the equations of motion for (). In particular,
the solution given by () with  and 
 is such a solution. Following the general logic of Sen's proposal,
it is natural to interpret this solution as a configuration of 
 stable -branes,
corresponding to the topologically stable codimension four SW soliton on a 
 brane pair.
 
The more general configuration described by ()
with  can be interpreted in two different ways. Firstly, we
may again choose . Then one can show that this
configuration satisfies the second order equations of motion for the 
Lagrangian () but does not satisfy the first order 
equations () with constant . This is natural since
this solution corresponds to a system of  -branes and 
-branes which is not a BPS configuration from the point
of view of the Lagrangian (). Secondly, one may consider
the situation where  depends on  and  on 
 and take as the low energy effective action the sum
of the functional () and the Chern-Simons term 
(), where
the latter contributes to the equations of motion for nonconstant
. Then for proper choices of  one can obtain configurations
which satisfy the noncommutative SW equations. For instance, the choice
 
corresponds to the same tachyon potential 
 as in (). However, for the
above choice of  the Chern-Simons term () becomes 
nontrivial
and contributes to the equations () which are the BPS
equations for the action  with  and 
determined by (). Therefore, for  given by 
()
the configuration () with  is a 
solution to the SW equations (). So, in both cases the
configuration () may be interpreted as 
-branes and  -branes. Other solutions
to the noncommutative SW equations can be analyzed similarly.
  


Concluding remarks 

In this paper we have discussed different noncommutative deformations
of the (perturbed) SW monopole equations on Euclidean 
four-dimensional space. Namely, starting from properly deformed 
self-duality type YM equations in eight dimensions, we performed a
reduction to  noncommutative SW equations on 
 with the matter field in the
adjoint representation of the gauge group. We then concentrated on the
  noncommutative SW equations with the 
matter in the bi-fundamental representation of 
. Perturbed versions of these
equations have also been discussed. Then, by considering the matter field
 as an element of a right or left -module,
we have introduced the (perturbed)  and  SW equations.
The commutative limits of all these three Abelian cases are identical to
the standard (perturbed) Abelian SW equations on .  
In summary we may write down the following diagram:

 

 & <8pc> self-duality type YM on  
 [d] 

 & <8pc> non-Abelian SW equations on   
 [dl][dr] 

 <8pc> ASDYM on   [d] &  &
 <8pc> SW equations on  
 [d] -> [r]   & <8pc> SW equations on 
  [d]

 <8pc>various integrable models on    
 & &<8pc> vortex equations on 
   -> [r]  & <8pc> vortex 
 equations on  
 
 
This picture shows the connection between the theories discussed in this
paper. Note that the noncommutative vortex equations in two dimensions
can easily be obtained via dimensional reduction from the noncommutative
SW equations with properly chosen perturbations.

It has been shown that 
supports regular finite-action solutions to the SW equations even if
there are no such solutions in the commutative case. This
is a well known phenomenon related to the fact that, due to the 
noncommutativity tensor , an additional length scale enters the
theory. We have constructed explicit solutions to the 
 and  noncommutative SW equations and
interpreted them as -brane configurations in type II superstring
theory. It would be illuminating to generalize the present results
to non-Abelian noncommutative SW theory and discuss the latter's
relation to superstring theory. 



Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to O.Lechtenfeld for useful comments. The work of
A.D.P. and A.G.S. was supported in part by the grants
DFG 436 RUS 113/669 and RFBR 02-02-04002. 
M.W. is grateful to the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes for 
financial support.
This work was done within the framework of the DFG priority 
program in string theory and supported by the grant Le 838/7.




Noncommutative Bogomolny transformation 

In order to derive () we need the trivial identities
 
where the covariant derivatives
 are given by
(). Furthermore, we have
 
Let us consider
 
This expression contains
 
 
Similarly,
 
with
 
 

A lengthy but straightforward 
calculation exploiting () and ()
yields for  the 
expression
 
where
 
 
and
 
The term  is given by
 
In a similar manner we also have
 
 
where
 
 
and
 
The term  is 
 
Therefore, we discover
 
Now suppose that all operators entering this formula 
are of proper trace-class, e.g.
  and 
. Then
 
since we can use the invariance of the trace under cyclic perturbations. 
In fact, one can easily check that for each term in () 
there exists a corresponding
term having the opposite sign so that the trace is indeed zero.

Finally we obtain
 
which is the desired result. Note that the choice  and
 yields the expressions () and () for the 
currents
. 



 99 


         E. Witten,
         Monopoles and four manifolds ,
         Math. Res. Lett.  1  (1994) 769
         [hep-th/9411102].



         E. Witten,
         Topological quantum field theory ,
         Commun. Math. Phys.  117  (1988) 353.



         N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
         Electric-magnetic duality, monopole 
         condensation, and confinement in  
         supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 426  (1994) 19
         [Erratum-ibid. B 430  (1994) 485]
         [hep-th/9407087];

         Monopoles, duality and chiral 
         symmetry breaking in  supersymmetric QCD ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 431  (1994) 484
         [hep-th/9408099].



         A. Bilal,
         Duality in  SUSY  Yang-Mills 
         Theory: A pedagogical introduction to the work of 
         Seiberg and Witten ,
         hep-th/9601007;

         W. Lerche,
         Introduction to Seiberg-Witten theory and 
         its stringy origin ,
         Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  55B  (1997) 83
         [Fortsch. Phys.  45  (1997) 293]
         [hep-th/9611190].



         K. Iga,
         What do topologists want from Seiberg-Witten 
              theory? ,
         Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17  (2002) 4463
         [hep-th/0207271].


        M. Marcolli,
        Seiberg-Witten gauge theory ,
        Texts and Readings in Mathematics Vol. 17, Hindustan 
        Book Agency (1999).

         S. Donaldson,
         An application of gauge theory to the topology 
         of four manifolds ,
         J. Differ. Geom. 18  (1983) 269;
         The orientation of Yang-Mills moduli spaces
         and -manifold topology ,
          J. Differ. Geom. 26  (1987) 397.

         V. Pidstrigach and A. Tyurin,
         Localisation of the Donaldson's 
              invariants along Seiberg-Witten classes ,
         dg-ga/9507004.

         S. B. Bradlow and O. G. Prada,
         Non-Abelian monopoles and vortices ,
         Geometry and physics, Aarhus (1995), 567
         [alg-geom/9602010]. 

         C. Okonek and A. Teleman,
         Recent developments in Seiberg-Witten theory and 
         complex geometry ,
         [alg-geom/9612015].


         J. M. Labastida and M. Marino,
         Non-Abelian monopoles on four manifolds ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 448  (1995) 373
         [hep-th/9504010];

         M. Marino,
         The geometry of supersymmetric gauge theories 
          in four dimensions ,
         hep-th/9701128.



         P. G. Freund,
         Dirac monopoles and Witten's monopole equations ,
         J. Math. Phys.  36  (1995) 2673
         [hep-th/9412208].



         S. Nergiz and C. Saclioglu,
         Liouville vortex and  kink solutions of 
               the Seiberg-Witten equations ,
         J. Math. Phys.  37  (1996) 3753
         [hep-th/9602088].



         C. Adam, B. Muratori and C. Nash,
         On non- solutions to the Seiberg-Witten 
              equations ,
         J. Math. Phys.  41  (2000) 5875
         [hep-th/0003125].



         M. Legare,
         Solutions of vanishing curvature non-Abelian 
         monopole equations ,
         Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17  (2002) 2501.



         N. Nekrasov and A. Schwarz,
         Instantons on noncommutative  
         and  superconformal six-dimensional theory ,
         Commun. Math. Phys.  198  (1998) 689
         [hep-th/9802068].



         E. Corrigan, C. Devchand, D. B. Fairlie and J. Nuyts,
         First order equations for gauge fields 
         in spaces of dimension greater than four ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 214  (1983) 452.



         L. Baulieu, H. Kanno and I. M. Singer,
         Special quantum field theories in 
         eight and other dimensions ,
         Commun. Math. Phys.  194  (1998) 149
         [hep-th/9704167].


         G. L. Naber,
         Topology, geometry and gauge fields ,
         Springer, Berlin (2000).

         J. D. Moore,
         Lectures on Seiberg-Witten invariants ,
         2nd edition, Springer, Berlin (2001).

         A. G. Sergeev,
         Vortices and Seiberg-Witten equations ,
         Nagoya Mathematical Lectures, Vol. 5, Nagoya University (2002).

         R. S. Ward,
         Completely solvable gauge field equations 
         in dimension greater than four ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 236  (1984) 381.


         D. B. Fairlie and J. Nuyts,
         Spherically symmetric solutions of gauge 
         theories in eight dimensions ,
         J. Phys. A 17  (1984) 2867;


          S. Fubini and H. Nicolai,
          The octonionic instanton ,
          Phys. Lett. B 155  (1985) 369;


          T. A. Ivanova and A. D. Popov,
          Self-dual Yang-Mills fields in , 
          octonions and Ward equations ,
          Lett. Math. Phys.  24  (1992) 85;

          (Anti-)self-dual gauge fields in dimension 
           ,
          Theor. Math. Phys.  94  (1993) 225;

          E. G. Floratos and G. K. Leontaris,
          World volume supermembrane instantons in 
          the light-cone frame ,
          math-ph/0011027.



         C. Vafa and E. Witten,
         A strong coupling test of S-duality ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 431  (1994) 3
         [hep-th/9408074].



         G. Bonelli, L. Bonora, S. Terna and A. Tomasiello,
         Instantons and scattering in  SYM in  ,
         hep-th/9912227.



         M. R. Douglas and N. A. Nekrasov,
         Noncommutative field theory ,
         Rev. Mod. Phys.  73  (2001) 977
         [hep-th/0106048].



         K. Furuuchi,
         Topological charge of  
         instantons on noncommutative  ,
         Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.  144  (2001) 79
         [hep-th/0010006].



         O. Lechtenfeld and A. D. Popov,
         Noncommutative 't Hooft instantons ,
         JHEP 0203  (2002) 040
         [hep-th/0109209].



         D. J. Gross and N. A. Nekrasov,
         Solitons in noncommutative gauge theory ,
         JHEP 0103  (2001) 044
         [hep-th/0010090].



         J. A. Harvey, P. Kraus and F. Larsen,
         Exact noncommutative solitons ,
         JHEP 0012  (2000) 024
         [hep-th/0010060].



         K. Hashimoto and H. Ooguri,
         Seiberg-Witten transforms of noncommutative 
         solitons ,
         Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 106005
         [hep-th/0105311].



         M. Hamanaka,
         Noncommutative solitons and -branes ,
         hep-th/0303256.



         K. Furuuchi,
         - in noncommutative Yang-Mills ,
         JHEP 0103  (2001) 033
         [hep-th/0010119].



         P. Kraus and M. Shigemori,
         Noncommutative instantons and the Seiberg-Witten 
              map ,
         JHEP 0206  (2002) 034
         [hep-th/0110035].



         N. A. Nekrasov,
         Lectures on open strings, and noncommutative 
         gauge fields ,
         hep-th/0203109.


         J. Bognar,
         Indefinite inner product spaces ,
         Springer, Berlin (1974).


         D. P. Jatkar, G. Mandal and S. R. Wadia,
         Nielsen-Olesen vortices in noncommutative 
         Abelian Higgs model ,
         JHEP 0009  (2000) 018
         [hep-th/0007078].



         D. Bak,
         Exact multi-vortex solutions in noncommutative 
         Abelian-Higgs theory ,
         Phys. Lett. B 495  (2000) 251
         [hep-th/0008204].


         A. Jaffe and C. Taubes,
         Vortices and monopoles ,
         Birkhauser (1980).


         E. Witten,
         -branes and -theory ,
         JHEP 9812  (1998) 019
         [hep-th/9810188].



         A. Sen,
         Non-BPS states and branes in string theory ,
         hep-th/9904207.



         K. Olsen and R. J. Szabo,
         Constructing -branes from -theory ,
         Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  3  (1999) 889
         [hep-th/9907140].



         K. Ohmori,
         A review on tachyon condensation in open 
         string field theories ,
         hep-th/0102085.



         W. Taylor,
         Lectures on -branes, tachyon 
         condensation, and string field theory ,
         hep-th/0301094.



         N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
         String theory and noncommutative geometry ,
         JHEP 9909  (1999) 032
         [hep-th/9908142].



         J. A. Harvey, P. Kraus, F. Larsen and E. J. Martinec,
         -branes and strings as noncommutative solitons ,
         JHEP 0007  (2000) 042
         [hep-th/0005031].



         I. Pesando,
         On the effective potential of the 
          system in type II  theories ,
         Mod. Phys. Lett. A 14  (1999) 1545
         [hep-th/9902181].



         C. Kennedy and A. Wilkins,
         Ramond-Ramond couplings on brane-antibrane 
         systems ,
         Phys. Lett. B 464  (1999) 206
         [hep-th/9905195].



         N. Berkovits,
         The tachyon potential in open Neveu-Schwarz 
         string field theory ,
         JHEP 0004  (2000) 022
         [hep-th/0001084].



         J. A. Harvey,
         Komaba lectures on noncommutative solitons 
         and -branes ,
         hep-th/0102076.



         N. Berkovits, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
         Tachyon condensation in superstring field theory ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 587  (2000) 147
         [hep-th/0002211].



         E. Gava, K. S. Narain and M. H. Sarmadi,
         On the bound states of - and 
         -branes ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 504  (1997) 214
         [hep-th/9704006].



         A. Dhar, G. Mandal, S. R. Wadia and K. P. Yogendran,
          system with -field, noncommutative 
         geometry and the CFT of the  Higgs branch ,
         Nucl. Phys. B 575  (2000) 177
         [hep-th/9910194];

         J. R. David,
         Tachyon condensation in the  system ,
         JHEP 0010  (2000) 004
         [hep-th/0007235].




         M. Aganagic, R. Gopakumar, S. Minwalla and A. Strominger,
         Unstable solitons in noncommutative gauge 
         theory ,
         JHEP 0104  (2001) 001
         [hep-th/0009142].



         P. Kraus and F. Larsen,
         Boundary string field theory of the 
          system ,
         Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 106004
         [hep-th/0012198].



         T. Takayanagi, S. Terashima and T. Uesugi,
         Brane-antibrane action from boundary string 
         field theory ,
         JHEP 0103  (2001) 019
         [hep-th/0012210].



         A. Sen,
         Supersymmetric world-volume action for 
         non-BPS -branes ,
         JHEP 9910  (1999) 008
         [hep-th/9909062].



         N. T. Jones and S. H. Tye,
         An improved brane anti-brane action 
         from boundary superstring field  theory and 
         multi-vortex solutions ,
         JHEP 0301  (2003) 012
         [hep-th/0211180].



         A. Sen,
         Dirac-Born-Infeld action on the 
         tachyon kink and vortex ,
         hep-th/0303057.


        M. F. Atiyah, R. Bott and A. Shapiro,
        Clifford modules ,
        Topology 3  (1964) 3.


         P. Horava,
         Type IIA -branes, -theory, and 
         matrix theory ,
         Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  2  (1999) 1373
         [hep-th/9812135].



         J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore,
         Noncommutative tachyons and -theory ,
         J. Math. Phys.  42  (2001) 2765
         [hep-th/0009030].



         E. Witten,
         Overview of K-theory applied to strings ,
         Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16  (2001) 693
         [hep-th/0007175].









