








 

Physical wavelets: Lorentz covariant, singularity-free, finite
  energy, zero action, localized solutions to the wave equation 

Matt VisserResearch supported by the 
Marsden Fund administered by the Royal Society of New Zealand 

School of Mathematical and Computing Sciences, 
Victoria University of Wellington, 
New Zealand.


E-mail: matt.visser@vuw.ac.nz   

Particle physics has for some time made extensive use of
  extended field configuations such as solitons, instantons, and
  sphalerons. However, no direct use has yet been made of the quite
  extensive literature on "localized wave" configurations developed
  by the engineering, optics, and mathematics communities. In this
  article I will exhibit a particularly simple "physical wavelet"
  - it is a Lorentz covariant classical field configuration that
  lives in physical Minkowski space. The field is everwhere finite and
  nonsingular, and has quadratic falloff in both space and time.  The
  total energy is finite, the total action is zero, and the field
  configuration solves the wave equation. These physical wavelets can
  be constructed for both complex and real scalar fields, and can be
  extended to the Maxwell and Yang-Mills fields in a straightforward
  manner. Since these wavelets are finite energy, they are guaranteed
  to be classically present at finite temperature; since they are zero
  action, they can contribute to the quantum mechanical path integral
  at zero "cost". 

Wavelet, localized wave, soliton, instanton, sphaleron 

hep-th/0304081 


d   
L   


Motivation 


While the particle physics community has for some time made extensive
use of extended field configurations such as solitons, instantons, and
sphalerons, no direct use has yet been made of the quite extensive
literature on "localized wave" configurations developed by the
engineering, optics, and mathematics communities. (For selected
references see .) These
localized waves are classical solutions of the wave equation that are
partially localized in space or time, this localization generally
coming at a cost such as infinite total energy and/or instability
(leading to dispersion or diffraction). The catalogue of known
localized waves is large and growing , but most of the known
examples are not in a form that would be easy to apply to particle
physics problems.

In this article I will exhibit a particularly simple "physical
wavelet" that is more promising from a particle physics standpoint.
It satisfies the properties that:
 
  
It is a localized wave that solves the wave equation.
  
It is a Lorentz covariant classical field configuration that
  lives in physical Minkowski space.


The field is everywhere finite and nonsingular, and has quadratic
falloff in both space and time.
  
The total energy is finite, depending on the peak field and the
  width of the pulse.
  
The total action is zero.

These physical wavelets can be constructed for both complex and real
scalar fields. Extending these idea to the Maxwell and Yang-Mills
fields is straightforward. The simplest case is that of the complex
scalar field and it is to that case that I first turn.



Complex scalar field 


Let  be the Minkowski metric
[particle physics signature], let  be an arbitrary 4-vector, and
let  be arbitrary timelike 4-vector, then
 
is a Lorentz covariant, finite energy, zero-action solution of the
d'Alembertian wave equation .  The "center" of the
pulse is at  and its "width" is 
.  The field is everywhere finite and in fact
 
To see this, use the fact that  is timelike. Then, using the
manifest Lorentz covariance of the field configuration, we can without
loss of generality first translate , and then go into the
zero-momentum frame where
 
Then the field configuration is
 
That is
 
Once written in this form it is a straightforward exercise to verify
that the wave equation is satisfied.  To see that the field is
everywhere bounded note
 
From  the penultimate inequality we also derive
 
demonstrating the promised quadratic falloff in both space and time.
Indeed for fixed  the magnitude of the field is maximized when
 
showing that the configuration disperses to spatial infinity at both
.

To calculate the 4-momentum, we remind the reader that the
stress-energy tensor for a massless complex scalar is
 
Then
 
which vanishes by the equations of motion. But this means that
 
is a conserved quantity, the 4-momentum of the configuration, which is
independent of the particular spacelike hypersurface  chosen to
do the integration. By simple dimensional analysis
 
where  is a dimensionless number to be calculated. [Note that
 has the dimensions of a position vector - a distance.]
The energy density is
 
and in the zero-momentum frame is easily calculated to be
 
For arbitrary  this integrates to 
 
(This is independent of  as it should be.)  This is the invariant mass
of the field configuration.  By spherical symmetry, the total momentum
is zero.  Thus, for any timelike 
 
Furthermore the Lagrangian is
 
which evaluates (in the zero-momentum frame) to
 
It is easy to check that
 
so that the configuration is zero action.


In summary, what we have is a Lorentz covariant, singularity-free,
finite energy, zero action, exact localized solution to the
d'Alembertian equation.  In many ways this configuration has more
right to be called an "instanton" than do the instantons of QFT;
those instantons live in Euclidean signature. This field configuration
lives in real physical time.

Now the fact that there are finite energy solutions to the wave
equation is not a surprise; that these finite energy solutions can
coalesce, bounce, and disperse without producing field singularities
is more interesting. One way of guessing that the field configuration
in equation () is worth investigating is the following:
It is easy to convince oneself that in 4 Euclidean dimensions the
solution to Laplace's equation with a delta function source at the
origin is
 
Thus in (3+1) Lorentzian dimensions the [singular] solution to the
wave equation with a delta function source at the origin is
 
If the source is now moved to a real position  we have
 
which is still a singular field configuration. Finally, move the
source away from physical Minkowski space to the complex position
, then
 
which is essentially equation () above.  This style of
approach has been particularly advocated by Kaiser . As
we have just seen, if  is timelike the resulting field
configuration is singularity free.  However, for null and spacelike
, while the field is still a solution of the wave equation,
the field is not bounded.  Because of the singularities the energy and
action integrals then diverge. Details are deferred for now and will
be presented in sections  and  below.

One should also note that in the optics and engineering literature the
most commonly used notations are not manifestly Lorentz covariant.
Thus it is common to see expressions such as
 
(see, for instance,) whose Lorentz transformation
properties are less than obvious - in fact this field configuration
is equivalent to equation () with the identification
 




Real scalar field 




By taking real and imaginary parts of the complex solution above we
can write down two solutions for the real scalar field. Namely
 
 
As previously, we can without loss of generality translate 
and go to the zero-momentum frame , then
 
 
The stress-energy for a real scalar field simplifies
 
Then
 
which vanishes by the equations of motion. The calculation for the
energy-momentum 4-vector now yields:
 
The action integral for both of these field configurations is still
zero. [.]


Maxwell field 


A similar construction can be performed for the Maxwell field. There
are a number of choices one could make, and I will simply pick one
that leads to a relatively simple field configuration. Start by
picking a timelike 4-velocity  and a spacelike unit vector 
orthogonal to it. Now adopt the ansatz

 

Here one is automatically in Lorenz gauge , 
, and the Maxwell equations reduce to the wave equation
 for the scalar potential . The field
configuration is manifestly Lorentz covariant and we can without loss
of generality go to the inertial frame where

 

In this inertial frame

 

where  is a constant unit vector. We shall soon see that this
is tantamount to working in the zero-momentum frame of the field
configuration.  The electric field is

 
where we have used the wave equation for . The magnetic field is
 
The energy density and momentum flux (Poynting vector) are
 
To evaluate total energy and momentum a useful integration by parts
(subject to suitable falloff at spatial infinity) is

 
Consequently
 
Now let us assume the potential  is spherically symmetric
. Then averaging over angular variables is the same as
averaging over orientations of the unit vector  and under the
angular integral we can effectively replace
 
Consequently

 

Similarly

 

Again invoking spherical symmetry for  we have

 

Therefore
 
so the total energy is sensibly positive.  Before making further
choices regarding the potential , consider the total momentum
 
Integration by parts implies
 
so that the net momentum is zero.  For the action, an integration by
parts together with the equations of motion yields
 
So we still have a zero action solution.

Up to now the potential  has only needed to be spherically
symmetric and to satisfy the wave equation (plus some falloff
constraint at spatial infinity to allow the integration by parts). The
general solution to the wave equation in spherical symmetry is

 
Returning to the energy  as given in equation
(), a further integration by parts, together with the
wave equation for  yields the computationally convenient form
 
Whence
 

Which verifies that the energy is constant in a model-independent
manner. Furthermore if  is smooth and satisfies suitable falloff
conditions at  then the wavelet will be nonsingular and
of finite energy.

To obtain a specific example it only remains to finish the complete
specification of the potential . One particularly simple
choice is to take one of the real scalar wavelets of the previous
section , with 
. Since the electric and magnetic fields are now specified in
terms of derivatives of a smooth bounded function, the electromagnetic
field is similarly smooth and bounded.  For the energy, write it in
the form
 
Whence, for either , an integration carried out at
arbitrary  yields the time-independent quantity
 
The calculation has for convenience been carried out in the
zero-momentum frame of the wavelet. In a general Lorentz frame we
would have
 
Thus this field configuration, as for the scalar case, is Lorentz
covariant, bounded, finite energy and zero action. The vector nature
of the Maxwell field has added technical complications, but there is
no real change in basic principles.

Aside:  
In closing this section, I should mention one other wavelet that is
particularly attractive. If one makes use of the pseudo-differential
operator  one could write
 
With this choice of  the energy integral simplifies
 
The price paid for making the energy look simple is that the electric
and magnetic fields are much more complicated to calculate.

Comment:   
Because the optics and engineering literature generally does not use
manifestly Lorentz covariant notation, it can be very time consuming
to calculate the 4-momentum of a specific pulse. Indeed only very
recently  has Lekner provided specific and explicit
computations of both  and  (as well as the
angular momentum) for a pulse similar to that considered above. As
expected (once one has the covariant perspective advocated in this
article) , indicating the existence of a
zero-momentum frame for the pulses of this type .


Yang-Mills field 


Once we have the Maxwell wavelet above, a Yang-Mills wavelet is
straightforward, indeed trivial. Let  be any
constant matrix in the center of the gauge group and set 
. The construction is so simple that there
is really nothing extra beyond the Maxwell wavelet considered above.


Null  



Let us now return to the original scalar complex wavelet.  Suppose the
4-vector  is null. Then because the numerator vanishes
identically the original definition above gives . We
should at a minimum change our field definition to read
 
Then without loss of generality we go into the frame
 
and then
 
That is
 
Note
 
The denominator now vanishes when  and , so that the field
is divergent on the beam axis. Suppose we write 
then
 
So we see that the field drops off as  as we move away from the
beam axis. [And more critically, the field blows up as  as we
approach the beam axis.] Attempts at calculating the energy and action
now lead to divergent integrals.  In other words, despite the fact
that it still solves the wave equation, for null  this is not a
particularly useful field configuration.


Spacelike  



Foe the complex scalar wavelet, suppose the 4-vector  is
spacelike. Then without loss of generality we go into the infinite
velocity frame where
 
and then
 
That is
 
Note
 
The denominator now vanishes when  and .  That
is, the field is divergent on a time-dependent circle orthogonal to
the beam axis. There is a short distance singularity as one approaches
this circle, and the energy and action integrals diverge.  In other
words, despite the fact that it still solves the wave equation, for
spacelike  this is not a useful field configuration.


Discussion 


The physical wavelet discussed in this article is important because it
represents a qualitatively different extended field configuration of a
type not normally encountered in particle physics. The wavelet is
neither a soliton, nor an instanton, nor a sphaleron though it
shares properties with all three of these extended objects:

 

Like the soliton it lives in physical time (Minkowski space, not
  Euclidean space), and possesses a well-defined 4-velocity.

Like the instanton it "dies away" in the infinite past and future.
  
Like the instanton it possesses a continuously adjustable scale
  parameter.

Like the sphaleron it is unstable to dispersal.

Because the wavelet fields are bounded and finite energy, wavelet
configurations will   be classically excited at any finite
temperature. Because the wavelet configuration has zero action,
arbitrarily complicated combinations of these physical wavelets can be
added to the field configurations appearing in Feynman's path integral
without modifying the phase - quantum mechanically there is no
"cost" in adding these configurations to the Lorentzian path integral
and they will   contribute.

Other "localized waves" might be interesting in specific
applications but the particular example discussed in this article is
important because of its extreme simplicity and pleasant behaviour.





I wish to thank John Lekner for stimulating my interest in these
issues. I also wish to thank Damien Martin for bringing the whole
Lorenz/Lorentz issue to my attention.



 99 


R. W. Ziolkowski, 
"Exact solutions of the wave equation with complex source locations",
J. Math. Phys. 26  (1985) 861-863.

M. K. Tippet and R. W. Ziolkowski, 
"A bidirectional wave transformation of the cold plasma equations",
J. Math. Phys. 32  (1991) 488-492.

J. Lu and J. F. Greenleaf,
"Nondiffracting X waves - exact solutions to free-space 
scalar wave equation and their finite aperture realizations",
IEEE Transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, 
39  (1992) 19-31.

J. Lu, H. Zou, and J. F. Greenleaf,
"A new approach to obtain limited diffraction beams",
IEEE Transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, 
42  (1995) 850-853.

G. Kaiser,
"Physical wavelets and their sources: Real physics in complex spacetime,"
arXiv:math-ph/0303027.


J. Lekner,
"Electromagnetic pulses which have a zero momentum frame",
submitted to J. Opt. A, 21 November 2002; arXiv:physics/0304022.

 Field configurations similar to the one considered in
  this article may variously be encountered under names such as:
  "localized waves", "focus wave modes", "pulses", "X-waves",
  "limited diffraction beams", "wavelets", and "physical
  wavelets".
  
 The Lorenz gauge was apparently first used by the
  Danish physicist Ludwig Lorenz (1829-1891), though it is commonly
  misattributed to the Dutch physicist Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
  (1853-1928).


L.  Lorenz, 
"On the Identity of the Vibrations of Light with Electrical Currents",
Philos. Mag. 34  (1867) 287-301. 


J. van Bladel, "Lorenz or Lorentz?", 
IEEE Antennas Prop. Mag. 33  (1991) 69. 







