1.5pt     
e  

20ptDIAS-STP-03-02 

The Spectrum of the Dirac Operator on Coset Spaces
with Homogeneous Gauge Fields 
Brian P. Dolan

Dept. of Mathematical Physics, NUI, Maynooth, Ireland

and 

School of Theoretical Physics, 
Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies,
 
10 Burlington Rd., Dublin 8, Ireland

bdolan@thphys.may.ie 
 

 
The spectrum and degeneracies of the Dirac operator are analysed
on compact coset spaces when there is a non-zero homogeneous 
background gauge field
which is compatible with the symmetries of the space, in particular
when the gauge field is derived from the spin-connection.
It is shown how the degeneracy of the lowest Landau level
in the recently proposed higher dimensional quantum Hall effect
is related to the Atiyah-Singer index theorem for
the Dirac operator on a compact coset space.



Introduction 


There has long been a fruitful interplay between
condensed matter physics and field theory in
particle physics, many concepts that were first
developed in the former later being applied
to the latter and vice versa.  The quantum Hall effecthas attracted the interest of many high energy
theorists, not least because the fractional QHE
exhibits collective excitations which mimic a fractional
electric charge, but also because there are deeper connections between
the Hall effect and string theory.
Recently Zhang and Hu proposed a higher
dimensional analogue of the quantum Hall effect, on ,
based on Haldane's description of the Hall effect on
 with a magnetic monopole at the centre,
.  Zhang and Hu's idea was developed further in
 and extended 
to complex projective spaces in.
The connection between the higher dimensional quantum Hall effect
and string theory was analysed in.

The higher dimensional quantum Hall effect
involves a generalisation of the Landau problem to particles
moving on a compact coset space ,
in the presence of a background gauge field: 
such as a  monopole on  or a homogeneous 
 instanton field on .  A common ingredient of the
these analyses is the calculation of the degeneracy of the ground state 
for particles moving
in a homogeneous background, i.e. a background field which
has the symmetry of the isometry group .  In previous
works, and in  this paper also, the gauge group will be
restricted to be the holonomy group  (or a factor group
of same if  is a product of smaller groups).

In the degeneracy of the ground state
was calculated using group theory: the non-relativistic Hamiltonian for 
a spinless
particle moving in a homogeneous background field
involves the quadratic Casimirs of the groups  and 
and the allowed states involve irreducible representations of 
that contain pre-ordained representations of . The dimension
of the representation of  corresponding to the ground state
is identified with the degeneracy of the ground state. 

It is common in discussions
of the quantum Hall effect to ignore the electron's spin.
Zhang and Hu treated scalar particles satisfying the exclusion
principle, as did Karabali and Nair:
this is perfectly justified when the Zeeman splitting 
is large enough that transitions between spin
states can be ignored and the ground state is effectively
isolated from the next highest spin state.  
Nevertheless one is tempted
to ask what is the role of electron spin in the
higher dimensional quantum Hall effect, and it will
be argued here that there is an important quantitative relic
of the Fermionic nature of the particles in the degeneracy
of the ground state, over and above the trivial
consequences of the exclusion principle.
It is shown in section 2 that
the degeneracies calculated in,
for ,  and  respectively, are related to the
index of the Dirac operator for Fermions moving in the appropriate
background field: in fact the degeneracy is the number of zero-modes 
of the Dirac operator and, generically, this is the modulus
of the index.  Furthermore the ground state wave-functions, the
higher dimensional analogues of the Laughlin wave-functions,
are precisely the zero-modes of the Dirac operator.

We do not have to look far to discover the reason for this - the
square of the Dirac operator
is nothing other than the Hamiltonian 
for a non-relativistic Fermion moving in a static background field,
 
where  is the Ricci scalar and
the last term represents the Zeeman splitting.
(There is an extra term on the right hand side of ()
if the spin connection involves torsion, this equation must therefore
be modified for
non-symmetric coset spaces with torsion as considered in section 3.)
Thus a non-relativistic particle moving in a static
background magnetic field is
an example of supersymmetric quantum mechanics with a self-dual
pre-potential.
Since the Dirac operator is Hermitian, the eigenvalues of the
Hamiltonian () are positive semi-definite and a zero-mode
requires exact cancellation of all three terms on the right hand side.
It is shown in sections 2 and 3 
that, for specific homogeneous background fields
(analogues of monopole and instanton fields on  and )
all three terms on the right hand side of () are
mutually commuting and so can be simultaneously diagonalised
so that all spin components decouple from each other.
The Dirac Laplacian  
is itself a positive operator on a compact space with positive curvature, 
so a zero-mode
of the Dirac operator, if one exists,
requires a cancellation of the lowest eigenvalue
of the Laplacian with the lowest eigenvalue of the sum of
curvature and Zeeman terms on the
right hand side of ().
In fact, for the homogeneous background fields that are considered
here, the eigenvalues of () can be determined purely in terms
of certain quadratic Casimirs of the isometry group  and the 
holonomy group  and are given by equation () or, 
more generally, ().

Even without calculating the full spectrum 
it is possible to find the representation of  with
the lowest eigenvalue
for any Fermion in a given representation of the gauge group.
If the chosen representation of the gauge group allows 
for a zero-mode of the Dirac operator then
the dimension of the representation corresponding to the
lowest eigenvalue generically gives the 
number of zero-modes.  Since this
calculation involves only the lowest eigenvalue of the Zeeman and the
curvature terms, which are fixed in advance, the Fermionic
nature of the particles can be ignored and the problem reduces
to choosing the correct representations of  to scan in
minimising the Laplacian. This is precisely what was done
in and.

The net result is that the number of zero-modes of the Dirac
operator, for Fermions in a given representation of the
gauge group, can be calculated simply from a knowledge of the
quadratic Casimirs of  and the decompositions of its
representations under .
This generalises the results of andto the quantum hall effect on any coset space  with compact
Lie groups  and .

Of course an analysis of the spectrum of the Dirac operator
is of intrinsic interest, even without reference to the
quantum Hall effect.  In particular it is of obvious importance
in Kaluza-Klein theories and and string theory. 

The layout of the paper is as follows.  In section 2 the case
of symmetric spaces  is treated in detail and it is shown
how the eigenvalues
of the Dirac operator in the presence of a homogeneous
background gauge field can be expressed in terms of quadratic
Casimirs  and .  The examples
of ,  and  are worked out and compared to
known results.  Section 3 extends the analysis to non-symmetric
spaces with torsion and the example of 
is treated in detail - this space is of interest in string
theory where it is arises in the context of seven dimensional spaces
with  holonomy and their conical singularities.
Section 4 gives a summary of the results.
Some technical details are relegated to three appendices:
appendix A reviews aspects of the geometry of homogeneous spaces
used in the text.  Appendix B presents the
spectrum of the Dirac operator on , in the presence
of a homogeneous background  gauge field.
Appendix C presents a
standard analysis of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem on
 for comparison with the
results of section 3.

Symmetric Spaces 

Consider the Dirac operator for a Fermion moving on a 
-dimensional compact space, without
boundary, in the presence of a background gauge field:
 
where  is the spin connection,
 the gauge connection and  
are generators of the gauge group ( are
orthonormal indices and  is a co-ordinate index). 
The -matrices satisfy the usual
Clifford algebra,
 
and  are -beins for the metric.
The curvature and field strength follow from
 
For a torsion free connection squaring the Dirac operator gives
 
with  the Dirac Laplacian.
We shall refer to  as the kinetic
 energy
and 
 as the Zeeman
energy.
The Laplacian here is the Laplacian acting on spinors, including the spin and
the gauge connection, so its spectrum depends on both the metric and 
the background field.  

On a coset space , with  and  compact groups,
it is natural to use the -invariant metric, for which the generators of 
are Killing vectors and the holonomy group is .  
Furthermore we shall consider background gauge fields which are compatible with 
the isometries, in the sense that Lie transport of the field strength  by
a Killing vector  generates a gauge transformation,
 
where , the group of gauge transformations. 
In particular this will be the case if we identify the gauge group with the
holonomy group and the gauge connection with the spin connection - the
details of this identification are given in appendix A.  (A variation on
this is if the holonomy group factorises into simple groups and  factors.
When this is the case the gauge group can be taken to be one of the factors.
For example this is the
situation for the homogeneous  instanton on , where 
and, at the level of the algebras,  so we can take
the gauge group to be just .)

Let  be the generators of the isometry group , with ,
and  the generators of the holonomy group .
Then the curvature 2-forms of the -invariant metric for a symmetric 
space are (see appendix A),
 
Identifying the gauge connection with the spin connection gives rise to the
field strength,
 
For a symmetric space the Riemann tensor is co-variantly 
constant and this means that the
above field strength is co-variantly constant,
 
In particular the Laplacian commutes with the Zeeman term in the Hamiltonian.

With this choice of background field the commutator () simplifies,
 
Now 
 
are a representation
of the gauge group (which may be reducible, in general),
 
so 
 
with
 
being the generators of  in the tensor product representation of
 with the spinor representation .
This allows the Laplacian to be expressed as the difference of quadratic Casimirs,
 
For spinors in a given representation  of the gauge group 
in this expression is always calculated in the fixed
representation (),
which in general involves reducible representations of ,
while the representations used in  
range over all irreducible representations
of  than contain ().
In particular the cross-term  from  
in () exactly cancels
the Zeeman energy in () and, as described in
appendix A, the second order Casimir for the representation 
is related to the Ricci scalar by .
The eigenvalues of the square of the Dirac operator () 
can then be expressed purely in terms of quadratic Casimirs:
 

This construction will now be illustrated with some examples.
i)  

This was the geometry originally studied by Haldane in the
context of the quantum Hall effect.
The isometry group is generated by the algebra of 
 
and we are free to choose  to generate the 
holonomy. Formula () of appendix A gives
 
so 
 
are the curvature 2-forms for a sphere of unit radius.
Also
 
is the field strength if a magnetic monopole at the centre of the sphere.
Actually this corresponds to a monopole of charge 2, since
 
is the Chern class of the tangent
bundle (which is equal to the Euler characteristic).
In general we can put a monopole of any integral charge at the centre
of the sphere
 
(Alternatively we can work with a monopole of charge 2 and consider
Fermions of any half-integral charge in this background.) 

Choosing  and , with  and
 Pauli matrices,  we have
 
The Ricci scalar for a sphere of unit radius is 2, so equation 
() gives
 
For positive  this
indicates that there are spin down zero-modes of the Dirac operator
if
 
while for negative  there are spin up zero-modes
if
 
There are of course no zero-modes for  as required by
Lichnerowicz theorem.

In this example  of () is just a number, ,
and  is  
so 
 
The eigenvalues of the Laplacian () are therefore
 
as discussed in,
so eigenvalues of () are 
 
which can also be obtained directly from ().
For  this reproduces the well-known result that the
spectrum of the Dirac operator is linear in angular momentum
(see e.g.).

For  the representations  of  that appear in a harmonic
expansion of  are restricted to those that contain the 
 representation of charge ,
i.e.  with  a non-negative integer,
 
There are zero-modes for ,
and  for positive  or
 for negative .
In either case the degeneracy of the ground state is
 
which is the number of zero-modes of the
Dirac operator.  Note the shift of  away from 
by , due to the intrinsic spin of the Fermion.

The degeneracy () relates to the Atiyah-Singer index theorem which states that
the the index of the Dirac operator is minus the first Chern class
,
 
where  is the number of positive chirality zero-modes
and  the number
of negative chirality zero-modes.
Indeed the ground state wave-functions infor the integer quantum Hall effect, spherical analogues of the
Laughlin wave-functions, are precisely these zero-modes.
The case   corresponds to ,
in this case the gauge connection exactly cancels the spin connection
for the relevant chirality and single zero-mode
of the Dirac operator is a constant spinor.


The above calculation can be represented graphically
using Young tableaux, which will be useful in more complicated situations
to follow.
The fundamental of  decomposes as
 
Denoting  by ()
and  by () 
the -dimensional irreducible representation of  contains
 
 
with .  Fixing the  charge to be  constrains  
so . The ground state energy for a Fermion in this
background can now be
found by minimising , since all the other terms in the
energy are constants for fixed , that is by minimising
 
If  this is minimised by , so  and the
degeneracy of the ground state is .
If  it is minimised by   and then , so the
degeneracy is .  In either case the ground state has 
 and the degeneracy
is .  Clearly  and the  charge 
is not just the monopole charge , but includes a shift to
account for the intrinsic spin of the Fermion, .

This method, using representation theory to describe the kinetic
energy and calculate the degeneracy of the
ground state, was used in:
though in that reference the particles were treated as scalars
so there was no intrinsic spin - there was therefore no Zeeman
energy to make the total ground state energy vanish and no shift in the
charge to account for the intrinsic spin of the particles.
The technique is however applicable to both the 
Laplacian for scalars and the
square of the Dirac operator because, for a given gauge background
and representation,
they only differ by constants.  It has the advantage of avoiding 
an explicit calculation
of the full eigenvalue spectrum of the Dirac operator.

ii)  

The next example, , was the case studied in the
first paper on the higher dimensional quantum Hall effect,.
In this case the algebra of the holonomy group is 
and we can take the gauge group to be just one  factor.
The Riemann tensor can be split into self-dual and anti-self-dual
parts and these correspond to the curvatures arising from the
two  factors of the holonomy group.  Choosing, for example, the
self-dual  factor the resulting 
 background gauge field
is the homogeneous instanton of charge one, which has
 symmetry on  (this paper
was published a little after the BPST instanton, 
but the techniques
are very enlightening and highlight the analogy with the
Wu-Yang monopole - Yang calls this homogeneous instanton
configuration a non-abelian monopole).

Representations of  can be labelled by two integers
 and  with .  The second order Casimir and dimension
are given by
 
and
 
respectively.

Now suppose we have a particle on  in the representation  of
 in the background of a homogeneous instanton.
Demanding that an  irreducible representation contains
the  of  implies 
and so
 
The Ricci scalar for the unit four-sphere is  so
the eigenvalues () of  for a Fermion in the representation
 of the gauge group are thus

 
(The factor of two in front of the gauge Casimir  here is due
to the fact that the Dirac operator is non-chiral,
the holonomy group is , and both chiralities
couple to the gauge group in the same way.)
The total isospin  is a combination of the gauge isospin 
and the intrinsic spin of the Fermion, , so the
energy levels are labelled by the integer  and
 
both with degeneracies  
 

The spectrum of the Dirac operator on  has already been studied in the
literature.  With , so , () reduces to
 
The eigenvalues of the Dirac operator itself are therefore linear
in  and reproduce the result of, with 
in their notation.

Zero-modes of the Dirac operator require  and 
so that  has vanishing eigenvalue, .
The degeneracy of this ground state is
 
and these are precisely the degeneracies found infor the ground state of the higher dimensional quantum Hall effect
on .  This can be related to the index of the Dirac operator.
Recall that the  instanton
in the  representation can be represented by the field strength
 
and ,  being 
-dimensional matrices
(see for example).
The index of the Dirac operator for a Fermion in the -representation
of the gauge group  is then
 
since the unit  has volume 
.  This agrees with the degeneracy of the ground state 
() if
 
The representation  again includes the intrinsic spin of the
Fermion:  is in the tensor product of the  with the  in
().  Thus  can give  and
the single zero-mode of the Dirac operator 
for a Fermion in the fundamental representation
of  is a constant spinor on  because the gauge connection
again exactly cancels the spin connection in this case.
The analogues on  of the Laughlin-Haldane wave-functions on 
are constructed in by taking anti-symmetrised products
of the zero-modes of the Dirac operator in the instanton background
with .
iii)  

Our final example of a symmetric space is .  This is not
a spin manifold, there is a topological obstruction to defining
spinors on this space, but spinors can exist if they are
coupled to an appropriate background gauge field.
The gauge group is taken to be  and the representations
are labelled by the isospin  and the hypercharge .
Representations of  which contain the  representation
of  are easily found. 
Under  the  and  
decompose as 
 
Let (), 
(),
(,) and 
(,).
A general irreducible representation of  can be labelled
by two integers  and  and it contains
 
with , .  
The second order Casimir and dimension are
 
and
 
respectively.
Furthermore there are constraints
 
 for 
to contain .  
This means that 
the allowed states are labelled by two integers, as first noted in 
.  Note that  is odd if  is half-integral and
even if  is integral.

The full spectrum of the square of the Dirac operator is given
in appendix B, here we shall concentrate on the zero-modes.
There are two cases to consider:  and  :
 
For  equations () and () 
indicate that there are zero-modes with degeneracy
   
For  equations () and ()
indicate that there are zero-modes with degeneracy
   
For  equation () agrees with the degeneracy of the
lowest Landau level for a scalar field derived in.
Although () differs from the corresponding expression
for scalars in, it agrees for ,
which is the limit used in their analysis.

But now
equation () can be compared with known results for the Dirac index
on .
For  we have a  bundle with  even and
 
while the index is  
with  the  charge of the Fermion, including a spin
contribution.
So  requires , while  requires .
 implies  and
is the so-called spin structure, where the spin exactly cancels the
monopole charge.  For the particular cases  and  there are
generically no zero-modes of the Dirac operator.

For  we have a rank-2 vector bundle with  odd and
 
while the index is 
So  when  and  when .  For  or 
there are again generically no zero-modes.   has 
and so degeneracy ; it is therefore a singlet of  
and requires  and : the Fermion spin cancels against the isospin
and monopole charge
(analogous to  in ()).

Non-symmetric Spaces 

On a non-symmetric coset space the analysis of section 2 requires some
minor modifications.  On non-symmetric spaces
there is a natural spin connection  which has torsion, as
described in appendix A, and equation () is 
modified to
 
because  when there is torsion.
Indeed for non-symmetric coset spaces there is a spin connection with
 
where
 
are the torsion 2-forms.  The connection involving torsion is
used here because the resulting curvature tensor 
 
is co-variantly
constant with this connection, as shown in appendix A.  This means
that at least the first three terms on the right hand side of equation 
() are mutually commuting and simultaneously
diagonalisable.

Identifying the gauge connection with the spin connection now gives the
same expression as for symmetric spaces
 
and we see that
 
is related to .
Furthermore
 
commutes with ,  and  (the last because 
is co-variantly constant).
Now every term on the right hand side of ()
is mutually commuting and it reads
 

Paralleling the argument that led to ()
for symmetric spaces the eigenvalues can be expressed terms of Casimirs
 
This equation is more general than ()
and includes it as a special case,
because  for symmetric coset spaces.

As an illustration consider the space ,
which is of interest in string theory, where a seven dimensional space
with  holonomy can have a conical singularity on ,
.  We shall not calculate the full spectrum of the Dirac
operator here, but shall concentrate on the zero-modes.
There are two independent  gauge
fields and we can take "monopoles" of both, so the background
gauge field is labelled by two integers  and , which are the
hypercharge and the third component of isospin of a  irreducible
representation.  
Under
 
The  of  decomposes as
 
Let (), 
( ), 
(),
(, ).
Then (,) and 
(, ).
The ) representation of  contains
 
with , .  
Demanding that the  representation of  contains
the  representation of  puts
constraints on the six integers , namely
 
The  states that contain  are therefore 
labelled by four independent integers
(note that  and  are either both even or both odd).
If zero-modes of the Dirac operator exist, then their number
is given by the dimension of the  representation
which minimises the second order Casimir (),
subject to these constraints.  We find
* 
These two representations have dimensions
 
respectively.
Other combinations of signs follow from
* 
In summary the dimensions of the ground states are
* 
That these do indeed correspond to zero-modes can be established
by comparison with a more standard
analysis (as presented in appendix C for example): for 
fields with monopole charges  (hypercharge) and  
(third component of isospin), 
the index is ()
 
Clearly 
 
and
 
will do the trick
(either identification works when ).
This shift is again due to the intrinsic spin of the
Fermions contributing to the  charges.  

Conclusions 

In this paper the spectrum of the Dirac operator, for Fermions
coupled to topology non-trivial homogeneous 
background gauge fields on compact coset spaces
, has been determined purely in terms of quadratic Casimirs.
The spectra are obtained from (),
which reduces to () for symmetric spaces.
This is the central result.

It has been shown how the ground state degeneracies 
encountered in discussions of the
quantum Hall effect on , and its higher dimensional
generalisations to  and ,
are related to the Atiyah-Singer index
theorem for spinors on these spaces.
Physically the square of the
Dirac operator is the non-relativistic Hamiltonian
for a particle moving in a background "magnetic" field and consists
of a kinetic term and a Zeeman splitting term (at least for
zero torsion).
For spinors on a coset space  and gauge group 
,(Or a factor group if  is a product of Lie groups.) 
moving in a homogeneous background field identified with the natural spin
connection, the kinetic term and the Zeeman splitting term commute.
The Hamiltonian can then be diagonalised resulting in
a set of uncoupled spin states,
each of which can be treated independently.

If all we are interested in is zero-modes and the index theorem
it is not necessary to compute the whole spectrum.
If zero-modes of the Dirac operator exist the ground state
must be one in which the Zeeman energy exactly cancels the
kinetic energy and its degeneracy is the number of zero-modes.
Since the kinetic energy is positive-definite,
this cancellation requires a minimum of the quadratic Casimir corresponding
to the kinetic energy.  The degeneracy of the ground state is
then just the dimension of the representation of 
that minimises the quadratic Casimir - subject to the condition
that only representations of  that contain the representations
of  relevant to the spinor dynamics are considered.
Generically the number of zero-modes is the same as 
the modulus of index of the
Dirac operator, so this gives a method of calculating the
index just by using knowledge of the quadratic Casimir.

The construction is not one-to-one: there may be more than
one possible representation of the gauge group giving the same
number of zero-modes of Dirac operator.  For example on
 an  singlet with  has  which
is the same as for an  doublet with .
The complete spectrum of the Dirac operator on 
is given in appendix B.

The technique also works for non-symmetric space with torsion
and the example of  has been treated in detail.


Acknowledgements 

It is a pleasure to thank Charles Nash for useful discussions
on the Dirac operator and the Atiyah-Singer index theorem.


Appendix 

In this section we summarise the construction of
homogeneous connections and curvatures on coset spaces.
None of this material is new: the construction is well known
to mathematician's
.
The development here is based on the exposition for physicists in
.

On coset spaces , with  and  compact Lie groups and  simple,
the Riemann tensor can be obtained in terms of the
structure constants of .  
Denote the generators of  by , with the algebra
 
The set of generators  decomposes
into generators of , which
shall be denoted by , and the remaining generators, which
will be labelled .
Thus  takes on -values where  is the dimension
of .
The algebra of  now splits up as
 
The space  is called symmetric if ,
when this is the case the decomposition () is 
invariant under .

Orthonormal 1-forms for the group  can be chosen as the Cartan 1-forms,
 
so
 

Then the subset  are orthonormal 1-forms for the -invariant
metric on  and the remaining 1-forms  can be
expanded on  as .

The torsion free H -valued(For notational simplicity we do not
distinguish between the group and the algebra here.)  connection 

is then defined by
 
and evaluates to
 

The curvature 2-forms can then be calculated from
 
resulting in
 
On a symmetric space these reduce to the simpler form
 
so the Riemann tensor has components
 


On a non-symmetric space there is a second, very useful,
connection that comes from introducing a torsion tensor which is
identified with the non-symmetric structure constants:
 
giving torsion 2-forms
 
Then the connection with torsion is defined via
 
which leads to 
 
The resulting  curvature 2-forms are
 
giving curvature tensor 
 
The Ricci scalar for the connection with torsion
is then easily evaluated as
) 
which can be determined using the appropriate quadratic Casimirs of .

A particular instance of this is when  is trivial so .
Then  and 
, all co-variant
derivatives are trivial and  is called the 
parallelising torsion for .
On a symmetric space, of course, 
() and () are identical
because .

In fact it is not difficult to show, using (), ()
and the Jacobi identity, that 
 in () is co-variantly
constant,
 

On a generic -dimensional manifold the curvature
2-forms () are 
Lie algebra valued 2-forms, but on  both () and ()
are H  valued
2-forms, where .  This means that we can take
linear combinations of () 
that lie in H  without
losing any information.
For example, if  is semi-simple, taking the combination
 
suggests defining
 
and then  are H -valued 2-forms which are equivalent to
() (this formula is easily adapted to the case where
 contains  factors).

Appendix 

The calculation of the full spectrum of the Dirac operator
on  proceeds as follows.
For  the second order Casimir and dimension are
 
and
 
respectively.
With  and , as in the text,
the constraints read
 
where  is even (odd) for  integral (half-integral).
Now the spectrum depends on whether  or  :


 If  then :
in this case let , so ,  and 
,
for  a non-negative integer.
If  then :  in this case let
, so ,
 and , for  a non-negative integer.
In either case
 
For  in () take the  background
to have fixed charge  
and the  background to have
isospin , so 
 
(the  here is because the  gauge field is
a multiple of  to conform with the normalisation
of  in appendix C).
Finally the Ricci scalar for  can be evaluated from
() and
the structure constants in appendix C 
to be  so, putting all this together,
the eigenvalues of () are
 
while the degeneracies are
 
with  and  an integer.

It is important to understand how the gauge charges  and  
are related to the total charges 
 and  (which include the spin connection).
There are four cases to consider:
 
 and , these are states that couple to
the  part of the spin connection and not the  part (the
 relates to the fact that the first Chern class of the tangent
bundle for  is 3).  The spectrum is
 
For  singlets , so , this spectrum agrees with the
results of (in the
notation of that reference , so  or ).
 
 and , these are states that couple to
the  part of the spin connection and not the 
part.  The spectrum is  
 
For  only case 1 above allows for zero-modes (when ).
For  there are zero-modes in both cases.


 If , let ,
so .  Then: either  and ;
or  and . 
If , let ,
so .  Then: either  and ;
or  and .
In either case:
 
The eigenvalues of () are therefore
 
with degeneracies






 
where  and .
(The degeneracy is always an integer because of the restriction that
 is odd when  is half-integral and even if  is integral.)

Again there are four possibilities:
 
 and , 
 
 and , 
 
These eigenvalues are bounded below by zero and, for , 
only () allows for zero-modes (when ).
When  the spectrum agrees with equations 
()-(). 

Appendix 

In this section we give an explicit  evaluation of the index
of the Dirac operator on , using
standard differential-geometric techniques. 

Let ;  be the Gell-Mann matrices
for , so
 
and
 
In the notation of appendix A,  and ,
when 
 
are chosen as the  generators.  This space is
not symmetric, because some of the .
The curvature 2-forms, for the spin connection with torsion
described in appendix A, are 
* 
These are not independent, since ,
they are associated with two  field strengths:
* 
We extract  singlets by projecting out the top left-hand components
* 
A monopole field with charges  is a linear combination of
these
 
from which 
 
(we use the shorthand ).
The index of the Dirac operator is 
Explicit calculation reveals that , so
* 
where 
is the volume of .
The normalisation can be fixed by using the fact 
 has Euler characteristic
, so
 
this fixes  so
 
Note that  and  must be either both even or both odd for
 to be an integer.


 03 

 S.M. Girvin, "The Quantum Hall Effect: Novel Excitations 
and Broken Symmetries", Les Houches lectures (1998), (cond-mat/9907002)

 B.A, Bernevig, J. Brodie, L. Susskind and N. Toumbas,
JHEP  0102  (2001) 003, (hep-th/0010105)

 Shou-Cheng Zhang and Jiangping Hu,
Science  294  (2001) 823,
(cond-mat/0110572); Jiangping Hu and Shou-Cheng Zhang,
"Collective Excitations at the Boundary of a 4D
Quantum Hall Droplet", (cond-mat/0112432)

 F.D.M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett.  51  (1983)
605

 Yi-Xin Chen, Bo-You Hou and Bo-Yuan Hu,
"Non-commutative Geometry of 4-dimensional Quantum Hall Droplet", 
(hep-th/0203095);
B.A. Bernevig, Chyh-Hong Chern, Jian-Ping Hu, N. Toumbas and Shou-Chen Zhang,
"Effective field Theory Description of the Higher Dimensional Quantum Hall
Liquid", (cond-mat/0206164);
H. Elvang and J. Polchinski, "The Quantum Hall
Effect on , (hep-th/0209104);
Bo-You Hou and Dan-Tao Peng, "Incompressible Quantum Hall Fluid", 
(hep-th/0210173)

 D. Karabali and V.P. Nair, Nuc. Phys. 
B641  (2002) 533, (hep-th/0203264)

 M. Fabinger, "Higher-dimensional Quantum Hall
Effect and String Theory", (hep-th/0201016)

 F. Cooper, A. Khare and U. Sukhatme, 
Phys. Rep.  251  (1995), (hep-th/9405029)

 M. Atiyah and E. Witten, 

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  6  (2003) 1, (hep-th/0107177)


 A.P. Balachnadran, G. Immirzi, J. Lee and P. Pres najder, Dirac Operators on Coset Spaces",
(hep-th/0210297)

 T. Eguchi, P. Gilkey and A. Hanson, Phys. Rep.  66C  (1980) 213

 Chen Ning Yang, J. Math. Phys.  19  (1978) 320;
ibid.  19  (1978) 2622 

 A.A. Belavin, A.M. Polyakov, A.S. Schwartz and Y.S. Tyupkin,
Phys. Lett.  59B  (1975) 85

 S. Hawking and C. Pope, Phys. Lett.  73B  (1978) 42

 B.P. Dolan and C. Nash, 
JHEP  0207  (2002) 057, (hep-th/0207007)

 Shoshichi Kobayashi and
Katsumi Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry , (1963), (Wiley)

 A. Salam and Strathdee, 
Ann. of Phys.  141  (1982) 316
 L. Alvarez-Gaume and P. Ginsparg, Ann. Phys.  161 
(1985) 423

 H. Grosse and A. Strohmaier,  
Lett. Math. Phys.  48  (1999) 163 (hep-th/9902138)

