  
1l                               
  
  




gh  
sgh  
NS  
R  


                                                           
                                                           
                                                           

                       
150mm                                           
235mm                                          
-0.5 in                                         
5mm                                         
                                                           




                                                           


 


 Super QCD and Fractional Branes Franco Pezzella   
 INFN, Sezione di
Napoli and
 Dipartimento di
Scienze Fisiche, Universita di Napoli   Complesso Universitario Monte
S. Angelo, ed. G  - via Cintia -  I-80126 Napoli, Italy  
  
We show how to get the one-loop beta function and the 
chiral anomaly of  Super QCD from a stack of fractional  D3-branes localized 
inside the world-volume of  fractional D7-branes on the orbifold . They are obtained by analyzing the classical supergravity background generated by such a brane configuration, in the spirit of the gauge/gravity
correspondence.
Talk given at
the IXth International Symposium on Particles, Strings and Cosmology  PASCOS '03 ,
 Mumbai-India, January 3-8 2003.  

















Introduction 


This talk is based on the results of the paper, that goes in the direction of achieving a deeper understanding of the so-called gauge/gravity correspondence , originating from the complementarity  between two different but equivalent descriptions of the low-energy properties of D-branes. Indeed, on the one hand a D-brane can be described in terms of the gauge theory living on its world-volume; on the other hand
it is a classical solution of the ten-dimensional supergravity (low-energy string effective theory). Hence one can exploit the classical geometrical properties of -branes to get insight in the dual  gauge theory and viceversa.
This correspondence has led Maldacena to his famous 
conjecture, that provides an exact duality between a conformal and 
highly supersymmetric gauge theory and a (super)gravity theory. It is interesting to apply the gauge/gravity correspondence to less 
supersymmetric and non-conformal gauge theories by using fractional branes
 which live in an orbifold space, stuck at the orbifold fixed point.
We consider a bound state of  coincident fractional D3-branes and 
 fractional D7-branes on the orbifold 
 yielding  Super QCD with  fundamental hypermultiplet. The beta function and the chiral anomaly of this theory are reproduced by analyzing
the asymptotic behaviour of the classical supergravity solution. 
This is valid in the region
far from the brane, where the ultraviolet properties of the gauge theory 
are reproduced.



Fractional D-branes on the orbifold 
  

We consider fractional D3 and D7 branes on the orbifold
 in order to study the properties of 
 supersymmetric gauge theories. The orbifold group acts on the directions 
 transverse to the world-volume of the stack of the  D3-branes. 
The  group is characterized by two elements
,  with , hence the four elements of the
tensor product  are easily obtained. The non-trivial elements act on the complex vector 
of  as:

; 
; 

.
This orbifold is non-compact with the fixed point ,  
corresponding to the three  points ,  and  
each of them associated to a vanishing two-cycle  
with . 
The low energy Type IIB superstring theory spectrum
consists of an untwisted  and three twisted  sectors 
generated by its -form fields dimensionally reduced on the three vanishing two-cycles 
   (). A fractional D-brane can be regarded
as a D-brane wrapped on the vanishing two-cycles and, being stuck
at the orbifold fixed point, it couples to all twisted states. The 
Chan-Paton factor accompanying any state of the open string string stretched
between two fractional branes
transforms according to an irreducible (one-dimensional) representation of the orbifold group. 
This means that we have four different kinds of fractional D-branes on this orbifold.
We can get a pure   SYM with gauge group  
by means of a stack of  fractional D3-branes of the same kind. In order to get matter in the fundamental representation
we consider a bound state of  fractional D3-branes and  fractional
D7-branes of two different kinds, in equal number. Chiral 
matter is
then provided by the open strings having one end attached to the D3-brane and the other one to the D7-brane. Physical states associated to these strings transform under the fundamental representation of the gauge group, while the number of D7-branes can be regarded as a flavor index. We have considered configurations in which the D7-branes extend in the
directions  i.e.
partially along the orbifold, while the D3-branes are in the
directions , completely localized in the
D7-brane world-volume. In this way we are able to study  super QCD
with  hypermultiplets. We have shown in that choosing 
 D7-branes yields a consistent gauge theory free from 
gauge anomalies.

Supergravity analysis of the dual gauge theory 

The two complementary ways of describing a D-brane 
can be related 
by studying its low-energy effective world-volume action in the supergravity 
background. If a fractional D-brane is thought as a D-brane wrapped on
the orbifold vanishing two-cycles, 
its world volume action reads:
 
where . 
Specializing this action for  and expanding it up to quadratic terms in
 one has:





where
 
These equations show the fundamental role played by the 
the twisted fields

 and ,
being  the volume form dual to the vanishing two-cycle .
The next step is to plug into eqs. () the supergravity 
background generated by the D3/D7 system. We have determined only 
the asymptotic
behaviour for large distances of the classical solution 
and this has been revealed sufficient for computing the gauge coupling 
constant and the  angle of  super QCD 
:




 
The coordinates  are holographically identified
with the scalar components   of the superfield  appearing
in the cubic superpotential 
. The scale transformation 
and the  one 

 induce on  the transformation , i.e.  
 and 
. These latter act on the gauge parameters as follows:
 
The first equation generates the one-loop -function of  Super QCD with
 hypermultiplets:



while the second one reproduces the chiral  anomaly.

Acknowledgemnts.  I would like to thank P. Di Vecchia, A. Liccardo, R. Marotta, F. Nicodemi, R. Pettorino and F. Sannino for useful discussions.


 99 
 
R. Marotta, F. Nicodemi, R. Pettorino, F. Pezzella and F. Sannino, JHEP 0209 (2002) 010. 
J. Maldacena, Adv. Theo. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231.
M. Bertolini, P. Di Vecchia and R. Marotta, hep-th/0112187 and references therein.


 
M. Bertolini, P. Di Vecchia, G. Ferretti and R. Marotta, 
Nucl. Phys. B630 (2002) 222; 
M. Bertolini, P. Di Vecchia, M. Frau, A. Lerda and R. Marotta, Nucl. Phys. 
B621 (2002) 157; R. Marotta and F. Sannino, Phys. Lett. B545 (2002) 162;

P. Di Vecchia, hep-th/0212162.
M. Bertolini, P. Di Vecchia, M. Frau, A. Lerda and R. Marotta, Phys. Lett. 
B540 (2002) 104; 
I. R. Klebanov, P. Ouyang and E. Witten, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 105007.











































































