


































.3ex   
.3ex   
.3ex   
.3ex   

#1  #2  (#4) #3 

Mod. Phys. Lett. A 
Nuovo Cimento 
Nucl. Phys. B 
Nucl. Phys. 
Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 
Phys. Lett.  B 
Phys. Rep. 
Phys. Lett. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 
Phys. Rev. D 
Z. Phys. C 
Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 
Prog. Theor. Phys. 
JHEP 
Euro. Phys. J. C 
JETP (USSR) 
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Piz. 
Trans. New York Acad. Sci. 
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 
Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 
Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 


TOKAI-HEP/TH-0301 


Flavor Symmetry Breaking in Strongly Coupled =1
Supersymmetric  Gauge Theory with  (to be published in Europhysics Letters (2003))  


Masaki Yasue  

yasue@keyaki.cc.u-tokai.ac.jp 

Department of Physics, Tokai University,

1117 Kitakaname, Hiratsuka,

Kanagawa 259-1291, Japan. 

April, 2003 
             




 
In the  gauge theory with  quarks for , its instanton effects indicate the signal of dynamical flavor symmetry breakdown of  to , which is not described by the conventional "magnetic" degree's of freedom.  It is argued that this breaking is well described by our effective superpotential consisting of "electric" quarks and gluons instead of monopoles of .  The low-energy particles include the Nambu-Goldstone superfields associated with this breakdown.  The proposed superpotential is found to exhibit the holomorphic decoupling property and the anomaly-matching property on a residual chiral  symmetry.

PACS: 11.15.Ex, 11.15.Tk, 11.30.Rd, 11.30.Pb 

                             

                              









It is well known that the physics of strongly coupled =1 supersymmetric (SUSY) gauge theories can be described by the  duality using the "magnetic" degrees of freedom instead of the "electric" degrees of freedom.  This description has been motivated by the great success of the  duality in  SUSY theories, where the "magnetic" degrees of freedom determine various properties of  physics. However, neither the appearance of the "magnetic" degrees of freedom can be readily understood inside  SUSY theories nor the meaning of the  duality is clear. The physics due to the  duality can be traced back to the corresponding physics due to the =2 duality.  Especially, the "electric" quarks and gluons in  SUSY theories are continuously deformed to the "magnetic" quarks and gluons in the corresponding  SUSY theories.  It is also known that  SUSY theories are too constrained to cover physics realized in all of  SUSY theories.  For example, supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics (SQCD) with -colors and -flavors exhibits the =1 duality only for  ( 3), where its phase is characterized as an interacting Coulomb phase.  It is, thus, obscure that SQCD with ()  really enjoys the  duality although it satisfies plenty of indirect consistency conditions including those from brane constructions in string theory.  The similar questioning on the validity of the  duality has lately appeared in  SUSY theories (with ) by demonstrating that physics near the Chebyshev point (known as a superconformal point) in explicitky broken  SUSY theories is found to be characterized by the presence of dynamical flavor symmetry breaking, which should be contrasted with the absence of flavor symmetry breaking in the =1 duality.  It is still possible to expect that the Chebyshev point may merge with the ordinary singular point in the exact  limit.

As an alternative description of the physics of strongly coupled =1 SUSY theories, which is not directly supported by the  duality, we have suggested to use Nambu-Goldstone superfields as low-energy degrees of freedom associated with dynamically flavor symmetry breaking. Namely, the suggested phase is described by confined "electric" quarks and gluons instead of "magnetic" quarks and gluons. The essence to make dynamical breakdown of flavor symmetry more visible in N=1 SUSY theories lies in the inclusion of a composite superfield () made of two chiral gauge superfields as well as mesons and baryons. This composite superfield has been excluded in the low-energy degrees of freedom because one can envision that it turns out heavy after the vacuum structure is determined.  But, it will correctly describe the instanton physics present in  SUSY theories and has been proved that our superpotentials constructed along this line of reasoning in fact reproduce the consistent vacuum with the instanton effects, where  (or ) quarks get heavy while others remain massless in the  (or ) SUSY theories with  (or ).  Furthermore, it has greatly helped us reveal the existence of the vacuum located away from the origin of a moduli space.  Of course, this new phase coexists with the one with the  duality as much as the same way that QCD with two flavors theoretically allows both phases with massless proton and neutron (corresponding to the "magnetic" description) as well as with pions (corresponding to the "electric" description) to exist.  

One may raise the objection stating that this kind of dynamical flavor symmetry breaking cannot occur in strong coupling SUSY gauge theories since the =1 duality description is valid and the emergence of the origin of moduli space forbids the presence of dynamical symmetry breaking.  In this paper, we would like to show affirmative discussions on the presence of the flavor symmetry breaking, thus located away from the origin of moduli space, in the  theory with  along the above line of thought, which should be contrasted with the absence of the flavor symmetry breaking based on the =1 duality, utilizing two monopoles.  We rely upon the known instanton dynamics of the  theory with , leading to the flavor symmetry breaking of . However, so far no superpotential has been proposed to reproduce this instanton effect in the "electric" phase.  We describe this dynamics in the form of an effective superpotential for  regulated by "electric" degrees of freedom. 

In the  theory with -quarks, the flavor symmetry is given by

 

under which chiral quark superfields of  and chiral gauge superfields of 

 (Throughout this paper, the labels of  specify the flavor indices of  and those of  specify the color indices of )   

transform according to TABLE .  The instanton of  yields the contributions from the gluinos and  quarks, which can be expressed as 



, 


where  () is a spinor component of  ().  This instanton amplitude is equivalent to

 

where  is the -th scalar quark and  represents the scalar component of .  This evaluation clearly shows the appearance of the dynamical flavor symmetry breaking of

 

with  as a maximal subgroup. 

 [!t]
     
     
         Quantum numbers of quarks, , and gauge fields, , where ADJ  stands for the adjoint representation of . 


We would like to explain this instanton physics realized in the "electric" phase of  on the basis of an effective superpotential. Possible composite superfields involved in our discussions are chiral superfields (mesons) of



,  


and a chiral flavor-singlet "gauge" superfield (baryons) of












 = 
  
  / 

 as well as a composite superfield made of two chiral gauge superfields





 =  
with the  gauge coupling, , where the gauge coupling is explicitly included in  for later discussions.  The inclusion of  is advocated by Veneziano and Yankielowicz some times ago while the formulation without  has been motivated by Afleck, Dine and Seiberg.  The role of  is to reproduce the correct amount of the breaking of an anomalous  symmetry by instantons, which may not be physically required since this symmetry is not a conserved symmetry so that effective interactions need not respect its presence.  However, we adopt the description in terms of  to evaluate the instanton effects by the effective superpotential approach.

The classic construction of effective superpotentials requires that not only they are invariant under the transformations of all the symmetries but also they are compatible with the response from an anomalous  symmetry, namely,    , where  represents the lagrangian of the  theory and  () is a gauge field strength. Its SUSY version applied to the effective superpotential denoted by  becomes


. 


The resulting superpotential takes the simple form of

 

where  is the mass scale of .  We can also construct another effective superpotential including the chiral "gauge" superfield of :

 

where  is a coupling parameter, which also satisfies 

.  However, this superpotential generates a massive  superfield for the instanton-suggested vacuum of  and the anomaly-matching conditions on  fail to be satisfied.  One may worry about the classical limit of our superpotential of Eq.(), where the non-perturbative effects should vanish.  Recalling the relation of , where  is a reference scale, one can readily find that our superpotential simply yields , which is the tree superpotential for the gauge kinetic term as stressed in Ref..

The SUSY vacuum defined by our superpotential, which requires  to vanish, is specified by







 =  = 0 and  =  = 0, 
where  is the scalar component of  (Other fields such as scalar components of  with  can be set to vanish at the minimum; therefore, we omit these terms.) . The solution to these equations is given by  and  = 0, leading to

 

This vacuum is the same as Eq.() generated by the instantons.  As a result, the maximal flavor symmetry respected by the  theory turns out to be  as in Eq.(). In this end, the superpotential vanishes but the chiral Nambu-Goldstone superfields are produced as the low-energy degrees of freedom (Of course, interactions of the Nambu-Goldstone superfields arise from kinetic terms via their Khlar potentials) .  This situation is similar to the one encountered in supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics (SQCD) with . The corresponding superpotential in terms of  is given by 

 

where  and  are flavor-singlet chiral superfields (baryons) analogous to 

 without , respectively, made of quarks and anti-quarks.  The solution is given by 

 

indicating flavor symmetry breaking in SQCD with =.


 [!t]
     
     
        Quantum numbers of superfields in the Higgs phase (the upper column) and the confining phase (the lower column), where SYM  stands for the symmetric representation of  and  denotes the symmetrization with respect to  and  in . 

The anomaly-matching property is easily seen by the use of the complementarity, where  is also broken by  = , resulting in . The low-energy degrees of freedom listed in TABLE  are supplied by  as the symmetric representation of  and  as the chiral gauge superfields of  arising from the leftover piece in .  These superfields directly corresponds to the Nambu-Goldstone superfields of  (with Tr() = 0) associated with  and to the chiral flavor-singlet "gauge" superfield of . The field  with Tr()0 forms a mass term with  and the both are decoupled.  The presence of  requires that the "gauge" superfield of  to be massless.  This masslessness of the chiral "gauge" superfield of  is the indication of the appearance of a gauged  symmetry.  Since the Nambu-Goldstone superfields are neutral under this  symmetry, this "photon" does not interacts with matter fields.  

This description of the  gauge theory with  should be compared with the one given by the  duality with "magnetic" quarks.  The flavor symmetry breaking is absent and the low-energy degrees of freedom are supplied by two monopoles and the chiral "gauge" superfield of , whose anomalies match the original anomalies.  One may think that since, in the "magnetic" phase, the flavor  group is unbroken, the anomaly-matching on its subgroup of  is also realized and that, furthermore, our low-energy spectrum looks the same as the one in the "magnetic" phase. So, one may also think that it is trivial to have the consistent description of the flavor  group.  But, our physics is regulated by the "electric" quarks but not by the "magnetic" quarks.  As long as our "electric" physics also correctly describes the  physics, it is not surprising that the both descriptions result in the similar low-energy spectrum.

The holomorphic decoupling property of Eq.() can be seen by adding a mass of  to the -th quark, yielding

 

with .  The vacuum is, then, specified by , which results in

 

where  is a  submatrix of  and  = .  This superpotential is nothing but Eq.() by letting  with  decoupled. For , after eliminating  in Eq.(), we reach

 

which is the same effective superpotential as one of the series of the superpotentials discussed in Ref. for .

Finally, we comment on the holomorphic decoupling from the  theory with .  We have advocated to use the effective superpotential in the "electric" phase of  for :

 

where  is a baryon made of  quarks, namely, , and  () with = (In Ref., Eq.(8) should reads  () and the related parts should be modified accordingly.) . The combination of  with the obvious notation is classically equivalent to det.  The spontaneous flavor symmetry breaking is also induced at the SUSY vacuum specified by this effective superpotential.  It can be found that this superpotential correctly describes the instanton effects for the  of massive quarks, thus leaving  quarks massless, with any finite masses and exhibits the holomorphic decoupling property for . 

Similarly, we also expect the holomorphic decoupling from  for  with the -th quark decoupled to  for , which gives the superpotential

 

for , where  contains the field  analogous to , which can be literally obtained from  by decoupling the -th quark: .  As a result, = for   with the -th quark removed is converted into = for , where .  Namely, a composite superfield of the "diquark"-type given by  should be present to form a color-singlet composite of . If  is correctly decoupled, Eq.() becomes

 

Since  (as we expected) is allowed if , yielding , at the SUSY minimum, this superpotential will describe the spontaneous symmetry breaking by =1 leading to  and  is realized.  Such a nonvanishing  is found to be ensured by requiring . For , it is satisfied by .  Therefore, the choice of  required for the  theory with  respects the holomorphic decoupling.  The complementarity argument follows for  () and the resulting spectrum in the Higgs phase coincides with that of the Nambu-Goldstone superfields in the confining phase.  One of the linear combinations of Tr and  is decoupled by forming a mass term with  and the presence of  is essential for the consistent decoupling of . It is readily understood that the further decoupling of the -th quark yields Eq.().  The details can be found in the subsequent article.

Summarizing our discussions, we have stressed the importance of the instanton physics specific to  with  to reveal the non-perturbative "electric" physics of , which indicates the spontaneous flavor symmetry breaking.  This dynamics is opposed to the  dynamics based on the  duality, describing the unbroken flavor symmetry realized in the "magnetic" phase.  We have found that the following effective superpotential correctly describes the  physics realized in the "electric" phase with :

 

Our superpotential respects
 
correct vacuum structure with instanton physics, 
holomorphic decoupling property for  (and also for ),
dynamical breakdown of the flavor  symmetry:

 

consistent anomaly-matching property due to the emergence of the Nambu-Goldstone superfields together with the additional flavor-singlet composite gauge superfield.
The low-energy symmetry is found to be:

 

where  is associated with the massless composite gauge superfield. 

The similar dynamical symmetry breaking is also expected for the  theories with , which require either a "diquark"-type  body composite of  for  or a -body composite of .  Equipped with these composites, we are allowed to have  (or equivalent configurations for ), signaling the dynamical symmetry breakdown and the Nambu-Goldstone bosons as low-energy degrees of freedom in the strongly coupled  theories for .



 99 
plain 




 
N. Seiberg,  49 6857 1994 .


 N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B426  (1994) 19; B431  (1994) 484. 


 
R.G. Leigh and M.J. Strassler,  447 95 1995 ;
P.C. Argyres, M.R. Plesser and N. Seiberg,  471 159 1996 ;
M.J. Strassler,  123 373 1996 ;
N.Evans, S.D.H. Hsu, M. Schwetz and S.B. Selipsky,  52A 223 1997 ;
P.C. Argyres,  61A 149 1998 ;
T. Hirayama, N. Maekawa and S. Sugimoto,  99 843 1998 .


I. Affleck, M. Dine and N. Seiberg,  51 1026 1983 ;
 B241 493 1984 ;  B256 557 1985 .


 
K. Intriligator and N. Seiberg,  431 551 1994 ;
P.C. Argyres, M.R. Plesser and A.D. Shapere,  75 1699 1995 ;
A. Hanany and Y. Oz,  B452 283 1995 .


 K. Intriligator and N. Seiberg,  45BC 1 1996 ;
M.E. Peskin, hep-th/9702094 in Proceedings of the 1996 TASI, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 1996 ; 
M. Shifman,  39 1 1997 . 


 
See for example, A. Giveon and D. Kutasov,  71 983 1999  and other refernces therein.  


 
K. Intriligator and N. Seiberg,  444 125 1995 .


 
N. Seiberg,  435 129 1995 ; 
K. Intriligator, R. Leigh and M.J. Strassler,  456 567 1995 ;
C. Vafa and B. Zwiebach,  506 143 1997 ; 
C. Csaki and W. Skiba,  415 31 1997 ; 
T. Hirayama, N. Maekawa and S. Sugimoto, in Ref.; 
K. Fujikawa,  101 161 1999 ;
K. Konishi and L. Spanu, hep-th/0106175.


 
T. Eguchi, K. Hori, K. Ito and S.-F. Yang,  471 430 1996 .


 
G. Carlino, K. Konishi, S.P. Kumar and H. Murayama,  608 51 2001 .

  P.I. Pronin and K.V. Stepanyantz, hep-th/9902163;  K.V. Stepanyantz, hep-th/9902201;
T. Appelquist, A. Nyffeler and S.B. Selipsky,  425 300 1998 .
N. Arkani-Hamed and R. Rattazzi,   454 290 1999 ;


 
Y. Honda and M. Yasue ,  101 971 1999 ;  466 244 1999 ; in Proc. the 30th Int. Conference on High Energy Physics  , Osaka, 27 July-2 August, 2000, edited by C.S. Lim and T. Yamanaka (World Scientific, Singapore, 2001), p.1365.


 
M. Yasue ,  543 296 2002 .


 
G. Veneziano and S. Yankielowicz,  113B 321 1983 ;
T. Taylor, G. Veneziano and S. Yankielowicz,  B218 493 1983 ;
G. Veneziano and S. Yankielowicz,  B249 593 1985 .


 
A. Masiero, R. Pettorino, M. Roncadelli and G. Veneziano,  B261 633 1985 .


 
M. Yasue ,  35 355 1987 ;  36 932 1987 ;  78 1437 1987 .


 G. 't Hooft, in Recent Development in Gauge Theories , 
Proceedings of the Cargese Summer Institute, Cargese, France, 1979, edited 
by G. 't Hooft  et al. , 
NATO Advanced Study Institute Series B: Physics Vol. 59 (Plenum Press, New York, 1980).


S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby and L. Susskind,  B173 208 1980 ;
T. Matsumoto,  97B 131 1980 .


M. Yasue , in preparation.








