
  <  
 >  
 .6ex     #2   <  
 >  
 .6ex     #2   
 
 


 







 

Cubic Matrix, Generalized Spin Algebra and Uncertainty Relation 



 
Yoshiharu Kawamura (E-mail:
haru@azusa.shinshu-u.ac.jp)  


Department of Physics, Shinshu University,
Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan





 
We propose a generalization of spin algebra using three-index objects.
There is a possibility that a triple commutation relation among three-index objects
implies a kind of uncertainty relation among their expectation values.
footnote  

Introduction 

Matrix is an instrument indispensable to mathematics and physics.
One of the main reason is as follows.
Physical systems are often described by many variables, some of which are
treated on an equal footing, e.g. coordinates of space.
The systems have symmetries under some transformations for variables
and such symmetry transformations, in many cases, form a group, e.g., 
rotations for coordinates of space form a rotational group.
Use of matrices makes the analysis with many variables simple and systematic
because an action for group elements can be represented by a matrix.
In fact, the group theoretical analysis has been applied to a wide range of systems, e.g.,
the classification of elementary particles
and the determination of interactions among them.Considering its success, it is natural to ask the following questions:
 
Is there a generalization of matrix?

If there is a generalization, what advantages and applications for mathematics and physics?

For the first question, one might hit upon a many-index object such as 
since a matrix is regarded as a two-index object.
For the second one, 
a possible answer is that a new mechanics has been proposed 
based on many-index objectsand its basic structure has been studied from the algebraic point of view.
This mechanics has a counterpart of the canonical structure in classical mechanics
or Nambu mechanics,
and is interpreted as its quantum' or discretized' version.
It is also regarded as a generalization of Heisenberg's matrix mechanics
because a generalization of the Ritz rule is taken as a guiding principle,
This mechanics has such interesting properties, but
it is not clear whether it is applicable to a real physical system
and what physical meanings many-index objects possess.
There is also the possibility of examining an algebraic structure 
of many-index objects independent of its dynamics to provide information 
on their physical reality and implications.
This is a main motivation of our work.

In this paper, we propose a generalization of spin algebra using three-index objects and 
point out a possibility that a triple commutation relation leads to
a kind of uncertainty relation.


This paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we explain the definition of three-index object.
We study a generalization of spin algebra in 3. 
In section 4, we discuss a connection between a triple commutation relation among three-index objects
and an uncertainty among their expectation values.
Section 5 is devoted to conclusions and discussion.


Cubic matrix 

Here we state our definition of a cubic matrix(
Awata, Li, Minic and Yoneya introduced many-index objects
to realize the quantum version of Nambu bracket.They refer to three-index object as cubic matrix' and we use
the naming in this paper 
although the definition of triple product is different each other.) 
and its related terminology.
A cubic matrix is an object with three indices, , 
which is a generalization
of a usual matrix, such as .
We refer to a cubic matrix whose elements possess cyclic symmetry, i.e., ,
as a cyclic cubic matrix.
We define the hermiticity of a cubic matrix by 
 for odd permutations among indices
and refer to a cubic matrix possessing hermiticity as a hermitian cubic matrix.
Here, the asterisk indicates complex conjugation.
A hermitian cubic matrix is a special type of cyclic cubic matrix, because it obeys the relations
.
We refer to the following form of a cubic matrix as a normal form or a normal cubic matrix:
 
A normal cubic matrix is also a special type of cyclic cubic matrix.
The elements of a cubic matrix are treated as -numbers throughout this paper.

We define the triple product among cubic matrices , 
 and  by
 
The resultant three-index object, ,
does not always have cyclic symmetry, even if ,  and 
are cyclic cubic matrices.
Note that this product is, in general, neither commutative nor associative; that is,
 and
.
The triple-commutator is defined by
 
The triple-anticommutator is defined by
 
If ,  and  are hermitian cubic matrices,
 and  are also hermitian cubic matrices. 









Further we define the product between cubic matrices  and  by
 
If  and 
are hermitian cubic matrices,
the two-index object, ,
possess a hermiticity, i.e., .
If  and 
are cyclic cubic matrices,
they commute with respect to this product, i.e. ,
.


Generalized spin algebra 

Spin algebra 

Here we review the spin algebra .
The algebra is defined by
 
where s are spin variables ,  is the reduced Planck constant
and  is the Levi-Civita symbol.
Matrices on the adjoint representation are written by  matrices such as
 
where each of the indices  and  runs from 1 to 3.
Further matrices on the spinor representation are written by  matrices such as
 
where s are Pauli matrices and each of the indices  and  runs from 1 to 2.

In general, matrices on the spin  representation are given by  matrices:
 
where each of the indices  and  runs from 1 to .
The Casimir operator  is given by
 
The spinor representation matrices () are obtained from () with , and
the adjoint representation matrices () are obtained from () with 
after making a suitable unitary transformation.
 

Generalization 

Let us generalize the spin algebra () using hermitian cubic matrices.
We consider the following  matrices as a counterpart of (),
 
where each of the indices , ,  and  runs from 1 to 4
and  is a new physical constant.
The  and  satisfy the following algebra,
 
where the indices ,  and  are omit.
There exists a subalgebra in ()
whose elements consist of , ,  and  (or 
, ,  and ).
Here , ,  and  are different numbers among them.
For example,  satisfy the algebra:
 
We refer to the above algebra () as a cubic spin algebra'.
The s satisfy the so-called fundamental indentity':
 

 As a counterpart of spinor representation matrices (),
we define four kinds of hermitian  matrices:
  
where each of the indices ,  and  runs from 1 to 3, 
 and  
.
It is shown that the variables  yield the cubic spin algebra ().(
This choice is not unique, but it belongs to  with 
and . 
Here  takes 1 or .) 

For  matrices () which satisfy the cubic spin algebra
(), we can find the example:
 
where each of the indices ,  and  runs from 1 to , and
 and  are defined by
 
and
 
respectively.
Here  takes 1 or .

As a comment,
we can find  matrices  which satisfy the algebra

.


Here the triple commutator  is defined by
 
with a usual definition of the triple product among matrices:
 
An example is as follows,
 
where  is given in ().







Uncertainty relation 

Uncertainty relation in quantum mechanics 

The uncertainty relation in quantum mechanics is expressed by
 
where  and  represent an uncertainty of position 
and its canonical momentum, respectively.

This relation and a generalization are nicely formulated.For any observable , there is a correspondence to a hermitian operator
.
The expectation value of  is defined by
 
where  is a wave function and describes a state of the system.
The uncertainty of the value of measurement for  is defined by
 
Here  is a standard deviation which  
represents the magnitude of fluctuation about the mean value.
For any observables  and , the following uncertainty relation holds;
 
Let us derive the above relation in the matrix formalism for a later convenience.
The following relationship exists between
the matrix  in Heisenberg's matrix mechanics 
and the hermitian operator ,
 
where s constitute a complete set of orthonormal functions.(
Here we treat a case with a discrete spectrum for simplicity, but
it is straightforward to extend a case with a continuous one.)  From 
() and (), the  is written down as
 
for the wave function . 
In the same way, the expectation value of  is written by
 
Here 

 stands for a complex vector whose component is .
Then the uncertainty relation () is shown by use of
the Schwarz inequality 
and the relation .
Hence the uncertainty relation is understood as a consequence of
algebraic relation between physical variables.

If the expectation value  does not vanish,
it is not possible to measure the values of  and  simultaneously
as precise as possible.
The uncertainty relation () is derived
from the commutation relation for  and , i.e., .

Generalized uncertainty relation 

We have seen that the uncertainty relation 

is derived from the commutation relation such as  in quantum mechanics.
 Then, we have a question whether there is an uncertainty relation originated from 
the triple commutation relation such as .
(The typical triple commutation relation is the cubic spin algebra discussed in the previous section.)
In the following, we will find that an inequality such as




is derived with certain types of definitions for expectation values of many-index objects.
We define the expectation value for a cubic matrix  by

 
where  is a complex number and
 is a real antisymmetric object, .
Then the expectation value of  is written by
 
where .
Further we define the expectation value for a two-index object  by

 
The expectation value of  is written by
 
In this way, two kinds of expectation values(
In case that ,
the expectation values  and  are reduced to

 and



where .) 
are introduced without any guiding principle.
It is an important subject to pursue their physical implication.
By use of the inequality:
 
and the relation:
 
the following uncertainty relation is derived,
 
where the uncertainty  is defined by
 
Here  and 
hence .
Note that there is the identity 
for arbitrary cyclic cubic matrices  and .

Finally we discuss a physical implication on the uncertainty relation
().
Let us assume that the 4-dimensional space-time coordinates 
are described by cubic matrices  () which satisfy the following relation,
 
where  is the Planck length defined by .
Here  is the Newton constant and  is a speed of light. From
the above argument, the following uncertainty relation can be derived,
 
Many people have discussed uncertainty relations
concerning the measurement of space-time distances
based on various kinds of thought experiments.Among them, the relation like 
 -0.5ex   

is deeply related to ours ().
Here  and  are an uncertainty of space distance  and a time period
of observer, respectively.
The Lorentz covariant form has been proposed in Ref.;
 
where s are the four vectors to define a space-time volume and
 is any four vector which represents the velocity vector of an observer.
There is a possibility that the space-time uncertainty relation
() has the origin from the algebraic relation such as
 


Conclusions and discussion 

We have studied a generalization of spin algebra using cubic matrices and 
pointed out a possibility that a triple commutation relation among cubic matrices implies
a kind of uncertainty relation among their expectation values.
As a physical implication, we suggest that the space-time uncertainty relation
can be connected to the triple commtation relation
such as .

The physical meanings of cubic matrices have not been completely understood and
there still exist several questions.
The s are representation matrices that operate a representation space called spin space.
We have a question whether  also act as generators or not and
what kind of representation space exists.
In quantum mechanics, the matrix element  is interpreted 
as a probability amplitude between the state 
described by  and that described by .
However the meaning of the cubic matrix element  has not been known yet.
Further the derivation of uncertainty relation () seems tricky
because the definition of expectation values looks ad hoc.
We need to find the meaning of  and .
The physical implication on expectation values could be a key to
find a way out.
It is also an interesting subject to find the relationship 
between the space-time uncertainty relations derived
from string/M theories and ours ().

Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Professor S. Odake for useful discussions. 


 99 
H. Georgi, Lie algebra in particle physics  (Benjamin Cummings, 1982).

Y. Kawamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 107  (2002), 1105; hep-th/0203007.

Y. Kawamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 109  (2003), 1; hep-th/0206184.

Y. Kawamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 109  (2003), 153; hep-th/0207054.

Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. D7  (1973), 2405.

H. Awata, M. Li, D. Minic and T. Yoneya, J. High Energy Phys. 02  (2001), 013.

E. H. Kennard, Z. Phys. 44  (1927), 326.

H. P. Robertson, Phys. Rev. 34  (1929), 163.

As a review, see L. J. Garay, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A10  (1995), 145.

F. Karolyhazy, Nuovo Cim. A42  (1966), 390.

Y. J. Ng and H. van Dam, Mod. Phys. Lett. A9  (1994), 335; A10  (1995), 2801.

G. Amelino-Camelia, Nature 398  (1999), 216.

N. Sasakura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 102  (1999), 169; J. High Energy Phys. 05  (2002), 015.

As a review for uncertainty relations for string/M theories, see T. Yoneya,
Prog. Theor. Phys. 103  (2000), 1081.





  
