

equation section 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     



  Leeds Pure Mathematics 2002/24  
 
  Fermions coupled to Skyrmions on  
   
 
Steffen KruschS.Krusch@maths.leeds.ac.uk   

Department of Pure Mathematics  

School of Mathematics, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 
9JT  
 
England  
 

April 30, 2003 
 


 
This paper discusses Skyrmions on the -sphere coupled to
fermions. The resulting Dirac equation commutes with a generalized angular
momentum . For  the Dirac equation can be solved
explicitly for a constant Skyrme configuration and also for a
 symmetric hedgehog configuration. 
We discuss how the spectrum changes due to the presence of a non-trivial 
winding number, and also consider more general Skyrme configurations 
numerically.


 
 pages, 6 figures




Introduction 


The Skyrme model is a classical field theory which describes
atomic nuclei and their low
energy interactions. 
It is a non-linear theory admitting
topological solitons, 
so-called Skyrmions, labelled by a topological charge  which can be 
identified with the baryon number.  
When the theory is quantized the Skyrmions give a
good description of nuclei,  resonance and 
even bound states of nuclei
. 
A striking feature is that Skyrmions can be quantized as fermions 
.  
When the theory is coupled to
a fermion field two different ways of describing fermions appear in
the same theory. Physically, the fermion field can be thought of as light
quarks in the presence of atomic nuclei. 
Hiller calculated the spectrum of
the fermions in the background of a Skyrmion. 
However, the 
approximation for the Skyrmion configuration was very crude. The
spectrum shows a spectral flow of the eigenvalues depending on the
value of the coupling constant. In particular one mode crosses
zero. This general behaviour has been verified by other authors
. 
To gain a better understanding we consider a generalization of the
model.

Since static field configurations in the original Skyrme model 
in flat space are topologically
equivalent to maps , the model can be  generalized to the
base space being a sphere of radius . 
The original model is recovered in the limit
. It turns out that for  and baryon number 
the Faddeev-Bogomolny bound is satisfied and the minimal energy solution can
be worked out explicitly. 
In this case the map  is an isometry. 
For larger  the Skyrmions are localized and tend to the usual 
flat space Skyrmions in the limit . 

Monopoles and Skyrmions have many properties in common, and it is
therefore instructive to recall the results for monopoles. There is an
index theorem making 
use of the Bogomolny equations which states that for  monopoles
there is a  dimensional vector space of fermionic zero modes
. 
Furthermore, the monopole and its fermionic zero mode can be
calculated explicitly for . We will examine how
far we can extend the analogy between monopoles and Skyrmions.

In this paper we study fermions coupled to Skyrmions on . 
The Dirac equation on  is derived in Sect. 
. We also explain the Skyrmion-fermion interaction. 
In Sect. , 
we derive the ordinary differential equation which
describes the solutions with total angular momentum 
for general shape functions. In Sect. , we
give a brief discussion of ordinary differential equations and their regular
singular points.
In Sect. , the equation of Sect. 
 is solved for a constant Skyrme configuration, 
which is equivalent to a mass term for the fermions. 
We also discuss the boundary conditions which are
necessary to derive the spectrum. 
In Sect. , we derive the eigenfunctions and
the spectrum for the hedgehog configuration with the special shape
function . 
In Sect.  the results of Sect.
 and
  are verified numerically. 
The spectrum for more general shape functions is also evaluated 
numerically and compared with results in the literature. 
We find an interesting relationship between the topological charge of 
the Skyrmion and certain singular points. We end with a conclusion.


The Dirac Equation on  

In this section we derive the Dirac equation on a -sphere of radius
. 
First we define an atlas of two charts  and  which
are the stereographic projections from the north pole  and the
south pole , respectively. 
Next we define vierbeins on both charts which uniquely determine a
connection one-form using the metric compatibility condition and the
torsion-free condition. The connection one-form induces the spin
connection so that we can finally write down the Dirac equation for
each chart.(A good discussion of frame fields and
spin-connections can be found in, 
and also in.)  
At the end of this section we discuss the interaction term which
couples fermions and Skyrmions.

In order to construct the stereographic projection let  
be embedded in Euclidean  with coordinates
. 
The points of  can now be labelled by the
projection from the north pole  onto the  plane through
the equator introducing the coordinates . Alternatively, one
can project from the south pole  introducing the coordinates
. 
These two charts are well defined everywhere apart from their
projection point  and , respectively.
In terms of the  Cartesian coordinates we obtain

 

In the following, we derive the equations of motion for both charts. 
As we shall see in Sect. , this enables us to discuss the 
regularity conditions at the north and south pole in a simple way. 
We will also use the two charts to discuss a nontrivial symmetry of the 
energy spectrum in Sect. .

The induced metric on 
can be calculated from the Euclidean metric in .
Taking into account that our base space is a
Lorentzian space time , the metric can be written
as 

 

The other coordinate system gives rise to the same metric replacing
 by . On the overlap the two charts are
related via the transition functions

 

Therefore, the coordinate vectors  and  
are related by
 

Note that this transformation has the determinant 
.

We now choose non-coordinate bases 
 and 
. 
It is convenient to choose diagonal vierbeins
 and  such that

 

where all other components vanish. The minus sign occurs because
 and  are related by inversion which changes the
orientation. The vierbeins satisfy

 

where  is the flat Minkowski
metric. The same relations are true for the vierbeins .
The non-coordinate basis vectors are related by an -transformation

 

This is in fact a -rotation about the vector .  

With this choice of vierbeins the connection 

one-form 
 can be calculated from the metric compatibility condition 
 and the torsion-free
condition 

 

where  is the
dual basis of . 
After a short calculation we obtain

 

and the same relation holds for  expressed in
-coordinates.
The spin connection  is now given by

 

where 
, and the -matrices satisfy the standard
anticommutation relations 
.
The Lagrangian for fermions in curved space time is given by 

 

With our choice of coordinates and vierbeins we obtain

 

using the coordinates  and

 

for the coordinates .
Equation () can be transformed into () by
using  and the induced spinor
transformation   of the fermion field  which we
calculate in the following. The spinor transformation  is defined as

 

The transformation  is a lifting of the local Lorentz
transformation  of the vierbeins in (). 
Note that the transformation 
 can be rewritten as 

 

for . Here .
Since we are only concerned with the spatial part we work with
the Euclidean  rather than with .
Infinitesimally, the rotation is given by 
. 
This can be lifted to a spinor transformation by

. For  we obtain

 


Note that there is a sign choice. As the spinor transformation
 is an element of the double cover of the rotation group, 
the transformation  is also a lifting of the rotation 
. 

In the following we discuss fermions coupled to Skyrmions. The
full Lagrangian  of this model is the sum of the fermion 
Lagrangian , the Skyrmion Lagrangian 
 and the interaction Lagrangian . In 
this paper we consider fermions in the background of a static Skyrme 
configuration and neglect the backreaction. Therefore, we do not discuss 
the Skyrmion Lagrangian any further, and the interested reader is referred 
to. The interaction Lagrangian  
given by 

 

where  is a convenient 
parameterization of the Skyrme field.
Equation () is the standard parity-invariant manner in which 
fermions couple to a Skyrme field and is also called the Yukawa 
interaction term. 
This Lagrangian was first introduced by
Gell-Mann and Levy (without a fourth order Skyrme term),
. Also see for a discussion
of various different chiral models. Recently, the Lagrangian
() has been discussed by Balachandran et al. 
. 

Note that  is a spin and an isospin spinor. In our notation the Pauli
matrices  act on the isospin indices, whereas the
-matrices act on the spin indices. 
It is convenient to split the Dirac spinor into two
 spin isospin matrices  and  such that

 

In this notation the -matrices can be written 
in terms of quaternionic  matrices using  times the spin
Pauli matrices  and the two dimensional identity matrix 
as a basis for the quaternions. 
Since any complex  matrix can also be expressed 
in terms of quaternions with complex coefficients 
it is convenient to choose the same basis
for the quaternions as before. Then the spin isospin
matrices  can be written as 
. With this notation the spin operators act on  by
left-multiplication, , whereas the isospin matrices
act on  by right multiplication 

  

where the transpose in () guarantees the group structure,
and () gives a useful trick to evaluate .

As mentioned above, we make the approximation that the Skyrmion is a fixed
static background field, i.e.  we ignore the backreaction of the
fermion fields.
Furthermore, we only consider spherically symmetric
Skyrmions. For , Skyrmions are believed to be spherically symmetric, 
but for  this is no longer true. However, we expect that some generic 
features of the Skyrmion-fermion interaction are not sensitive to the 
precise shape of the Skyrmion. For more details see Sect. 
. 
Spherically symmetric Skyrme fields are best written in polar coordinates

 

where  is the "radial" shape function and  is
the normal vector in -direction, see (). 
The shape function  can be
calculated by solving the Euler-Lagrange equation of the Skyrme
Lagrangian numerically. 
However, instead of using a numerical solution it is more convenient
in this context to approximate  by an explicit function.  
Manton showed in that a good ansatz for  not too large 
is the conformal ansatz given by(For 
 the ansatz tends to . 
Qualitatively, this is still a good ansatz.)  

 

Here  is a constant which has to be determined by minimizing the
energy of the Skyrmion. 
This ansatz describes a Skyrme configuration which is either localized around
one of the poles or uniformly distributed. The value 
 corresponds to the -symmetric ansatz of the previous section, 
whereas for , or , the Skyrme field is localized at the
south pole, or the north pole, respectively. 
Manton also showed that for  the stable solution is .  

Finally, we can write down the Dirac equation for fermions
coupled to a spherically symmetric background Skyrmion. It is given by

 

using the coordinates  and

 

using the coordinates . Here the Skyrmion gives rise 
to 

 

and the same equation holds in the coordinate system .


Solving the Dirac Equation for  

In order to solve the Dirac equation we introduce spherical polar
coordinates for equation () and (). 
In terms of the coordinates   in , the polar
coordinates for the -sphere of radius  can be written as

 

The angles  can now be expressed in terms of  as

 

In terms of the  , the relations for
 and  are identical to the ones above, 
and for the  coordinate we obtain

 

Equation () gives rise to the following Dirac equation in polar
coordinates: 

 

where  and 
the unit vectors  are given by

 

 can be written as 

. Similarly,
equation () give rise to 

 

The spin connection term could be removed by setting 
 and 
, respectively. 
However, it is
easier to discuss the regularity of the solution in terms of the
original fields.

We adopt the standard representation of the
-matrices where  is diagonal. This is convenient
because the Dirac equation is invariant under parity. 

 

Now, the spinor transformation  in () can be
evaluated explicitly: 

 

With this choice of -matrices, 
we can derive the differential equation for the stationary solutions
of the Dirac equation by setting 
: 

 

where

 


The components of the matrix in equation () commute with the
total angular momentum  operator 
 where  is the orbital
angular momentum operator, the spin operator is 
 and the isospin operator is 
. In polar coordinates, the orbital angular momentum 
is given by  

 

Equation () is also invariant under
parity  with

 

It is worth discussing the parity operator  in more
detail.  acts on the -matrices and the partial
derivatives as follows:

 

Using the spinor transformation  in () we can show that 

 

Therefore, the parity operator  which is defined
for the coordinates  differs from 
 by a minus sign.(The origin of this sign difference is that 
the charts do not form an orientation atlas.) 

The  positive parity spin isospin spinors are given by  

 

This gives rise to the following system of first order differential
equations:

 

where ,  and  are functions of .
Note that the  spinor

 

gives rise to the same equation with  replaced by .

In -coordinates positive and negative parity are
interchanged such that the  is given by

 

This gives rise to 

 

Again the  spinor

 

gives rise to the same equation with  replaced by .

Equation 
() can be transformed into a second order
differential equation for  where . Note that
since  it is consistent to set 
. 

 
 

and similarly equation 

() can be transformed into

 
  

It is not easy to transform equation () and () into
each other. In fact, 
due to the spinor transformation () 
 and  are related via
 
Also note that  is given by

  

and similarly  can be written as

 


Explicit Solutions of the Dirac equation 

In this section we solve the Dirac equation which has been derived in the 
previous section for various shape functions . However, first we 
review some basic facts about ordinary differential equations 
and regular singular points, following.

Differential Equations and their Singular Points 

Any linear second order differential equation can be brought into the
standard form 

 

If  and  are analytic functions in the neighbourhood of
 then  is called a regular point. 
In this case there are locally two linearly independent solutions
 and  such that any solution of () is
a linear combination of  and . Moreover,
 is an analytic function, i.e.  it can be written as

 

If either  or  is singular then  is called a
singular point. In the special case that 

 

where  and  are analytic functions, i.e.  

 

the point  is
called a regular singular point . 
Equations which only have regular or regular singular points are known
as Fuchsian differential equations.
Equation () can then be solved by the following
ansatz:  

 

The exponent  can be calculated by solving the so-called
indicial equation  

 

which is derived by inserting the
ansatz () into ().
The two solutions  of the indicial equation
() are called the exponents  of the regular singular
point . Our convention will be that .
If the difference of the exponents  is
not a positive integer or zero, then the ansatz () 
gives rise to two linearly independent 
solutions of () which are uniformly
convergent in some neighbourhood of . Note, however, that the
solution diverges at  if its exponent  is negative.

Let  be a positive integer or zero. 
This situation is slightly more subtle because the two solutions can
become linearly dependent, and this could lead to further logarithmic
terms.  
The solution  with exponent  is always uniformly 
convergent in some neighbourhood of . 
Therefore, we reduce equation () to a
differential equation of first order by setting 
. This gives rise to the following equation for :

 

This equation can be solved by integration and separation of variables,
and we obtain

 

where  is an analytic function in a suitable domain, and  and 
 are constants. A short calculation shows that 

 

Let

 

Then for  the most general solution is 

 

where  and  are arbitrary constants, and  is the
solution of the form ().
The constant  and the
function  are completely determined by the
differential equation (). 
The function  is given by

 

the coefficients  being constants. In the special case that 
 no logarithms occur, i.e.  the two solutions  and
 are linearly independent.

If  the corresponding form of the solution is 

 

It is also possible to discuss the singularity at infinity. The
transformation  maps the point at infinity to
the origin. If we apply this transformation to equation
() we obtain a new differential equation in terms of . 
If the new equation has a regular or a regular singular point at the
origin  then () has a regular or regular singular
point at infinity. 

If a Fuchsian differential equation has  finite regular singular
points  with exponents  and a regular
singular point at infinity with exponents  
then the following equation holds:

 

This is a useful consistency check for the exponents.

Fermions coupled to a Constant Skyrme Field 

We are interested in the behaviour of fermions in the presence of a
background Skyrmion. 
The Skyrmion introduces a space-dependent
complex mass for the fermions. Therefore, it is instructive to
consider first a massive fermion on . 
This corresponds to  so that the fermion mass is
. This example can be solved explicitly in terms of hypergeometric
functions. 
In the following sections we proceed to more complicated
configurations. In Sect. , we consider the
spherically symmetric shape function  which can also be
solved explicitly, but in a less standard way. In Sect.
, the conformal shape function () 
is discussed. In
this case, the differential equation can no longer be solved
explicitly. 
We present numerical algorithms in Sect. .


Setting , equation () can be written as

 

where .

Equation () has three regular singular points, one at
, one at  and one at 
 with exponents , 
 and 
 
respectively. Note that relation () between the exponents
is satisfied, i.e.  the sum of the exponents is
equal to .
In this example we will show that the solution is non-singular on
 if its exponents are  and .

Equation () can be solved explicitly:

 

where  is a hypergeometric function, e.g.  see
.
The hypergeometric function is non-singular for  and is
normalized at , i.e.  . It may be
singular at , corresponding to , which is the north pole. 
As  has to be non-singular at the south pole, , we
have to set . 

Since  is not well defined at  we have to express  in
terms of  and calculate .
Using the transformation () from  to 
we obtain 

 

which is the analogue of equation ().
Setting , in equation () we can
derive a similar equation for  which has exponents
,
 and
. The solution
of this equation can again be expressed in terms of hypergeometric
functions: 

 

This is only non-singular at  if we set . 
Assuming that ,  can be calculated from 
equation ():

 

Therefore,  can be written as

 

 has to be non-singular at .
Equation ( then implies that  is also non-singular 
at . Therefore, the regular solution  has the exponents
 and . Note that this argument only relies on 
the local behaviour and explicit solutions are not needed.
As we shall see, in the generic case, the exponents at the singular
points do not depend on the chosen shape function, so that our
analysis is also valid for general shape functions. 
Problems can occur if additional singular
points coalesce with the singular points at  because this changes 
the exponents.(In the following section we will also discuss the 
case that further singular points are inside the interval .) 
In the generic case, the regular solution can be calculated by
imposing that the solution can be expanded as a power series at the
north and at the south pole. Later, this will be the basis for our
numerical algorithm. Now, we impose this condition in order to calculate 
the spectrum of equation ().

Using formula (15.3.6) in we can express   in
terms of hypergeometric functions at the second singular
point.(
Equation () only holds if . 
However, this inequality is satisfied because  
.) 

 

The last term has to vanish, otherwise  would be singular
at the north pole. Therefore, either 
 or  has to have a
pole. Since , we obtain , and
the spectrum is therefore

 

With this condition the eigenfunctions  reduce to
Jacobi Polynomials (, formula 15.4.6).

The spectrum is displayed in figure .
It is symmetric with respect to . The importance
of this result lies in the fact that for  the energy  and the
corresponding solutions  are the same for all possible shape
functions . 
Therefore, these solutions can be used as starting values
for the relaxation method, which will be described in Sect.
. As the radius of the -sphere tends to infinity the spectrum 
tends to the usual spectrum of the Dirac equation, which is continuous for 
. 
Also note that if we assume that  and its first and second 
derivative remain finite as  tends to infinity then the energy  has 
to be of order  in this limit, so  is the leading order 
asymptotic for . Therefore, we displayed the lines  in figure 
. 
As we shall see in Sect.  the region  also plays 
a special role for our numerical algorithm.

 [!htb]
 
The energy levels  as a function of the coupling
constant  for .  is shown as dashed lines. 
 

Another way of deriving the spectrum () is to note
that if the exponents at  both vanish then  is an 
integral function, that is it has only one singular point at infinity. 
The only integral functions which do not possess an essential singular 
point at infinity are the polynomials, e.g.  
.
Therefore, one of the exponents at infinity is equal to  for 
. Since the exponents at
infinity are  
we obtain the same spectrum as before. Note however, that since the 
exponents  differ by an integer, we have to 
check in this approach that the solution is indeed a polynomial, 
i.e.   in equation () vanishes.
This spectrum has also been calculated by other authors, 
e.g. . 

Fermions coupled to the Skyrme Field  

In this section we construct the solutions of equation ()
for . Configurations with  are called 
"hedgehog configurations" because at each point the vector in isospin
space is proportional to the coordinate vector. For  the
map from the base  to the target  is even an isometry and 
possesses -symmetry. Setting  in
equation () we obtain 


 


 

This is a homogeneous differential equation of Fuchsian type with four
singular points. They are located at ,  and
. Assuming  the exponents are

 

For  the singular points at  and 
coalesce, and therefore, the exponents at   become 
 and the exponent at infinity is 
. 
The relation for the exponents () is satisfied.

For  the singular points at  and 
coalesce. This changes the exponents at  to 
. In this case, there is an essential singular point
at infinity and the equation is no longer Fuchsian. 


Since we are interested in solutions that can be expanded as a power series
around , it is natural to look for polynomial solutions.
The singular point at   might impose a
constraint. In order to verify whether there is a logarithmic term we
have to calculate the  coefficient  in equation (). Here
. After a standard calculation we obtain 
. Therefore, there are two independent power series at the point 
. This imposes no further restriction, since we do not
have to exclude any of these two solutions. This implies that  is 
again an integral function and we can calculate the energy spectrum using 
the exponents at infinity. Again, the exponents  
differ by an integer, and we have to verify that the solutions are 
indeed polynomials. It turns out that the only problem occurs for 
.

In the following, we derive the recurrence relation for these
polynomials. Yet, it is instructive to consider first the solution where
 is a constant , i.e.  . Then we 
can solve equation () for  and obtain  and 
. Setting  in equation (), we 
obtain 

 

It is easy to see that this is not a solution for .
 is only a solution  for arbitrary  if . 
This solution is very interesting because its spectrum crosses  for 
.

Now we derive the general solution for equation (). 
Since we are interested in the solutions for which the relevant
exponent vanishes for , we expand  around the south
pole :

 

Assuming that , we derive the following recurrence
relations. The initial condition is


 

and the recurrence relation is given by

 

Since we have an initial condition we expect to be able to reduce this second
order recurrence relation to a recurrence of first order. Therefore, we make
the ansatz

 

Substituting this ansatz into the recurrence relation
() we obtain a non-linear first order recurrence for
the . However, this can be solved by setting 

  

By construction the series () has the right behaviour at
the singular point . To 
find the behaviour at  we have to discuss the radius of
convergence  of the series. The radius 
 can be calculated as the following limit: 

 

Therefore, the series converges for . For ,
equation () can be written as

) 

For large ,  behaves like . Therefore, 
is proportional to  so that the terms in the sum
() are of order  and do not vanish. Hence, the series
is divergent, unless it terminates.

But because of the special form of  and  it is easy to see
when the series terminates. In fact, for  we can now write 
as the following product:

 

where  is the product of all odd numbers less than or equal to
.
All  vanish for  
which is the constant solution that we have derived
previously. If the term  vanishes then the
coefficient for  vanishes individually. However, if one of the
terms in the product vanishes, say for , then not only
 vanishes but also all  for , i.e. 
the series terminates.


 [!htb]
 
The energy levels  as functions of the coupling
constant  for .  is shown as 
dashed lines. 


From this condition the complete energy spectrum can be calculated.
We obtain the special level  which crosses from
positive to negative energies, and two series of energy levels 
and  which are given by

 

The spectrum is displayed in figure .
If we only consider the modes with energy 
 the spectrum is symmetric under
reflection at the axes  and .
However, the mode  with energy  is only symmetric under
combined reflections  and , which corresponds to
a -rotation around the point .

This spectrum agrees with our previous calculation where we used the fact that 
 is an integral function.

Numerical Results 

In this section we first describe numerical algorithms to calculate
the spectrum for more general shape functions . Then we
discuss the spectrum for the conformal ansatz (). We
also discuss the simple ansatz  which gives rise to
Skyrmions with . Finally, we compare our results with the
literature.

Numerical Algorithm 

The energy spectrum can be calculated for various shape functions
using a standard relaxation method. 
The differential equation () is rewritten as a system of
first order differential equations.

   

The energy  is considered as an additional dependent variable whose
derivative vanishes, , so that the complete system
becomes

  

For simplicity, let us discuss the numerical algorithm for
-symmetric shape function .
Equation () has a regular singular point at  which
implies that at this point we cannot choose value and derivative of
the solution independently. 
However, once the value of  is chosen we can calculate
. In fact, inserting  
into equation () we obtain

 

Similarly we obtain for ,

 

The system () is discretized such that the boundary
conditions at the singular points  are satisfied. 
Starting from an initial configuration the relaxation
algorithm calculates an improved configuration by linearizing the
equation around the solution and minimizing an error function which
indicates how well the discretized equations are satisfied. 

The secret of a successful relaxation method is a good guess for the
starting configuration. Fortunately, for  the analytic solution of
() is known for all possible shape functions
. Therefore, we start with this configuration at  and
increase  by a small amount . The relaxed solution is a
good initial configuration for , and so on.

As a test, the spectrum for  is calculated using the
relaxation method. This reproduces the analytic result.
For  the relaxation method converges well as long as
 is not inside the interval . However, if the
regular singular point  is inside the interval, the
relaxation algorithm no longer converges and has to be modified.
This is one of the main reasons for including the lines  in the 
figures.

In this case a specially chosen shooting method proves more suitable. It 
deals with the additional singularities in  by simply avoiding 
them. 
As mentioned before, our differential equation can be defined on the
complex plane. 
Due to the boundary condition the solution  is an analytic
function. The original solution is recovered by restricting  to be a
real function of a real variable . In order to avoid further
singular points on the real line we can set  where 
. Then equation () induces a differential equation
for , that is the equation is solved on a semi-circular contour. The
resulting differential equation can be written as a system of 5 real first
order differential equations, one of which corresponds to the energy .
Now, the spectrum can be obtained by a standard shooting method,
. The boundary conditions for the shooting
method are that at the singular points  the solution is 
non-singular and furthermore that the equation is real at . Since
the equation has real coefficients, the fact that  is 
real for  implies that  is real for .

A successful shooting method needs a good initial guess. For  we
can rely on our explicit solution and impose  and

 

where equation () follows from equation () and
equation () follows
from the reflection relation for the gamma function (see (6.1.17) in
). As in the relaxation method the initial guess for
the coupling constant  is the value of the solution for
coupling constant .

It is also possible to reconstruct the solution  for 
using the solution  for . Cauchy's
formula states that if  is an analytic function and  is a contour
enclosing the point  then 

 

see for example.
In our case  is a real function on the interval
, so 

 

where the coefficients  are real. It follows that  can be
written as

 

and a similar formula can be obtained for its derivative .
For  both the relaxation method and the 
shooting method give the same result.

Generalization to more complicated Skyrmions 


With the conformal shape function (), equation () 
gives rise to a rather lengthy differential equation with five regular singular 
points, see for more details. 

Assuming that the singular points do not coalesce we obtain the following
exponents: 

 

where  and  and .

The relation () is again satisfied. Moreover, the
exponents at infinity are the same as for .
In the limit  the exponents at infinity change
discontinuously (see ()).

The exponents change if one or more singular points coalesce.
However, in general, there are five singular points which all have
different characteristics. 


The regular singular points at 
 provide the boundary conditions for the regular solution,
and are not very sensitive to the exact form of the shape
function. They imply that the solution of this equation locally still is an 
analytic function of .

One might expect that the regular singular point at infinity could be used 
to calculate the degree of the polynomial as in the previous two sections. 
However, for general , the solutions are not regular on the entire
complex plane, so that the exponents at infinity do not contain any
information about the spectrum. This is 
because there is a further singular point at  with 
exponents . Generically, the solution diverges 
logarithmically at this singular point such that  is a 
branch point, see equation ().
The existence of polynomial solutions might be  related to the
spherical  symmetry of the problem, which is broken for .
Note that the singular point at 
 is independent of , and it can
never be inside the interval  because  
for .
Finally, the singular point at  depends on
the energy . Moreover, for certain values of ,  and  this
point can be inside the interval . This singular point could
force a potential solution to diverge, such that
it would no longer be well-defined. Therefore, we are interested
in the local behaviour near . 
After a straightforward but long calculation using
Maple, we obtain .
Therefore, locally, both solutions are convergent power series, and no
logarithmic divergencies occur.  

 [!htb]
 
The spectrum using () for the shape
function  where 
.  is shown as dashed lines. 

In the following we calculate spectra as functions of the coupling
constant  for different values of  numerically. 
For  we reproduce the spectrum for  of Sect. 
.
Also note that  corresponds to the spectrum for 
which agrees with the spectrum for  in Sect.
. 
As  increases the
spectrum moves towards the  spectrum. At the same time, the
energy  intersects  for increasing values of the coupling
constant , such that for  the intersection point also
appears to move to . In figure  we display the
spectrum for . 


In the following we discuss the eigenfunction which crosses zero in more 
detail. We restrict out attention to the following Lorentz scalar  
which is defined as 
 

A short calculation shows that  is a function of  
only. Therefore, we can integrate out the angular coordinates  and 
 and obtain:

 

The density  measures where the fermion field is 
localised.
To obtain equation () we used equations () and 
().
 and  can be calculated from () and 
(), respectively. Recall .
Expressing  in terms of   avoids 
having to worry about the denominator in () which is rather 
difficult to handle numerically. 
Note however, that  is non-singular for 
. This follows from the behaviour at the 
corresponding regular singular point of equation ().
The function  is related to  via equations 
() and (). This implies

 


In the following, we calculate  for ,  and 
and compare it to the baryon density 

 

which measures where the Skyrme field is localized.(Usually, 
 is defined with a minus sign, but this is of no 
relevance here.) 

The expression for  can be calculated explicitly for . In this 
case . Since we are interested in the zero crossing mode we 
have to set  and obtain

 

Surprisingly, this is independent of . Also note that in this case 
 is proportional to . In the following, 
we normalize  so that .

For , the Skyrme configuration is localised near the north pole 
 (see figure ). In figure  (a) and (b) 
we show  for  and , respectively. In figure 
 (c) and (d) we show  for several values of 
the coupling constant . For ,  can also be 
calculated 
explicitly and is independent of . For  and , the fermion 
configuration is also localised near the north pole. For , the energy 
 vanishes when . For , the energy  vanishes 
when . In figure  (e) and (f) we display 
 for these values of  and compare it to the baryon 
density . There is quite a good agreement between these 
two functions. Therefore, the  states can be interpreted as a 
fermion-Skyrmion bound states.


 [!hb]
 
[ for .]
 
[ for .]
 
[ for  for .]
 
[ for  for .]
 
[Comparison of  and  for 
.]
 
[Comparison of  and  for
.]
 
In this figure we display  and 
 as a function of  for  and 
, and for various values of the coupling constant .  


The simplest method for obtaining a Skyrmion with baryon number 
is the ansatz . For  this Skyrme configuration has
very high energy. However, we are mainly interested in the interplay of topology
and the spectrum of the Dirac equation which should be independent of
the precise form of the Skyrmion.



 [!htb]
 
The spectrum using .  is shown as dashed 
lines.  

For  the spectrum is displayed in figure . It 
is symmetric with respect to the -axis. 

Note that the symmetry of the spectrum can be derived from equation () 
and (). For even  the function  is an even function of  
and  is an odd function of .
Under  and  equation () transforms into equation 
(). However, the equations are just expressed in different 
coordinate systems, and hence have the same energy eigenvalues. Therefore, we 
have shown that the spectrum is symmetric under  if  is even, 
provided that  is an odd function of .


For  all the eigenmodes have the same value,
independent of the background configuration, and parity. As 
increases, the modes increasingly feel the influence of the background
configuration, in particular its topology. It appears that the
winding number  of the Skyrmion forces  modes to cross zero, one for
 and one for . In order to follow the spectrum for  
the shooting method has to be used.


 [!htb]
 
The spectrum using
. Here we only show the spectrum for , see text. 
 is shown as dashed lines. 


This pattern can also be verified for , see figure . 
Now there are three modes
which cross zero, two of positive parity () and one of negative
parity . It seems probable that the number zero-crossing modes
of positive parity differs at most by one from the number of
zero-crossing modes of negative parity. Further calculations for
 and  confirm this pattern. For  we find two
zero-crossing modes of positive parity and two of negative parity,
whereas for  there are three positive parity modes and two
negative parity modes.


This numerical evidence shows that the singular points of equation () 
play an important role. In the following we will assume that  is an 
analytic function, and in particular that it can be expanded in a Taylor series 
with respect to the variable , for .
It follows that  and  are also analytic functions of .
Therefore, the only singular points of () inside the interval  
occur for . 
If such a singular point is non-degenerate its exponents
are  and . Furthermore, it can be shown be shown by expanding  as a 
power series in  that the coefficient  always vanishes. 
In our previous examples  was always monotonic. Let  be 
monotonic with boundary conditions  and . 
If  then  has  nondegenerate solutions for 
. 
In this case, these singularities of equation () all have exponents 
 and the coefficient  vanishes, so that the solution of () 
is regular at these points. 
We conjecture that the existence of  regular singular points inside
the interval  indicates that there are  modes crossing from one
side of the spectrum to the other. This conjecture is equivalent to 
the statement that for topological charge  there are  modes that cross 
zero.(The existence of such zero-crossing modes has also been 
discussed recently by Balachandran et al.   in a more geometric 
language. The authors discovered a relation between these modes and 
Euclidean instantons.) 


If we allow for more general Skyrme configurations than the hedgehog,
such a statement becomes even more difficult to prove, because now we
have to  solve partial differential equations. However, both the
topological number and the number of singular points are stable under
small perturbations. Therefore, there seems to be a deep interplay
between the topology of the configuration and the singular points of a
differential operator. This can be compared to monopoles where we have
an index theorem which connects the topology of the monopole
configuration with the index of the Dirac operator. 


In the following we compare our results with the literature.
Kahana and Ripka considered the problem of coupling a hedgehog
configuration to fermions in flat space using an approximation
for the Skyrme configuration with a size parameter. Varying this
parameter they computed the spectral flow of the eigenvalues.
They found a  zero mode for a special value of the "size" of
the hedgehog. 
Since the size is given by minimizing the energy density
for the Skyrmion their result corresponds to varying the
coupling constant .  

In a linear approximation for the shape
function, , was used.
Here  so that the Dirac equation for the fermions is
independent of . However, we defined the Skyrmion as a given
background configuration which minimizes the energy. Therefore,
 where  is the size of the
Skyrmion.   
can be calculated by minimizing the energy: 
. 
Kahana and Ripka showed by numerical calculation that there is a zero  
mode for  which corresponds to . 

In an exponential function was used to approximate the
shape function: .
In this case minimizing the energy results in  and the zero
mode occurs for  which corresponds to .

The fact that there is a mode which crosses zero seems to be
independent of the special ansatz for the shape function. 
This is consistent with our results.

In it has been argued that a Skyrmion in flat space 
is reasonably well approximated by the stereographic projection of a Skyrmion on 
a -sphere of optimal radius. The optimal radius for  is  so we can 
use our analytic result for the mode  in Sect. . 
For  this is a zero mode, and the value of  is in the same 
order of magnitude as in the literature mentioned above.

Conclusion 

We have derived the Dirac equation for fermions on the -sphere which are
chirally coupled to a Skyrmion. In this paper, we only considered spherically 
symmetric Skyrme configurations and fermionic states with the total
angular momentum  . 
We were particularly interested in the shape
functions  and  and the conformal ansatz
().  

The shape function  leads to a hypergeometric equation and can 
therefore be solved explicitly in terms of hypergeometric
functions. To derive the spectrum we have to impose that the solutions
are non-singular at the north and south pole using the correct chart.
We derived the spectrum

 

which agrees with the spectrum calculated by Sen
 using Maurer Cartan forms. Moreover, the
eigenfunctions  are given by Jacobi Polynomials.

The shape function  is more complicated. 
It leads to a Fuchsian equation with four regular singular
points, two at the boundary , one at infinity and one
depending on  and . However, the equation could still be solved in
terms of polynomials. We were able to solve the recurrence relation
for the coefficients of the polynomial and derived the corresponding
spectrum: 

 

The eigenfunctions have been evaluated explicitly:

 

where

  

We also considered more general shape functions numerically. For 
we discussed the conformal ansatz () and calculated the
spectrum. 
For  the spectrum agrees with the analytic solution. In
particular there is a mode  whose energy  crosses zero for a
certain value of the coupling . 
The graph of  as a function of  changes as the 
parameter  in the ansatz is varied. However, for finite , this 
mode always stays present. 
According to our numerical evidence the eigenfunction for  can be 
interpreted as a fermion-Skyrmion bound state.

For larger  we considered the ansatz . This leads to
 modes crossing zero. We conjectured a connection between zero modes
and certain singular points in the equation which in turn are
connected to the winding number of the configuration. 


Acknowledgements 

The author wants to thank N S Manton, H Pfeiffer and Y Shnir for many 
discussions during various stages of this project. 
The author also would like to thank J M Speight for many helpful 
suggestions and continuous support.

 
 10 

T. H. R. Skyrme, A nonlinear field theory , Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.   A260 : 127 (1961 ),


G. S. Adkins, C. R. Nappi and E. Witten, Static properties of nucleons in
  the S kyrme model , Nucl. Phys. B228 : 552 (1983 ),


R. A. Leese, N. S. Manton and B. J. Schroers, Attractive channel skyrmions
  and the deuteron , Nucl. Phys. B442 : 228 (1995 ),
  <hep-ph/9502405>  ,


P. Irwin, Zero mode quantization of multi-skyrmions , Phys. Rev.   D61 : 114024 (2000 ), <hep-th/9804142>  ,


S. Krusch, Homotopy of rational maps and the quantization of skyrmions 
  (2002 ), <hep-th/0210310>  ,


D. Finkelstein and J. Rubinstein, Connection between spin, statistics, and
  kinks , J. Math. Phys. 9 : 1762 (1968 ),


E. Witten, Global aspects of current algebra , Nucl. Phys. B223 :
  422 (1983 ),


A. P. Balachandran and S. Vaidya, Skyrmions, spectral flow and parity
  doubles , Int. J. Mod. Phys. A14 : 445 (1999 ),
  <hep-th/9803125>  ,


J. R. Hiller and T. F. Jordan, Solutions of the D irac equation for
  fermions in S kyrme fields , Phys. Rev. D34 : 1176 (1986 ),


S. Kahana and G. Ripka, Baryon density of quarks coupled to a chiral
  field , Nucl. Phys. A429 : 462 (1984 ),


G. Ripka and S. Kahana, The stability of a chiral soliton in the fermion
  one loop approximation , Phys. Lett. B155 : 327 (1985 ),


G. Ripka, Quarks Bound by Chiral Fields , Oxford Science Publications
 (1997 ).

N. S. Manton and P. J. Ruback, Skyrmions in flat space and curved
  space , Phys. Lett. B181 : 137 (1986 ),


N. S. Manton and B. J. Schroers, Bundles over moduli spaces and the
  quantization of  monopoles , Ann. Phys. 225 : 290 (  1993 ),


M. Nakahara, Geometry, Topology and Physics , Graduate Student Series in
  Physics, IOP Publishing Ltd
 (1990 ).

T. Eguchi, P. B. Gilkey and A. J. Hanson, Gravitation, gauge theories and
  differential geometry , Phys. Rept. 66 : 213 (1980 ),


S. Krusch,  skyrmions and the rational map ansatz , Nonlinearity
  13 : 2163 (2000 ), <hep-th/0006147>  ,


M. Gell-Mann and M. Levy, The axial vector current in beta decay , Nuovo
  Cim. 16 : 705 (1960 ),


N. S. Manton, Geometry of skyrmions , Commun. Math. Phys. 111 : 469
  (1987 ),


E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, A Course of Modern Analysis ,
  Cambridge Mathematical Library, Cambridge University Press, fourth edition
 (1927 ).

M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions ,
  Dover Publications, tenth edition
 (1972 ).

D. Sen, Fermions in the space-time  , J. Math. Phys.
  27 : 472 (1986 ),


M. Carmeli and S. Malin, Field theory on  topology. 3.
  the D irac equation , Found. Phys. 15 : 1019 (1985 ),


W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky and W. T. Vetterling,   Numerical Recipes , Cambridge University Press
 (1992 ).

S. Krusch, Structure of Skyrmions , Ph.D. thesis, University of
  Cambridge
 (2001 ).

G. S. Adkins, Static properties of skyrmions , in K. Liu, editor,   Chiral Solitons , page 99, World Scientific
 (1987 ).

