












 
IMSc/2003/04/05 

hep-th/0304152
 





 
Asymptotic Density of Open p-brane  
 



States with Zero-modes included   




S. Kalyana Rama 



Institute of Mathematical Sciences, C. I. T. Campus, 

Taramani, CHENNAI 600 113, India. 



email: krama@imsc.res.in 
 




ABSTRACT 
  
We obtain the asymptotic density of open -brane states with
zero-modes included. The resulting logarithmic correction to the
-brane entropy has a coefficient , and
is independent of the dimension of the embedding spacetime. Such
logarithmic corrections to the entropy, with precisely this
coefficient, appear in two other contexts also: a gas of
massless particles in -dimensional space, and a Schwarzschild
black hole in -dimensional anti de Sitter spacetime.







1.   
The asymptotic density of states  at level , 
, for -branes compactified on 
 has been be calculated within the semiclassical
quantisation scheme. (For various
applications of this result see the review article inand.) The corresponding -brane entropy,
given by , then has a logarithmic correction
with a particular coefficient , which depends on the
dimension  of the embedding spacetime.

The correct counting of the asymptotic density of states must
also include the zero-mode states. They have been included for
the open string case () in. As a
consequence, the logarithmic correction coefficient  becomes
independent of  and is given by . Such
logarithmic corrections to the entropy, with precisely this
coefficient, , have appeared in other contexts
also: in -dimensional conformal field theories
, and in the entropies for  and 
 dimensional black holes calculated using the spin
network formalism.

In this paper, using the results of, we obtain the
asymptotic density of states for open -branes. We then
include the zero-modes following the methods of
. We find that the logarithmic correction
coefficient  becomes independent of the dimension  of the
embedding spacetime, and is given by .

Logarithmic corrections to entropy also arise for statistical
mechanical systems due to statistical fluctuations.
Using the results of, we find that logarithmic
corrections to the entropy, with precisely the same coefficient
as that obtained in the open -brane case, namely 
, appear in two other contexts also: a gas
of massless particles in -dimensional space, and a
Schwarzschild black hole in -dimensional anti de Sitter
spacetime.

This paper is organised as follows. In section 2 , we
briefly present the results of and, using them, obtain
the asymptotic density of states for open -branes. In section
3 , we include the zero-modes. In section 4 , we show
that such logarithmic corrections with precisely the same
coeffiecient appear in other contexts also. In section 5 ,
we conclude by mentioning a few issues for further study.

2.   
The asymptotic density of states  at level , 
, for -branes compactified on 
 can be calculated within the semiclassical
quantisation scheme, and is of the form 
 
where , , , and  are constants.  was
obtained in and the correct expressions for
the remaining constants , , and  in. The
corresponding -brane entropy  is given by 
 
where the leading term  and 
 is the coefficient of the logarithmic
correction to the entropy.

We now present briefly the results of. Seefor details. In the semiclassical quantisation, the total
number operator  can be written in the proper time
formalism as
  
where , 
,
, and  are
number operators. For the sake of simplicity, we
have set the -brane tension to unity and taken all the
circles in  to be of unit radius. 

Let  be the number of independent eigenstates of the
total number operator  with eigenvalue . Its
generating function  is given by 
 
Inverting the above relation then gives  in terms of
: 
 
where the integration contour is a small circle around the
origin. Using Meinardus theorem and the
properties of Epstein zeta function, an asymptotic expression
for  can be obtained in the limit  which is
sufficient to obtain  in the limit . The
asymptotic expression for  is of the form
 
where , , and  are constants. The contour integral in
(), and thus , can then be evaluated by
saddle point method. For  of the form given in equation
(), the saddle point is located at 
 and , in the
limit , is given by
 
In our case, 
 and  where 
 and  is the Riemann zeta function; the
constant  is given explicitly in and is not required
for our purposes.  See for further details.

We now obtain the asymptotic density of states for an open
-brane using the above results. In this case modes 
and  together contribute to one standing wave (SW)
mode of the open -brane and, hence, should be counted only
once. Thus, the corresponding total number operator is given by 
  
The corresponding generating function  is given by 
  
where the last equality follows since 
 and the product in the last expression
includes both  and . Note that the
generating function  is identical to that in equation
() with  there replaced by . It therefore
follows that the density of states  for an open
-brane in the limit  is given by (), but
now with  replaced by . Explicitly, in the limit
, 
 
where 
,  is as given in
 but with  there replaced by
, and we have used 
 in obtaining ().
Note that  is of the form given in equation ()
with  and 
, and that string theory result is
obtained upon setting .

3. 
We now include the zero-modes and obtain the resulting
asymptotic density of open -brane states. The complete
Hamiltonian for a -brane in the proper time formalism is
given by 
 
where  is the transverse momentum square opeartor and
 is the total number operator given in (),
and they both commute with each other.

The correct counting of the total number of states 
must include the zero-mode states also, namely those
corresponding to the transverse momentum. For open strings 
(),  with zero-modes included has been
calculated in in the limit . The
resulting  is still given by equation () with
 as before, but now with 
 independent of the dimension  of the
embedding spacetime. See for further
discussions.

The total number of states  for open -branes, with
zero-modes included, can be calculated for other values of 
also in the limit .  is still given by
equation (), but now the relevent generating
function , with zero-modes included, is given by
 
where the second equality follows since the operators 
 and  commute with each other and 
is the generating function given in equation (). The
momentum integral can be evaluated easily and results in an
extra -dependent factor given by 



 
where  is a constant. The contour integral in
(), and thus , can now be evaluated by
saddle point method. The saddle point is at 
 as before, and the
total number of open -brane states , in the limit
 and with zero-modes included, is now given by
 
where the constants  and  are as in equation
(). Clearly,  is of the form given in
equation () with  as before,
but now with  independent of the
dimension  of the embedding spacetime.

The open -brane entropy  with zero-modes included is
thus given by 
  
where . The coefficient of the
logarithmic correction to the open -brane entropy with
zero-modes included is now given by  and is
independent of the dimension  of the embedding spacetime.
Note that without zero-modes included it is given by 
, as can be seen from equations ()
and (), and depends on .

4.   
For open strings () with zero-modes included, the
coefficient of the logarithmic correction to the entropy given
above becomes , which agrees with the results of
. Such logarithmic corrections, with precisely
this coefficient, , have appeared in other
contexts also: in -dimensional conformal field theories
, and in the entropies for  and 
 dimensional black holes calculated using the spin
network formalism.

Similarly, it turns out that logarithmic corrections, with
precisely the coefficient given in equation (), namely
, also appear in two other contexts.
Recently, logarithmic corrections to entropies of statistical
mechanical systems, arising due to statistical fluctuations,
have been obtained in. One calculates the density of
states  as an inverse Laplace transformation of the
partition function in the canonical ensemble. Statistical
fluctuations can then be incorporated naturally. Then, 
 is the number of states with energy in the
range  where  depends on the
precision with which the system is prepared and, in particular,
is independent of . The entropy  is therefore given by
.

The result of is that for a system at temperature
, with specific heat  (which must be positive for
this formalism to be applicable), one obtains for its entropy 
 
where  is the leading term. See for details.

Now, consider a gas of massless particles in -dimensional
space. Then 





Equation (), therefore, gives 
 

For a Schwarzschild black hole, the specific heat is negative
and, hence, the above formalism is inapplicable.
However, a Schwarzschild black hole of sufficiently large mass
in a -dimensional anti de Sitter spacetime (AdS) has
positive specific heat. Consider an AdS Schwarzschild
black hole of mass . For sufficiently large , one has
 





where  is the horizon. It then follows that 
. Equation (), therefore, gives
 
See) for details. For AdS, see also
. From equations () and (),
we see that logarithmic corrections to the entropy of a gas of
massless particles in -dimensional space, and to that of an
AdS Schwarzschild black hole, both have a coefficient
 which is precisely the same as that
obtained in the open -brane case with zero-modes included.

5.    
To summarise, we have obtained the asymptotic density of open
-brane states with zero-modes included. The corresponding
open -brane entropy has a logarithmic correction, with a
coefficient . Such logarithmic corrections,
with precisely the same coefficient, also appear for a
-dimensional gas and for an AdS Schwarzschild black
hole where the corrections arise due to statistical
fluctuations.

The relation of a -dimensional gas to AdS
Schwarzschild black hole, for , and , can be
understood in the context of AdS/CFT duality as
that of a boundary conformal field theory at high temperature
. In light of the present results, one may
explore the relations between quantum/semi classical -branes,
-dimensional gas, and AdS spacetime in more
detail. In particular, it will be interesting to know if the
values of  are restricted for quantum/semi classical
-branes, or if a duality exists between -dimensional gas
and AdS spacetime for any value of .

As mentioned earlier, the coefficient ,
corresponding to , also appears for the entropy of a 
 dimensional black hole calculated using the spin
network formalism.  In this formalism, one considers
punctures, each carrying a spin , and counts
the number of spin singlet states, namely those states with
. The leading term (and a part of the
logarithmic correction) in the entropy corresponds to the number
of states with . However, such states include
states with  also. A correct counting,
that counts states with  only, then leads to
the coefficient  for the logarithmic correction
to the entropy. It will be interesting to find if a
similar interpretation exists for the logarithmic correction
coefficient  for other values of 
also.



Acknowledgement:  
We thank C. Castro for suggesting this problem, pointing out the
review article in, and for discussions; R. Kaul for
discussions regarding reference; and K. Kirsten for
correspondence.



 999 

S. Fubini, A. J. Hanson, and R. Jackiw, 
Phys. Rev. D 7  (1973) 1732. 

A. Strumia and G. Venturi,
Lett. Nuovo Cimento 13  (1975) 337; 
E. Alvarez and T. Ortin, 
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 7  (1992) 2889; 
B. Harms and Y. Leblanc, 
Phys. Rev. D 47  (1993) 2438, 
hep-th/9208070. 

M. B. Green, J. Schwarz, and E. Witten, 
Superstring Theory , section 2.3.5, 
Cambridge University Press, 1987. 

A. A. Bytsenko, K. Kirsten, and S. Zerbini, 
Phys. Lett. B 304  (1993) 235; 
A. A. Bytsenko, K. Kirsten, and S. Zerbini, 
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 9  (1994) 1569, 
hep-th/9405090. See also the review 
A. A. Bytsenko, G. Cognola, L. Vanzo, and S. Zerbini, 
Phys. Rept. 266  (1996) 1, 
hep-th/9505061 and references therein. 

A. A. Bytsenko and S. D. Odintsov, 
Prog. Theor. Phys. 98  (1997) 987, 
hep-th/9611151; 
A. A. Bytsenko, A. E. Goncalves, and S. D. Odintsov, 
JETP Lett. 66  (1997) 11, 
hep-th/9708136. 

S. Carlip,
Class. Quant. Grav. 17  (2000) 4175,
gr-qc/0005017.
See also P. Di Francesco, P. Mathieu, and D. Senechal, 
Conformal Field Theory , sections 6.3 and 10.2, 
Springer 1997. 

R. K. Kaul, hep-th/0302170. 

R. K. Kaul and P. Majumdar, 
Phys. Lett. B 439  (1998) 267, 
gr-qc/9801080; 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84  (2000) 5255, 
gr-qc/0002040; 
S. Das, R. K. Kaul, and P. Majumdar, 
Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 044019, 
gr-qc/0006211; 
R. K. Kaul and S. Kalyana Rama, 
to appear in Phys. Rev. D , 
gr-qc/0301128. 

D. Birmingham and S. Sen, 
Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 047501, 
hep-th/0008051; 
T. R. Govindarajan, R. K. Kaul, and V. Suneeta, 
Class. Quant. Grav. 18  (2001) 2877, 
gr-qc/0104010.

S. Das, P. Majumdar, and R. K. Bhaduri, 
Class. Quant. Grav. 19  (2002) 2355, 
hep-th/0111001. 

For the definition of the number operators 
 and their commutation properties see, for example, 
M. J. Duff et al,  
Nucl. Phys. B 297  (1988) 515.

See, for example, 
G. E. Andrews, 
The Theory of Partitions , Chapter 6, 
Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Volume 2,
Addison-Wesley publishing company (1976). 

E. Witten, 
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 505, 
hep-th/9803131. 

J. M. Maldacena, 
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 231, 
hep-th/9711200; 
S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov, and A. M. Polyakov, 
Phys. Lett. B 428  (1998) 105, 
hep-th/9802109; 
E. Witten, 
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 253, 
hep-th/9802150. 


