













The Holographic Supercurrent Anomaly 

M. Chaichian
E-mail: Masud.Chaichian@helsinki.fi  and W.F.
ChenE-mail:
Wen-feng.Chen@helsinki.fi   


 High Energy Physics Division, Department of Physical Sciences,
University of Helsinki

and

 Helsinki Institute of Physics, FIN-00014,  Helsinki,
Finland 

 
The -trace anomaly of supersymmetry
current in a supersymmetric gauge theory  shares a
superconformal anomaly multiplet with the  chiral -symmetry anomaly
and the Weyl anomaly, and its holographic reproduction is a
valuable test to the AdS/CFT correspondence conjecture.
We investigate how the -trace anomaly of the supersymmetry
current of  four-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theory
in an  conformal supergravity background
can be extracted out from the  gauged supergravity
in five dimensions.
It is shown that the reproduction of this super-Weyl anomaly
 originates from the following two facts: First the 
bulk supersymmetry transformation converts into 
superconformal transformation on the boundary, which consists of
 supersymmetry transformation and
special conformal supersymmetry (or super-Weyl) transformation;
second the supersymmetry variation of the bulk action
 of five-dimensional gauged supergravity is a total derivative.
  The non-compatibility
 of supersymmetry and  the super-Weyl transformation invariance yields
 the holographic supersymmetry current anomaly. Furthermore, we speculate
on that the contribution from the external gauge field
to the holographic superconformal anomaly is dominated by the leading
terms in the asymptotic expansion of the bulk fields in terms of
the radial coordinate, while external gravitational background
contribution is determined by those terms with logarithmic function
dependence on the radial coordinate.




PACS : 04.65.+e, 11.30.Pb, 11.15.-q, 11.40.-q








Introduction 


  The AdS/CFT
correspondence conjecture  states that  the type IIB string theory compactified on 
  theory with  units of  flux on  describes the same physics
  as   supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory.
  Further, the explicit definition was  given
  in Refs. and as follows. In general, Given
 the type IIB superstring theory in the background
,
 with  being a compact Einstein manifold, the boundary effect of
the type IIB superstring  theory must be considered since
 has a boundary at spatial infinity, which is actually
a copy of Minkowski space  (or its compactfied version ).  The
partition function of such a string theory with certain boundary
value of a bulk field takes the following form,
 
where  is the boundary value of the  bulk quantity
 such as the graviton, gravitino,  and 
antisymmetric tensor fields etc..
Since the isometry group  of  acts as the
conformal group  on , and hence a quantum field theory
defined on the boundary should be conformal invariant. The
 correspondence conjecture means that the type IIB
superstring partition function () should be identical to
the generating functional for the correlation functions of the
composite operators of certain conformal field theory
 
 being the quantum effective action describing
the composite operators  interacting with
 background field. That is,
  
In the large- case,  the type IIB string correction to
supergravity
is proportional to  ,  being
the string coupling, thus one can neglect the
string effect and just consider its low-energy effective theory,
the type IIB supergravity. In this case,
the  partition function of the type IIB superstring can be
evaluated as the exponential of the supergravity action in a field
configuration  which satisfies the
classical equation of motion of the supergravity with the boundary
condition given by , i.e.,
 
Comparing () with () and (), we immediately
conclude that the background effective action of the  large- limit
of the -dimensional conformal field theory can be approximately
equal to the on-shell classical action of   supergravity with
non-empty boundary,
 
In the above equation,  are the various composite operators
in the superconformal field theory such as the energy-momentum tensor
and chiral -symmetry current etc. and  are the
corresponding background fields such as the gravitational
and gauge  fields etc., which are boundary values of the corresponding
bulk fields.


Let us emphasize the role of the five-dimensional
gauged supergravities in AdS/CFT
correspondence.  The 
background arises from
the near horizon limit of -brane solution of type IIB supergravity
.
In the  background, the spontaneous
compactification on 
of the type IIB  supergravity actually occurs.
With the assumption that there exists
a consistent nonlinear
truncation of the massless modes from
the whole Kluza-Klein spectrum of the
type IIB supergravity  compactified on ,
the resultant theory should be the  gauged 
 supergravity since the isometry group  of the internal
space  becomes the gauge group of the compactified theory and
the  background preserves all of the supersymmetries of
type IIB supergravity.
Furthermore, if the background for the type IIB supergravity
is   with  being an
Einstein manifold rather than  such as 
 or certain orbifold, then due to the singularities in
the internal manifold, the number of preserved supersymmetries in
the compactified  supergravity is reduced and the
isometry group of the theory also changes.  One can
thus obtain
the gauged   supergravity in five dimensions,
and their dual field theories  are believed to be  supersymmetric
gauge theories.
In a strict sense, a supersymmetric gauge theory with lower supersymmetries
is not a conformal invariant theory since its beta function does not vanish.
However, it was shown that renormalization group flow of this type of
supersymmetric gauge theory has the fixed point, at which the conformal
invariance can arise.
The  correspondence between the 
gauged supergravities in five dimensions and  
supersymmertric
gauge theories can thus be built.

With the truncation  from the Kaluza-Klein tower, Eq.() can be
 considered as a quantum effective action
describing a superconformal gauge theory in an external supergravity
background, only where the external fields are
provided by the boundary values of those in a one-dimension-higher
bulk space-time. It is well known that the superconformal  anomaly
will arise from a classical superconformal gauge
theory  in an external supergravity background.
The reproduction of the  superconformal anomaly from the bulk
gauged supergravity will provide an important support to the above 
correspondence conjecture  at low-energy level.

In the next section, we shall briefly introduce the superconformal
anomaly for the  supersymmetric gauge theory in
an external  conformal  supergravity background.
Section 3 is devoted to a review of the 
gauged supergravity in five dimensions and its
 classical solution.
 We also emphasize  the behaviour of the fields
of gauged supergravity near the  boundary
and the reduction of bulk supersymmetry transformation
into an  superconformal transformation
on the  boundary. It is well known that the 
superconformal transformation consists of
the  four-dimensional supersymmetry transformation
and the special conformal supersymmetry transformation
(or super-Weyl in curved space-time background).
In section 4,
we calculate the supersymmetry variation of the five-dimensional 
gauged supergravity and extract out the surface term. Furthermore,
considering the fact that the four-dimensional supersymmetry and
the super-Weyl symmetry cannot be preserved simultaneously, we
find the  external gauge field part of the
holographic super-Weyl anomaly of 
supersymmetric gauge theory  from the boundary term the five-dimensional
gauged supergravity.
In Section 5 we  summarize the main results, and give some further discussions.
Our results suggest that the contributions to the superconformal anomaly
from the external vector field and gravitational  field have different
holographic origin: the external vector contribution lies in the
  leading term in the near-boundary expansion of the bulk fields, while
the gravitational background contribution comes from the terms
with logarithmic dependence on the radial coordinate in the expansion.


Superconformal Anomaly Multiplet in External
Conformal Supergravity Background 

The four-dimensional  supersymmetric  gauge theory
consists of  the  supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory coupled
with  massless matter fields in various possible representations
of the gauge group. The classical Lagrangian density is
 
where  is the field strength for the  gauge
field and the  is a Majorana spinor
in the adjoint representation of .
Due to the supersymmetry, its energy-momentum
tensor , the supersymmetry current  and
the axial vector (or equivalently chiral) R-current 
 lie in a supermultiplet.
These currents at classical
level are not only conserved,
 
but also satisfy further algebraic constraints
 
This will promote  the Poincare  supersymmetry to a superconformal
symmetry since one can construct three more conserved currents,
 
These three new conserved currents give the generators for
dilatation, conformal boost and special supersymmetry transformation.
 However,  the superconformal symmetry may become
 anomalous at quantum level. In the case that all of them, the trace of
 energy-momentum tensor, , the -trace
 of supersymmetry current,  and the divergence
 of the chiral -current, ,  get
 contribution from quantum effects,
 
 will form a (on-shell) chiral supermultiplet with the 
 playing the role of the lowest component of the
corresponding composite chiral superfield.


In general, there are two possible sources for above
 chiral supermultiplet anomaly. One is due to the
non-vanishing beta function of  supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory; The other one comes from
  the coupling of  above supercurrent multiplet with
the external supergravity fields. In this paper, we shall concentrate
on the superconformal anomaly arising from the latter one. In this
case, the -trace anomaly consists only of the super-Weyl
anomaly since the corresponding special conformal supersymmetry
transformation is just the supersymmetric analog of the Weyl
(or local dilational) transformation.
  Note that in
a supersymmetric gauge theory,
the Poincare 
 symmetry corresponding to the energy-momentum tensor ,
 the supersymmetry corresponding to the supersymmetry current
 , and the chiral -symmetry to the axial vector
 current  are all
 global symmetries and there no
 gauge fields within the supersymmetric gauge theory itself to
 couple with them. If there are
 some external supergravity fields , axial vector fields 
 and vector-spinor (Rarita-Schwinger) fields  couple
 to ,   and ,
 respectively,
  
 there will arise  external superconformal
anomaly chiral supermultiplet.
The action () describing the coupling of the external
supergravity fields with the currents of supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory
shows  that the covariant conservations  of
the currents, , are
equivalent to the local gauge transformation invariance of the external
supergravity system,
 
Furthermore,
the covariant conservation of the axial vector
current  and
 the vanishing of both the -trace of supersymmetry current
and the trace of energy-momentum  tensor at classical level,
 
mean the Weyl transformation invariance of , the super-Weyl
symmetry and the 
chiral gauge symmetry of the corresponding external supergravity system,
 
The transformations () and () imply that the external
fields
 
 constitute
an off-shell  conformal supergravity multiplet.
Therefore, in the context of the  (or
more generally gravity/gauge) correspondence the
 superconformal anomaly   in 
supersymmetric gauge theory due to the supergravity external sources
will be reflected
in the explicit violations of the bulk symmetries
of  gauged  supergravity on the boundary
.



With no consideration on the quantum correction from the dynamics of
the supersymmetric gauge theory, the external superconformal anomaly
is exhausted  at one-loop level. The external superconformal anomaly
multiplet for   supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory is listed
as the following:
 




 







In above equations,   is
the field strength
corresponding to the external  vector field ;

and   are the Riemannian and Weyl
tensors corresponding to the
gravitational field . The factor 
comes from the fact that the gauginoes are in the adjoint representation
 of  gauge group and hence there are  copies.

In the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, the holographical arising
of the  gauge field part of the chiral  anomaly
was pointed out by Witten that it should come directly from
the Chern-Simons
term in the five-dimensional gauged supergravity.
Further, the holographic Weyl anomaly
was shown in Ref. through a procedure called
holographic renormalization and in Ref.by the holomorphic dimensional regularization and
a special bulk diffeomorphsm preserving the Fefferman-Graham
metric of an arbitrary -dimensional manifold
with boundary topologically isomorphic to , respectively.
Actually, there have arisen quite a number of papers to discuss
various aspects of the holographic Weyl anomaly including
the modified models, the asymptotically 
space-time,  the  correction and new calculation
framework such as the Hamilton-Jacobi equation etc.
The aim of this paper is to tackle the holographic origin of
the supersymmetry current anomaly .





  Gauged Supergravity   in Five Dimensions
and Its  Boundary Reduction 



To show clearly how the holographic supersymmetry current anomaly arises,
we shall review some typical features of the 
gauged supergravity in five dimensions.


The ungauged  supergravity in five dimensions has the
same structure as  eleven-dimensional supergravity.
It has a global
 R-symmetry, and it contains a graviton , two
gravitini  and a vector field ,
 are the Riemannian and local Lorentz indices, respectively,
and  the  doublet indices.
The gravitini are the
 doublets and the symplectic Majorana spinors. The classical
Lagrangian density takes a simple form,

 
where the covariant derivative on the spinor field is defined with
the spinor connection ,
 

 The gauging of above supergravity is just turning the  subgroup of
 the global
  R-symmetry group into a local gauge group and straightforwardly
 considering the vector
 field as the   gauge field. The space-time
 covariant derivative  on the gravitini
 will be enlarged to include the  gauge covariant derivative,
 
The gauged  supergravity action is
 
The gauged  supergravity  has   classical
solution that
preserves  supersymmetry with the cosmological
constant proportional to .
To make the  classical solution take the standard form,
 
one must choose the parameters in the Lagrangian () as the
following ones:
  
Consequently,
the  Lagrangian density ()
  up to the quadratic terms in spinor fields becomes
  
The supersymmetry transformations at the leading order in spinor
fields read
 


To calculate the holographic superconformal anomaly, we need
to expand the fields around the  vacuum solution
(). Geometrically,
this  is actually a process of revealing the asymptotic
behaviour of the bulk fields
near the boundary of  space-time. Correspondingly, the
various bulk symmetries will be reduced to those on the boundary.
For examples, the bulk diffeormorphism invariance of the bulk
decomposes into  the diffeomorphism  symmetry on the boundary
and the Weyl symmetry, and the the bulk
supersymmetry converts into
a superconformal symmetry for an off-shell
 conformal supergravity on the boundary.

 The procedure of reducing the bulk gauged supergravity to
  the off-shell conformal supergravity on the boundary is
  displayed in a series of works on ,
    and  by Nishimura et al.
     The key point is  using the equations of motion of the
     bulk fields to
   find their radial coordinate dependence near the boundary
   of  space. For the spinor field such as
   the gravitino, one should also show how a
  sympletic  Majorana spinor in  five dimensions reduces to
  the chiral spinor on the four-dimensional boundary.
   The reduction from the on-shell
   five-dimensional  gauged supergravity
   to  off-shell conformal supergravity
   in four dimensions
   was performed
by Balasubramanian et al., so we briefly review their
result and then use it to derive the holographic
super-Weyl anomaly of the supersymmetry current
in  supersymmetric gauge theory.


 As the first step, one should partially fix the local symmetries of bulk
   supergravity
   in the radial direction. According to the  solution
   (), one can choose    
   and
    
to fix the Lorentz symmetry, the supersymmetry and
the gauge symmetry in the -direction, respectively.
The gauge-fixing choice and the torsion-free condition
, further determine the -dependence
of the spin connections,
 
In above equations, 
are the Riemannian and local Lorentz indices on the boundary, respectively,
and  is the Lorentz index in the radial direction.
We use the lower case quantities
to  denote the boundary values of bulk fields,
i.e., they are independent of the radial
coordinate .


The linearized equation of motion for the gauge
field  near the boundary,
 
implies that at the leading order in 
one can choose   to be independent of ,
 
Furthermore, the linearized equation of motion for the gravitino is
 
The reduced spin connection () and gauge field ()
as well as the gauge choices () and ()
lead to the boundary reduction of the bulk covariant derivative,
  
 where the four-dimensional convention is defined as the following,
  
The linearized gravitino equation reduces to
  
Diagonalizing the above equation by combining the
two components of the symplectic Majorana spinor,
,
and making the chiral decomposition
,
 ,
one can  see that near the boundary , the equation for the
right-handed component reads 
and hence the radial dependence of  is
 
The  left-handed  component is not independent, and
its radial coordinate dependent behaviour turns out to be 
Therefore, the   bulk supergravity multiplet
() reduces to the
boundary field (,
, ). It is actually the
 8+8 off-shell muiltiplet of  conformal supergravity
 since the bulk supersymmetry transformation
() reduces to the one for   conformal supergravity
.


The boundary reduction of the bulk supersymmetric transformation to
that for  the conformal supergravity is the following. First, as done
for the bulk gravitino, one
must redefine the bulk supersymmetric transformation parameter,
 and
decompose it as the chiral
components. The radial coordinate dependence of 
 should be the same as
as the bulk gravitino,
 
At the leading order in , the bulk supersymmetric
transformations reduces to 
where all the spinorial quantities, ,

 and 
 are Majorana spinors constructed from
their chiral components , ,
 and . Eq.()
shows that the reduced bulk supersymmetric transformation is
indeed the supersymmetric transformation for 
conformal supergravity with  and  playing
the roles of parameters for supersymmetry and special supersymmetry
transformations, respectively.


Holographic Super-Weyl anomaly of supersymmetry current 



The arising of the super-Weyl anomaly in 
 supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory from the  gauged  supergravity
 lies in two aspects. On one hand,
as a supersymmetric field theory, the supersymmetric variation
of the Lagrangian () of the gauged
supergravity is a total derivative.
These total derivative terms cannot be naively ignored due to the existence
of the boundary . On the other hand, near the  boundary,
the bulk supersymmetric transformation  decomposes into the
supersymmetry transformation and the super-Weyl transformation
on the boundary.
If we require  supersymmetry on the boundary to be preserved,
the total derivative
terms should yield the super-Weyl anomaly of the supersymmetry
current via the AdS/CFT correspondence given by Eq.().

 In the following, we shall calculate the supersymmetric
 variation of the gauged  five-dimensional supergravity
 () and extract out the total derivative terms. Then we shall
 reduce it to the  boundary and give the holographic supersymmetry
 current anomaly.  However, it should be emphasized that this surface term
 only yields the gauge field background part of the super-Weyl anomaly.
 One must employ a holographic renormalization procedure to reveal
 the gravitational part, just as how the holographic Weyl anomaly
 was found in Ref..

 First, the supersymmetric variation of the pure gravitational term
 and the cosmological term gives
  
where  is the inverse of .

 The supersymmetry variation of the pure gauge field terms
 (including Chern-Simons term) yields
  

As for the supersymmtric variations
 of the terms concerning the gravitino, we start from the
 kinetic terms of the gravitino,
  
 Considering only the terms at most quadratic in the
 spinor quantities, we have
  
 We list the calculation results in the following:
  
 The supersymmetric variation of the gravitino mass term is
  
 Finally, the supersymmetric variation of the interaction terms between
 the gravitino  and the graviphoton  gives
  
 Putting the above supersymmetric variations ()
- () together, we get
 

 In above calculation, we have made use of the following
 relations,
  
 Due to the nocommutativity between  and
 , we reiteratively use the following operations,
  
 It is convenient to choose the inertial coordinate system,
 i.e. the Christoffel symbol . Consequently,
 the metricity condition leads to
  
 and hence the modified spin connection,
  
  keeps only the quadratic fermionic terms.
 We have also considered the Ricci and Bianchi identities for
 the Riemannian curvature tensor and the Abelian gauge field
  

If we choose the indefinite Chern-Simons coefficient in Eq.()
as
 
the above supersymmetric variation of 
gauged supergravity action in five dimensions is a total derivative,
 
which is the typical feature of a supersymmetric field theory.


 Now we can extract out the holographic super-Weyl anomaly from above
 total derivative
 terms as Witten did in finding out the chiral
 -symmetry anomaly. Considering the -dependence of bulk fields
 and of the supersymmetry transformation parameter  given in
 (), (), (), (), (),
 (), () and (), and taking
 the boundary limit  after we integrate over
 the radial coordinate to the near boundary cut-off  , we
 obtain
  
 In deriving Eq.()  we have used  the fact  that
 the metric on the boundary should be the induced metric
  
rather than .
If we switch on the overall
gravitational constant factor
 on the classical Lagrangian (),
and consider
the following relations among the  radius , string
coupling , the number  of the -branes, the
five- and ten-dimensional
gravitational constants connected  by the compactification
on  of radius ,
 
Eq.() yields the gauge field part of the holographic
super-Weyl anomaly (up to a numerical factor),
 
This is the super-Weyl anomaly of supersymmetry
current contributed from the external gauge field background
at the leading order
of large- expansion of   supersymmetric gauge
theory.



Summary and Discussion 

We have investigated the super-Weyl anomaly
of  supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in the
external  conformal supergravity background via the AdS/CFT
correspondence. With the speculation that
at low-energy the type IIB supergravity in  background
should reduce to the gauged supergravity in five dimensions since
such a background provides a spontaneous compactification on ,
there should exists a holographic correspondence between
 conformal supergravity in five dimensions   and
 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory at the fixed point
of its renormalization group flow. The five-dimensional
 gauged  supergravity  has an  classical
solution  which preserves the full supersymmetry.
Around this  vacuum configuration, the five-dimensional
  on-shell gauged supergravity multiplet reduces to the
 off-shell conformal supergravity mutiplet on the boundary
of  space. Correspondingly, the bulk 
supersymmetry transformation converts into the 
superconformal transformation in four dimensions, which consists
of the  supersymmetry transformation for 
Poincare  supergravity and super-Weyl transformation. With
these facts in mind, we calculate the supersymmetry variation of the 
gauged supergravity in five dimensions and obtain the total derivative
terms. Further, we reduce the total derivative terms to the boundary
of  space using the boundary reduction of the bulk
fields. Considering the incompatibility of
the  Poincare  supersymmetry and the super-Weyl symmetry,
we  extract out the super-Weyl anomaly of  supersymmetric gauge
theory.

   However, as shown in Eq.(), we only reveal the contribution
 from the external gauged field when 
supersymmetric gauge theory couples to  conformal
supergravity background. As shown long-time ago in Ref.,
 there should also arise
a contribution from the external gravitational  background,
 
The reason for not having revealed this gravitational background
contribution is
that we only consider the leading order of -dependence
of the bulk fields.  If we make an complete near-boundary
analysis and consider the asymptotic expansion until the logarithmic
term emerges, i.e.,
 
the on-shell gauged five-dimensional supergravity action
has an indfrared divergence  near the  boundary due to its
infinite boundary. One must perform a holographic renormalization
procedure to make it well defined.
In this way, we believe that the contribution from the gravitational
background field will arise exactly as the holographic Weyl anomaly does
. Actually, in the pioneering work by Witten,
 it was pointed out that the chiral -symmetry anomaly
 comes from the Chern-Simons term of five-dimensional conformal
 supergravity. This can also give only the contribution from the external
 gauge field. To achieve the contribution to the chiral R-symmetry
 anomaly
 from the gravitational
 background, one must consider the asymptotic expansion of the bulk fields
 until the logarithmic function  of the radial coordinate
 emerges. The superficial  reason  for this  lies in the
 existence of the Chern-Simons term
 consisting only of the vector field.
 The Chern-Simons term is a topological term and becomes
 a total derivative under gauge transformation. Its supersymmetric
 variation is not a total derivative term, but to achieve supersymmetry
 for the bulk gauged supergravity, as shown in
 Eqs.()-(), one must choose the indefinite
 coefficient of the Chern-Simons term to make its non-derivative
 supersymmetric variation  cancel with the other one. In particular,
 unlike the induced metric  and
 the gravitino ,
 the leading term in the near-boundary asymptotic expansion
 of the gauge field  is
 independent of the radial coordinate.
 In Eq.(), it is the
 total derivative term relevant to the supersymmetric variation
 of the Chern-Simons term that leads to the external gauge field
 contribution to the super-Weyl anomaly of supersymmetry current.
 We are not aware  whether there exist any
 physical reasons for the difference between these two holographic
  contributions
  to the superconformal anomaly. Since the essence of the holographic anomaly
  is the anomaly inflow from the bulk theory,(
  We thank  A. Kobakhidze for discussion on this point.) 
  this is the reason why one can extract out the anomaly  from a
  higher-dimensional bulk theory,
  Thus it might be relevant to the difference between the
  anomaly inflows contributed by the gravitational and gauge field
  backgrounds.

Finally, it is worth to emphasize another way of calculating the
holographic Weyl anomaly proposed in Ref.. This approach
is independent of the concerete form of the classical bulk gravitational
action, and depends  purely on a special bulk diffeomorphism (called
the " PBH " transformation), which keeps the form of
the Fefferman-Graham metric of an arbitrary -dimensional
manifold with the boundary topologically isomorphic to 
invariant and reduces to a Weyl transformation on the boundary.
With a choice on the holomorphic dimensional regularization, there emerges
no logarithmic  function of the radial coordinate in the
near-boundary asymptotic expansion. Further, the invariance of a
 general bulk gravitational action, which admits an 
 classical solution,
 under this particular diffeomorphism  yields a
Wess-Zumino-like consistency condition satisfied by the generating
functional for the Weyl anomaly on the boundary ( being
an even integer).  Hence the hologrpahic Weyl anomaly can be extracted
out and no holographic renormalization procedure is necessary.
The advantage of this approach is that one can avoid the
complicated near-boundary analysis
and the subsequent holographic renormalization procedure. One may consider
to use  this approach to calculate the super-Weyl
anomaly of a supersymmetry current. However, there is one crucial obstacle
to overcome. That is, one needs to find a supersymmetric generalization of
above special bulk diffeomorphism, which should keep both the supersymmetry
in the bulk and on the boundary. In such an approach, one must
employ the holographic dimensional regularization to prevent the
logarithmic dependence from emerging
in the near-boundary asymptotic expansion. However, the dimensional
regularization in general does not preserve the supersymmetry.
This fact has cast a shadow on the application of the above approach to the
evaluation of the holographic supercurrent anomaly.



We are indebted to M. Grisaru,
 A. Kobakhidze, M. Nishimura and A. Schwimmer
for discussions.
We also would like to thank G. Kunstatter, R.G. Leigh,
 C. Montonen and M. Sheikh-Jabbari for useful remarks.
 This work is supported by
the Academy of Finland under the Project No. 163394.


 


 J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 231.



 S.S. Gubser, I.R. Klebanov and A.M. Polyakov,
Phys. Lett. B428  (1998) 105.



 E. Witten,  Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 253.




 M. Gu naydin, G. Sierra and P.K. Townsend,
Nucl. Phys. B242  (1984) 244; Nucl. Phys. B253  (1985)
573.

 M. Awada and P.K. Townsend,
Nucl. Phys. 255  (1985) 617;
L.J. Romans, Nucl. Phys. B267  (1986) 433.


M. Gu naydin, L. J. Romans and N.P. Warner,
Phys. Lett. B154  (1985) 268; Nucl. Phys. 272  (1986) 598.


 S. Ferrara, C. Fronsdal and A. Zaffaroni,
Nucl. Phys. B532  (1998) 153;  S. Ferrara and A. Zaffaroni,
Phys. Lett. B431  (1998) 49.



 For a review, see O. Aharony, S.S. Gubser, J. Maldacena,
H. Ooguri and Y. Oz, Phys. Rept. 323  (2000) 183.



 P.G.O. Freund and M.A. Rubin,
Phys. Lett. B97  (1980) 233.

 For a review, see M. Duff, B.E.W. Nilsson and
C.N. Pope, Phys. Rep. 130  (1986) 1.

 M. Gu naydin and N. Marcus,
Class. Quant. Grav. 2  (1985) L11.

 H.J. Kim, L.J. Romans and P. Van Nieuwenhuizen,
Phys. Rev. D32  (1985) 389.

 L.J. Romans, Phys. Lett. B153  (1984) 401.

 I.R. Klebanov and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B536 
(1998) 536.


 S. Kachru and E. Silverstein,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 
(1998) 4855.

 A. Lawrence, N. Nekrasov and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys.
 B533  (1998) 199.

 N.A. Novikov, M.A. Shifman, A.I. Vainshtein
and V.I. Zakharov, Nucl. Phys. B229  (1983) 381.

 N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B435  (1995) 129.

R.G. Leigh and M.J. Strassler, Nucl. Phys.
 B447  (1995) 95.


 For earlier works discussing on the 
  superconformal symmetry based on the perturbative -function,
  see P. West, Phys. Lett. B137  (1984) 371;
  A. Parkes and P. West,  Phys. Lett. B138  (1984) 99;
  D.R.T. Jones and L. Mezincescu, Phys. Lett. B138  (1984) 293;
  S. Hamidi, J. Patera and J. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B141  (1984) 349;
  W. Lucha and H. Neufeld, Phys. Lett. B174  (1986) 186;
  P. Piguet, K. Sibold, Phys. Lett. B177  (1986) 373; Int. J. Mod. Phys.
  A1  (1986) 913; Phys. Lett. B201  (1988) 241; C. Lucchesi,
  O. Piguet and K. Sibold, Helv. Phys. Acta, 61  (1988) 321.
  D.R. T. Jones, Nucl. Phys. B277  (1986) 153; A.V. Ermushev,
  D.I. Kazakov and O.V. Tarasov, Nucl. Phys. B281  (1987) 72;
  X.D. Jiang and X.J. Zhou,  Phys. Lett. B197  (1987) 156;
  Phys. Lett. B216  (1989) 160; Phys. Rev. D42  (1990) 2109.
  C. Lucchesi and  G. Zoupanos, Fortsch. Phys. 45  (1997) 129.


 For earlier works discussing on the 
  superconformal symmetry based on the perturbative -function, see
  P. Howe, K. Stelle and P. West, Phys. Lett. B124  (1983) 55;
  I.G. Koh and S. Rajpoot, Phys. Lett. B135  (1984) 397;
  F.X. Dong, T.S. Tu, P.Y. Xue and X.J. Zhou,
  Phys. Lett. B140  (1984) 333;
  J.P. Derendinger, S. Ferrara and A. Masiero,
  Phys. Lett. B143  (1984) 133.


 H. Liu and A.A. Tseytlin, Nucl. Phys. B533 
(1998) 88.


J. Iliopoulos and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B76 
(1974) 310; S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B87 
(1975) 207; P. Howe, K.S. Stelle and P.K. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B192 
(1981) 332.



 For reviews, see M.F. Sohnius, Phys. Rep. 128  (1985)
39; P. West, Introduction to Supersymmertry and Supergravity 
(World Scientific, Singapore, 1990); M. Chaichian, W.F. Chen and C. Montonen,
Phys. Rep. 346  (2001) 89.


 T.E. Clark, O. Piguet and K. Sibold,
Nucl. Phys. B143  (1978) 445; O. Piguet and K. Sibold,
Nucl. Phys. B196  (1982) 428; ibid  (1982) 447.


 For a brief review, see  M.T. Grisaru,
Anomalies in Supersymmetric Theories ,
Invited talk given at NATO Advanced Study Institute
on Gravitation: Recent Developments , Cargese, France, Jul 10-29, 1978;
 D. Anselmi, D.Z. Freedman, M.T. Grisaru and  A.A. Johansen,
Nucl. Phys. B526  (1998) 543.

 S. Ferrara, M. Kaku, P.K. Townsend, P. van Nieuwenhuizen,
Nucl. Phys. B129  (1977) 125; M. Kaku, P.K. Townsend,
P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev. D17  (1978) 3179; Phys. Lett. B69  (1977) 304; J. Crispim-Romao, Nucl. Phys. B145 
(1978) 535; T. Kugo and S. Uehara, Nucl. Phys. B226  (1983) 49.


For a review, see
E.S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, Phys. Rep. 119  (1985) 233.


 M. Henningson and K. Skenderis,
JHEP 9807  (1998) 023.




 M. Bianchi, D.Z. Freedman and K. Skenderis,
 Nucl. Phys. B631  (2002) 159;
 
 
 JHEP: 0108  (2001) 041.
 


 C. Imbimbo, A. Schwimmer, S. Theisen and S.
Yankielowicz, Class. Quant. Grav. 17  (2000) 1129.



 C. Fefferman and C.R. Graham, " Conformal Invariants "
in Elie Cartan et les Mathe matiques d'aujourd'hui 
(Aste risque, 1985) P. 95.

 S. Nojiri and S.D. Odintsov,
Phys. Lett. B444  (1998) 92; Int. J. Mod. Phys. A15 
(2000) 413;  Mod. Phys. Lett. A15  (2000) 1043;
S. Nojiri, S.D. Odintsov, S. Ogushi, A. Sugamoto
and M. Yamamoto, Phys. Lett. B465  (1999) 128.


 V. Balasubranian and P. Kraus, Comm. Math. Phys. 208 
 (1999) 3731; A.M. Awad and C.V. Johnson, Phys. Rev. D61  (2000) 084025.
 

 O. Aharony, J. Pawelczyk, S. Theisen and
S. Yankielowicz,  Phys. Rev. D60  (1999) 066001;
M. Blau, E. Gava and K.S. Narain, JHEP 9909 (1999)  010;
P. Mansfield and D. Nolland, Phys. Lett. B495  (2000) 435;
S.G. Naculich, H.J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
 Int. J. Mod. Phys. A17  (2002) 2567.


 J. Kalkkinen and D. Martelli,
Nucl. Phys. B596  (2001) 215; J. Kalkkinen, D. Martelli
and W. Mu ck, JHEP 0104 (2001) 036;
M. Fukuma, S. Matsuura and  T. Sakai, Prog. Theor. Phys.
104  (2000) 1089.


 E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk,
Phys. Lett. B76  (1978) 409.

 E. Cremmer, in Superspace and Supergravity , ed. by
S.W. Hawking and M. Roce k (Cambridge University Press, 1981).


 For a recent discussion relevant to five-dimensional 
gauged supergravity, see M. Gu naydin and M. Zagermann,
Nucl. Phys. B572  (2000) 131;
Phys. Rev. D62  (2000) 044028; ibid  D63  (2001) 064023.


A. Ceresole and G. Dall'Agata, Nucl. Phys. B585  (2000) 143.



 M. Nishimura and Y. Tanii, Phys. Lett. B446  (1999)
37; Int. J. Mod. Phys. A14  (1999) 3731; Mod. Phys. Lett. A14 
(1999) 2709. M. Nishimura, Nucl. Phys. B588  (2000) 471.


 V. Balasubramanian, E. Gimon, D. Minic and J. Rahmfeld,
 Phys. Rev. D63  (2001) 104009.
 

 L.F. Abbott, M.T. Grisaru and H.J. Schnitzer,
Phys. Lett. B73  (1978) 71.


C.G. Callan and J.A. Harvey,
Nucl. Phys. B250  (1985) 427;
S. Naculich, Nucl. Phys. B296  (1988) 837.


 R. Penrose and W. Rindler, Spinors and Spacetime ,
Chapter 9, Volume 2 (Cambridge University Press, 1986);
J.D. Brown and M. Henneaux, Commun. Math. Phys. 104  (1986) 207.







