





















255 by #2
255 by #2
255 by -#1
#1=-255 
by 60
 60 











  
















 
UCLA/03/TEP/13

hep-th/0304138

 


Loop equations, matrix models, and


 supersymmetric gauge theories
 


Per Kraus, Anton V. Ryzhov, and Masaki Shigemori


Department of Physics and Astronomy, 

UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547, 

pkraus, ryzhovav, shige@physics.ucla.edu 



 
We derive the Konishi anomaly equations for  supersymmetric gauge
theories based on the classical gauge groups with matter in 
two-index tensor and fundamental representations, thus 
extending the existing results for .

A general formula is obtained which expresses  solutions to the Konishi
anomaly equation in terms of solutions to the loop equations of the
corresponding matrix model.

This provides an alternative to the diagrammatic proof that the
perturbative part of the glueball superpotential  for these
matter representations can be computed from matrix model integrals, and
further shows that the two approaches always give the same result.  The
anomaly approach is found to be computationally more efficient in the
cases we studied.



Also, we show in the anomaly approach how theories with a traceless
two-index tensor can be solved using an associated theory with a
traceful tensor and appropriately chosen coupling constants.



Introduction 



The recently established connection
 between
matrix models and the effective superpotentials of certain 
 gauge 
 theories provides us with a new tool for studying
 supersymmetric field theories.   The connection, originally
 formulated in the context of  gauge theories with adjoint
 matter, has been established following two distinct approaches, one
 based on superspace diagrammatics, and the other on generalized
 Konishi anomalies.  These derivations were subsequently
 generalized to a few more gauge groups and matter
 representations, but the list of examples is actually quite short at
 present.  In particular, the diagrammatic approach has been
 applied to the classical gauge groups with matter in arbitrary
 two-index representations 
,
 while the anomaly approach has so far
 been used for  with matter in the adjoint and
 fundamental representations 
, in (anti)symmetric tensor 
representations, and  to quiver theories 
.
(The Konishi anomalies have
also been applied without direct reference to a matrix model in
.)    So basic questions remain
 regarding the general applicability of these ideas, and also
 whether matrix models can in fact successfully reproduce the known
 physics of supersymmetric gauge theories.


In, theories based on the classical gauge
groups with two-index tensor matter were considered using the
diagrammatic approach. In the case(Our
convention is such that .)   of  with
anti-symmetric matter, a comparison was made against an
independently derived dynamical superpotentialgoverning these theories.  The comparison revealed agreement up to
 loops in perturbation theory ( is the dual Coxeter
number), and a disagreement at  loops and beyond.  Although it
seemed most likely that the disagreement was due to
nonperturbative effects, even at the perturbative level there were
a number of subtleties deserving of further scrutiny. These
subtleties mainly concern the class of diagrams which should be
kept in the evaluation of the superpotential, and whether one is
allowed to use Lie algebra identities to express objects of the
form  in terms of lower traces
including the glueball superfield 
.  Since these subtleties arise at the same order in
perturbation theory as the observed discrepancies, it seems
important to gain a better understanding of them.   One motivation
for the present work was to rederive the results of
 in the anomaly approach to see if this gives
the same result, and if so, to see which diagrams are effectively
being computed.  We will see that the anomaly approach corresponds
to keeping at most two 's per index loop and not
using Lie algebra identities. So using these rules, whether one
computes using diagrams or anomalies, one finds the same
agreements/discrepancies between the gauge theory and the matrix
model.

Another motivation for this work was to apply the anomaly approach
to a wider class of theories.  For the classical gauge groups with
certain two-index tensors plus fundamentals, we will show how
solutions to the Konishi anomaly equations can be obtained from
solutions to the loop equations of the corresponding matrix model.  This leads
to the following general formula for the perturbative contribution
to the effective glueball superpotential
 
where the 's are matrix model contributions of a given
topology to the free energy.   This formula generalizes the 
results of, as well as
results 
found using the diagrammatic approach.

In fact, the above formula is only directly applicable to cases in
which no tracelessness condition is imposed on the two-index
tensors.    In it was shown that imposing a
tracelessness condition requires one to include additional
disconnected matrix model diagrams, and there was no simple
formula relating the superpotential to the free energy of the
traceless matrix model. On the other hand, one expects that the
traceful theory should contain all the information about the
traceless case provided one includes a Lagrange multiplier field
to set the trace to zero. We will show how this works in detail,
and find that indeed, the superpotential of the traceless theory can
be extracted from the free energy of the traceful matrix model. We
use this to rederive and extend some results from 
 in a much more convenient fashion.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  In sections
2 and 3 we derive the gauge theory Konishi anomaly equations and
the matrix model loop equations for the theories of interest.  The
theories can all be treated in a uniform way by using appropriate
projection operators.  In section 4 we discuss some of the
subtleties alluded to above, and then go on to show that solutions
to the  gauge theory anomaly equations follow from those of the
matrix model loop equations.  Section 5 concerns the effects of
tracelessness.  Details of some of our calculations are given in
appendices A and B.





 








Note: As we were preparing the manuscript, 
appeared which overlaps with some of our discussion. 



Loop equations on the gauge theory side 

In this section we  derive the gauge theory loop equations for
various gauge groups and matter representations, extending the 
 result of
.


Setup 


We consider an  supersymmetric gauge theory with  tree level
superpotential
 
where the two-index tensor  is in one of the following
representations:
 
  adjoint.
  adjoint.
  antisymmetric tensor.
  symmetric tensor, traceful or traceless.
  symmetric tensor.
  antisymmetric tensor, traceful or traceless.
For other  representations, see.
In the  cases, the object with the denoted symmetry is related to  by
 
Here  is the invariant antisymmetric tensor of , namely
 
The tracelessness of the  antisymmetric tensor is defined with
respect to this , i.e., by .


Also,  and  are fundamental matter fields, with  and
 being flavor indices.  In the  case we have 
fundamentals  and  anti-fundamentals , while in the
 case we have 
 fundamentals .  In the  case,  is
not an independent field but related to  by
 
In the  case,  should be taken to be even to avoid the Witten
anomaly.



 and  are taken to be polynomials
 
where in the traceless cases the  term is absent from .  
Further, due to
the symmetry properties of the matrix , some   vanish for
certain representations:
 
The symmetry properties of  also imply that the matrices
 have the following symmetry properties:
 

In this and the next few sections, we discuss traceful cases only,
postponing the traceless cases to section  
(we regard the  case as the traceless  case).



The loop equations 















We will be interested in expectation values of chiral operators.  
As in, 
 
in the chiral ring. 
Therefore, the complete list of independent single-trace chiral
operators are , ,
, and . 
As is standard, we define
 

The chiral operators can be packaged
concisely in terms of the resolvents
 
 R(z)
  -1 32^2  [^2 z- ] ,
  
 w_(z)  1 4 
 [_ z- ] ,
  
 T(z)
  [1 z- ] ,
 

 
 M_f (z)
  _1 z-  Q_f .
 Note that the indices of  are reversed relative to
, .  The resolvent  is nonvanishing only
for ; in all other cases . This can be
understood as follows.  In these semi-simple cases the Lie algebra
generators are traceless, so we cannot have a nonzero background field
.  There being no preferred
spinor direction specified by the background , the spinor
 can be nothing but zero.  Alternatively, if we integrate
out , then  should be of the form 
 by  the chiral ring relations
().  If we use the factorization property
of chiral operator expectation values, this is proportional to 
, which vanishes.


The resolvents defined in equation () 
provide sufficient data to determine the effective
superpotential up to a coupling independent part, because of the
relation
 


The generalized Konishi anomaly equation
 is obtained by
considering the divergence of the current associated with the variation
of a particular field :
 
where  is a gauge index.  Then the anomaly equation reads
 
where  is in the representation furnished by  .
The first term in () 
represents the classical change of the action under the variation
(), 
while the second term in () corresponds to
the quantum variation due to the change in the functional measure.


In the  case considered in, 
there is no additional symmetry imposed on the field , 
so  can be any function of
 and . 
In general, the tensor  will have some symmetry properties 
(symmetric or antisymmetric tensor in the present  study),
and  should
be chosen to reflect those. 

Similarly, the derivative 
 
should be defined in accord with the symmetry property of .
To this end, 
we define a projector  
appropriate to
each case: 
 
where
 
The tensor  satisfies .  Then,
the symmetry property of  discussed above is implemented by
the replacements
 
With this replacement,  can be any function of  and
 as in the  case.  The derivative can be treated as in
the  case also.


There is no such  issue for the  and  fields, although we have to
remember that they are not independent for .


With the projectors in hand, there is no difficulty in
deriving the loop equations for .  Here we just present the
resulting loop equations, leaving the details to Appendix
:
 
where  means to drop non-negative powers in a Laurent
expansion in .  The last two equations are really the same equation
due to the symmetry properties of 
 (see equation ()), and .  
Note that there is no  in these
cases as explained below Eq. ().

For the sake of comparison, the  loop equations  are
 
One observes some extra numerical factors in the  case as
compared to the  case.  The  in the first equation is
from the  in the definition of , while the
factor  in the last two equations is because in the  case 
and  are really the same field, so the variation of  under
 for  is twice as large as that for .  Finally,
the  and  
terms in the second equation of
() come from the second term of .



The solution to the loop equations () or
() is determined uniquelygiven the condition
 
where the second equation is only for the  case.  The contour 
goes around the critical point of .  Therefore, if we
recall the relation (), we can say that
the loop equations are all we need to determine the superpotential
.






Loop equations on the matrix model side 


Let us consider the matrix model which corresponds to the gauge theory
in the previous section.  
Its partition function is 

 
We denote matrix model quantities by boldface letters.  Here,  is an
 matrix with the same symmetry property as the
corresponding matter field in the gauge theory.   and 
are defined in a similar way to their gauge theory counterparts
(therefore  in () is not included for ).
The function (or the "action")  is the one defined in
().  We will take the , 
limit with the 't Hooft coupling  kept fixed.  The dependence
of the free energy  on  is eliminated using the relation
, and we expand  as
 
where the sum is over all compact topologies  of the matrix model
diagrams written in the 't Hooft double-line notation, and  is
the Euler number of .  The cases which will be of interest to us are
the sphere , projective plane , and  disk , with
, and 1, respectively.  All other contributions have
.

We define matrix model resolvents as follows:
 
These resolvents provide sufficient data to determine the free energy 
up to a coupling independent part since
 
We expand the resolvents in topologies just as we did for :
 
Although  and  are of the same order in ,
they can be distinguished unambiguously because all terms in 
contains coupling constants , while  does not
depend on them at all.  This is easily seen in the  diagrammatic expansion of
.  Also, because  and  do not contain ,
the expansion of  starts from the disk contribution, .


Now we can derive the matrix model loop equations.  Consider changing the
integration variables as
 
Since the partition function is invariant under this variation, we
obtain
 
The first term came from the change in the "action" and corresponds to
the first term (the classical variation) of the generalized Konishi
anomaly equation ().  On the other hand, the second
term came from the Jacobian and corresponds to the second term (the
anomalous variation) of Eq. ().


The derivation of the loop equations now can be done exactly in parallel
to the derivation of the gauge theory loop equations.  In the 
case, we again have to consider the projector .  Here we
leave details of the derivation to Appendix  and present
the results.  For , they are
 
  W'() z -    
 + m'() z -    
 =
 12 
  (1 z -  )^2   
  2  ^2
  1 (z - )(z - )  ,
 

 
 2 _  m_f ()  z -   _f'   
 =
    1 z -    
 _ff' ,
  2 _  m_f ()  z -   _f   
 =
    1 z -    
 _ in the  and  cases, respectively.
The last two
equations are really the same because of the symmetry properties of
 and .  


Equations () 
include terms of all orders in .  
Expanding the matrix model expectation values in powers 
of , 
plugging in the expansion
() and comparing the  and
 terms, we obtain the  loop equations
(In
the  antisymmetric and  symmetric cases,  can be
expressed in terms of ,
which leads to the expression
) 
in the  and  cases, respectively.
 .
This is done in Appendix , 
and the results are: 
 
We separated the  and  contributions using the
difference in their dependence on  (see the argument below
Eq. ()).  
Again, the last two equations are really the same equation.  
For comparison, the  loop
equations are
 
Note that there is no  contribution for .

The solutions to  equations () or
() are determined uniquely given the condition
 
In this sense, the loop equations are all we need to determine the free
energy .





Connection between gauge theory and matrix model resolvents 

On the gauge theory side we have arrived at the loop equations
().  If we can solve these equations for the
resolvents, in particular for , we will have sufficient data to 
determine the glueball superpotential  up to a coupling
independent part. In, it was shown for 
with adjoint matter that the solution can be obtained with the help of
an auxiliary matrix model. On the other hand, in
it was proved by perturbative diagram expansion that, for  and
 with two-index tensor matter, if one only inserts up to two field
strength superfield 's per     index loop then the
calculation of  reduces to matrix integrals.
















However, there are a number of reasons to study further the relation
between the gauge theory and matrix model loop equations.

First, as pointed out in (see also p.11 of
, and), there are subtleties
in using chiral ring relations at order  and higher, where  is
the dual Coxeter number of the gauge group, and these could be related
to the discrepancies observed in.  Since traces of
schematic form   can be rewritten in
terms of lower power traces at these orders, imposing chiral ring
relations before  using the equation of motion of  is not
necessarily justified.  So, it is important to clarify how this subtlety
is treated in the Konishi anomaly approach.





Second, as a practical matter, the anomaly approach is more efficient
than the diagrammatic approach in the cases we studied.











So, let us adopt the following point of view
(some related  ideas were explored in).
Let us not assume the reduction to a matrix model a priori .  Then 
the gauge
theory resolvents , , and  are just unknown functions that
enable us to determine the coupling dependent part of the glueball
effective action.  We do know that we can evaluate the perturbative
contribution to them by Feynman diagrams, but we do not know
whether they are affected by nonperturbative effects or whether they can
be calculated using a matrix model.  These resolvents satisfy the loop
equations (), and given the conditions
(), they are determined uniquely.
Similarly, the matrix model resolvents ,
, , and  are now just functions
satisfying matrix model loop equations ().  If we
impose the condition (), these
resolvents are also determined uniquely, and by definition can be 
evaluated in matrix model perturbation theory.


Now, let us ask what the relation between the two sets of resolvents is.
Actually it is simple: if we know the matrix model resolvents, we can
construct the gauge theory resolvents as follows.  In the  case,
 
with  and  identified; 
in the  case, we get 
 
with the same  identification.(Some of these relations
have been written down in 
.) 
One can easily check that if the matrix model resolvents satisfy the
matrix model loop equations () or
(), then the gauge theory resolvents satisfy the
gauge theory loop equations () or
().  The requirement
() is also satisfied provided that
the matrix model resolvents satisfy the requirement
().  Further, these relations lead
to
 
which implies a relation between the effective superpotential and the
matrix model quantities:
 
up to a coupling independent additive part.  This proves that the gauge
theory diagrams considered in the Konishi anomaly approach reduce to
matrix model integrals for all matter representations considered.
Further, we do not have to take into account nonperturbative effects,
since we can assume a perturbative expansion in the matrix model (although,
strictly speaking, one should also  verify that the Konishi anomalies
receive no nonperturbative corrections).

The relations () and 
()  are consistent with inserting
at most two 's per index loop, but not with 
inserting more than two and then using Lie algebra relations.  For instance,
this can be seen from the diagrammatic expansion of .  So
this shows us explicitly which diagrams are being computed in the
Konishi anomaly approach.  

In the  case, it was convenient to collect all
the gauge theory resolvents into a "superfield" , because of the
"supersymmetry" under a shift of  by a Grassmann number, and
one could relate  to the matrix model resolvent .  This
fact enabled one to extract all the gauge theory resolvents solely from
. However, in more general cases this trick does not work,
and we have to relate the two sets of resolvents directly as in
().


Traceless cases 

So far, we considered two-index traceful matter , and
discussed the relation between the gauge theory and the
corresponding matrix model.  In this section, we consider
traceless(In this section, we denote traceless quantities
by tildes to distinguish them from their traceful counterparts.) 
tensors .

These traceless tensors were studied in, and a
method of evaluating the glueball effective superpotential
 from the combinatorics of the matrix model
diagrams was given. However, the precise connection between the
gauge theory and the matrix model quantities was not transparent,
since one had to keep some of the matrix model diagrams and drop
others in a way that seemed rather arbitrary from the matrix model
point of view.  Instead, here we show that the calculation of
 in gauge theory with traceless  matter
reduces to a traceful  matrix model.




Traceless gauge theory vs. traceful matrix model 



To derive the generalized Konishi anomaly equation for a traceless
tensor we have to use the appropriate projector
 
where  is the projector of the corresponding traceful theory; 
the second equality holds for any projector defined in 
().
The anomaly term (the second term of Eq. ())
is the same as in the traceful case, since the trace
part is a singlet and does not couple to the gauge field.  Therefore, the
only difference in the anomaly equation between traceful and traceless
cases is in the
classical variation (the first term of Eq. ()), namely
 

For definiteness, let us focus on  adjoint matter, which can be
thought of as traceless  adjoint matter, without fundamentals
added;  
we will generalize the discussion to other groups and 
matter representations afterward. 
In this case, the last term of Eq.
() changes the  loop
equation (the first and the third lines of ())
to
 
Note that  for .  The constant  is
 
If we define
 
the above equations are
 
These are of the same form as the loop equations with
traceful  matter and the tree level superpotential .  
Therefore, in order to obtain the
effective glueball superpotential  for traceless
matter, we can instead solve the traceful theory with the shifted tree
level superpotential , choosing the value of  appropriately.
The solution to these loop equations is determined uniquely given the
condition
 
In the case of traceful matter, the contour is around a critical
point of the tree level superpotential.  However, for traceless
matter, the loop equations above tell us that the contour should
be taken around the critical point of the shifted superpotential
(), rather than the original
. This is because we cannot change all the eigenvalues of
 independently due to the tracelessness condition
.







Let the resolvents of the traceful theory with tree level
superpotential  be  and , with  treated as an
independent variable.   and  are functions of , 
 as well as , : , 
.  We will often omit  and  in the arguments
henceforth to avoid clutter.  Since  and  satisfy the same
loop equations as  and   provided  is chosen
appropriately, i.e. , it
should be that
 
These satisfy the conditions () given that
 and  satisfy the conditions () without
tildes. Expanding these  in , we find
 
In particular, setting  in the second equation,
 
which can be used for determining  in terms of all other parameters.
(
One might have expected that  can be determined by Eq.
().
However, it is easy to show using the relation
() that the equation is just the equation
of motion of the traceful theory, which is identically satisfied for
any :






) 
We infer from Eq. () equality between the traceless
and traceful effective superpotentials:
 
As long as we impose the tracelessness condition
(), this correctly reproduces the
relation ().  Note that 
depends on ; this is the origin of the complicated 
dependence of  found in.



Because we know that the traceful theory can be solved by the associated
traceful matrix model, we can calculate the effective superpotential
using that matrix model.  Specifically, in the present case, it is given
in terms of the free energy of the traceful matrix model by
 
The function  is determined by
 



If we add fundamental fields, the shift constant  is changed to
 
but everything else remains the same; we just have to work with
the traceful theory and the shifted tree level superpotential.
 is determined by the tracelessness condition.



We only discussed the  case in the above, but the
generalization to other tensors, i.e.,  traceless symmetric
tensor and  traceless antisymmetric tensor, is
straightforward.  We just shift the tree level superpotential as
(), and work with the traceful
theory instead.






Examples 


Here we explicitly demonstrate how the method outlined above works 
in the case of a cubic tree level superpotential, 
 
The associated traceful tree level superpotential is
 
().



SU(N) adjoint 

We first  consider  with adjoint matter and no
fundamentals. 
In it was found by perturbative computation
to order  that the corresponding  vanishes due
to a cancellation among diagrams.  We will now prove that 
 to all orders in .

The planar contributions to the free energy of the 
traceful matrix model can be
computed exactly by the standard method:
 
with
 
We discarded some  independent contributions.  The  term 
arises from shifting  to eliminate the linear term in . 
The superpotential is therefore
 
Imposing  leads to,
after some algebra,
 
Substituting back into () and doing some more algebra, we find
 
This vanishing of the perturbative contribution to the effective
superpotential is consistent with the gauge theory analysis of
.   In fact, it is shown there that 
for any tree level superpotential with only odd power interactions. 





Sp(N) antisymmetric tensor 

Now consider  with an antisymmetric tensor and no
fundamentals. 
By diagram calculations or by computer, 
the planar and  contributions to the free energy of 
the traceful matrix model are 
 
 
up to a  and  independent part.
From the tracelessness (), we find
 
Therefore, the effective superpotential is, up to an 
independent additive part,
 
where .  This reproduces the result of
 up to  and extends it further to
.

From these examples, the advantage of the present approach over the
traceless diagram approach of should be clear.  In
that approach, one has to evaluate contributing diagrams order by order
and evaluating the combinatorics gets very cumbersome.  On the other
hand, in this traceful approach, there is no issue of keeping and
dropping diagrams, and calculations can be done more systematically.
Therefore, being able to reduce the traceless problem to a traceful
problem is a great advantage.


Traceless matrix model 


We saw that the traceless gauge theory can be solved by the traceful
matrix model, not the traceless matrix model.  In the following, we
argue that the traceless matrix model is not useful in determining the
effective superpotential of the traceless gauge theory, .
The relation among traceless and traceful theories, as far as the
effective superpotential is concerned, is shown in Fig.
.





  
 Relation among traceful and traceless theories. 
 



The matrix model loop equation for traceless matter can be derived
almost in parallel to the traceless gauge theory loop equation derived
in the previous subsection.  Again, we replace the projector  with
the appropriate traceless version .  For example, in the case of
 adjoint without fundamentals, which was considered in the
previous section on the gauge theory side, the loop equation is
 
Here  is the shifted superpotential defined in
(), with  defined in
() and the gauge theory expectation values replaced by
the matrix model expectation values.

Eq. () is of the same form as the traceful
matrix model loop equation, and the first equation of the traceless gauge
theory loop equations ().  Finally, 
using the equivalence of the traceful gauge theory and matrix model, we
conclude that
 
However, what we need to determine  is , which we
saw in the last subsection to be obtainable from the traceful theory as
  From the standpoint of the traceless matrix model, the only thing we
know is , and we have no information about the
 dependence of .  In the framework of the traceless matrix
model, there is no way of performing the derivative 
 in () before making the replacement ,
because  depends on  also.

Therefore, it is impossible to obtain the effective superpotential for
the traceless gauge theory directly,
just by using the data from the corresponding
traceless matrix model.  
We really need to invoke the traceful matrix model.







Acknowledgments 





This work was supported in part by NSF grant PHY-0099590.




 

Loop equations on the gauge theory side 



In this appendix, we are going to calculate the gauge theory loop equations 
using the approach of. 
We start with 
generalized Konishi currents and corresponding 
transformations of the fields 
 
J_f && 
^e^V_adj   f (_, ) 
&

&
&=& f (_, ) 
J_g && 
Q^_f e^V_fund   g_f f'  () Q_f'  
&

&
Q_f  &=& g_f f'  () Q_f'  


The explicitly written indices on the 's and  are 
flavor indices, and gauge indices are suppressed.  
We find the generalized anomaly equations 
D^2 J_f
&=& 
f(_, ) W'()
+
Q f(_, ) m'() Q
+
_jklm  
A_jk,lm  
f_kj 
_lm   


D^2 J_g
&=& 
2 
Q m() g() Q
+
A^fund  g()
and  and  
vanish in the chiral ring. 


The field  being considered transforms by commutation 
under gauge transformations, 
so the elementary anomaly coefficient 






is the same as the one appearing in,  
A_jk,lm  
&=& 
1 32 ^2  
[
(_^)_jm  _lk  
+
(_^)_lk  _jm  
-
2 (_)_jm  (^)_lk  
]
-1.5ex 


&&
1 32 ^2  

_, [ 
^, e_ml  
]
_jk 
where  is the basis matrix with the single non-zero entry
. 


For fields transforming 
in the fundamental representation we should use 
A_jk ^fund  
&=& 
1 32 ^2  
(_^)_jk  
There is one modification in the treatment of fundamental fields,
as compared to the  case studied in.
Since the fundamental representation is real for  and
pseudo-real for , the fields  and  are not
independent; instead, they are related by ().
This results in the factor of 2 in the second equation in
(), but otherwise the discussion
proceeds as in. In the rest of the Appendix
we omit reference to fundamentals.





Next we consider the symmetries of . 
In equation (), 
 
must have the same symmetry properties as  itself. 
The tensor field will be taken either symmetric or antisymmetric.
We can discuss all four cases in a uniform fashion 
by using the notation 
^T = 

 
&
for groups , 
J J^-1 
&for groups , 
.
and . 




The gauge field satisfies 
 for  groups, and 
 for  groups. 




As discussed in Subsection , 
has the property  = P ,or explicitly _ab  = P_ab,ij  _ij 
with the projectors defined in (). To
ensure that  has the same symmetry as , we should replace
 in (). Specifically, we
will take  of the form f^SO  &=& P^SO  B z -   = ( B z -  
) + ( B z -   )^T = ( B
z -   ) + ( B^T z -   ) ,


f^Sp  &=& 
P^Sp  B z -   =
( B z -   ) 
+ J ( B z -   )^T J
= 
( B z -   ) 
+ ( J B^T J z -  )
,
with  or . 
Using the symmetry of the gauge field
and the chiral ring relations, 
both () and () 
reduce to 
f &=& 
B z -    
+ 
B z -   
.




Also, to take derivatives with respect to matrix elements
(
    In the case of  of,
    one had 
    which satisfies , for any matrix .
    ) 
correctly we should set 
_lm  _ab  
= 
P_lm,ab 
Then the tensor field anomaly term becomes 
A_jk,lm  
 
_lm  f_kj 
&=& 1 32 ^2  [ (^2)_jm  _lk  +
_jm  (^2)_lk  - 2 (_)_jm  (^)_lk 
] 
&&[ ( B z
-   )_ra  ( 1 z -   )_bs 
P_kj,rs  P_lm,ab  ]. After using the projectors
(), the identity 
, the symmetry properties of  and , and the
chiral ring relations, we find A_jk,lm  
_lm  f_kj 
&=& 1 32 ^2  [ ( ^2 z -  
) ( B z -   ) + ( 1
z -   ) ( ^2 B z -  
) .
&&. + 4 k  ^2 B (z - ) (z - )  ] The only
difference in () between the two
types of gauge groups is that the sign in front of the single
trace term is  for , and  for .


Taking  and  in () we find 
0 &=& 
 W'() z -  
+ 
 W'() z -  

&&
+
2 32 ^2  
[
( ^2 z -   ) 
( 1 z -   ) 
+ 2 k 
( ^2 (z - )(z - )  ) 
]





0
&=& 
 ^2 W'() z -  
+ 
 ^2 W'() z +  

+ 1 32 ^2  [ ( ^2 z -  
) ( ^2 z -   ) ] Now
recall that  for , and 
 for  since it only appears inside a trace;
so  W'() z -  &=& 
W'() z -   , ^2 W'() z
-  =  ^2 W'() z -   . The single trace terms have to be treated separately: when 
,  ^2 z^2 - ^2  &=& 12 z   [ ^2 (  1 z -   +  1 z +  
) ] = 1z    ^2 z -   while for , we should use  ^2 (z -
)^2  &=& - ddz    ^2 z -   . Putting everything together, we find the loop equations written in
equation ().




Loop equations on the matrix model side 


Here we derive the matrix model loop equations for 
following Seiberg, who discussed the 
case.  Start with the matrix model partition function
 
Because the fundamental matter is real for  and pseudo-real
for , there is no integration over .  It is not an
independent variable, but related to  by Eq.
().  We will write the symmetry properties of
the the tensor field  as
 
where .  The matrix  has symmetry properties as
given in Eq. ().


Now we perform two independent transformations 
 
where  (number) and  (matrix) are independent and
infinitesimal.  
To make sure that  has the same 
symmetry properties as  itself, we have introduced 
the appropriate projector  in (), 
see Eq. ().  
The measure in
() changes as
 
to first order in  and , 
where the corresponding changes in the Jacobians are 
 
where  is a trace over the flavor indices.
The classical pieces change by 
 
One can show the second equality using symmetry properties of 
: since it only enters  in the form of the trace, we should 
take  for  and 
 for . 
Similarly, 
 
where we used a similar symmetry property of the matrix . 
Finally, with the explicit form of the projectors 
() we find that in all four cases the 
statement  gives two independent loop equations 
(one for , and one for ): 
 
for  and 
, respectively.

This is Eq. () 
quoted in Section .



As it is written, equation () 
includes all orders in . The anomaly term in the first 
equation () factorizes as 
(1 z -  
)^2
= 
1 z -  
^2
[ 1 + (^2) ]
as can be seen from a diagram expansion. 
With this and the definition of matrix model resolvents 
() and (), 
we obtain the loop equations (). 






 99 


R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"Matrix models, topological strings, and supersymmetric gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 3 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206255].



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"On geometry and matrix models,"
Nucl. Phys. B 644 , 21 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207106].



R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"A perturbative window into non-perturbative physics,"
arXiv:hep-th/0208048.



R. Dijkgraaf, M. T. Grisaru, C. S. Lam, C. Vafa and D. Zanon,
"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211017.



F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Chiral rings and anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theory,"
JHEP 0212 , 071 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211170].



E. Witten,
"An SU(2) Anomaly,"
Phys. Lett. B 117 , 324 (1982).



H. Ita, H. Nieder and Y. Oz,
"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials for SO(N) and  USp(N),"
JHEP 0301 , 018 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211261].



S. K. Ashok, R. Corrado, N. Halmagyi, K. D. Kennaway and C. Romelsberger,
"Unoriented strings, loop equations, and N = 1 superpotentials from  matrix models,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211291.



R. A. Janik and N. A. Obers,
"SO(N) superpotential, Seiberg-Witten curves and loop equations,"
Phys. Lett. B 553 , 309 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0212069].




P. Kraus and M. Shigemori,
"On the matter of the Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture,"
arXiv:hep-th/0303104.




S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
"Cubic curves from matrix models and generalized Konishi anomalies,"
arXiv:hep-th/0303268.




R. Casero and E. Trincherini,
"Quivers via anomaly chains,"
arXiv:hep-th/0304123.




P. L. Cho and P. Kraus, "Symplectic SUSY gauge theories with
antisymmetric matter," Phys. Rev. D 54 , 7640 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9607200]; C. Csaki, W. Skiba and M. Schmaltz,
"Exact results and duality for Sp(2N) SUSY gauge theories with an
antisymmetric tensor," Nucl. Phys. B 487 , 128 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9607210].




A. Brandhuber, H. Ita, H. Nieder, Y. Oz and C. Romelsberger,
"Chiral rings, superpotentials and the vacuum structure of N = 1
supersymmetric gauge theories," arXiv:hep-th/0303001.




F. Ferrari,
"On exact superpotentials in confining vacua,"
Nucl. Phys. B 648 , 161 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0210135].



N. Seiberg,
"Adding fundamental matter to 'Chiral rings and anomalies in  supersymmetric gauge theory',"
JHEP 0301 , 061 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0212225].



A. Klemm, K. Landsteiner, C. I. Lazaroiu and I. Runkel,
"Constructing gauge theory geometries from matrix models,"
arXiv:hep-th/0303032.



R. Gopakumar,
"N = 1 theories and a geometric master field,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211100.



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
"The N = 2 U(N) gauge theory prepotential and periods from a  perturbative
matrix model calculation,"
Nucl. Phys. B 651 , 106 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211123].



S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,
"Matrix model approach to the N = 2 U(N) gauge theory with matter in the 
fundamental representation,"
JHEP 0301 , 015 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211254].



K. Konishi,
"Anomalous Supersymmetry Transformation Of Some Composite Operators In Sqcd,"
Phys. Lett. B 135 , 439 (1984);




K. i. Konishi and K. i. Shizuya,
"Functional Integral Approach To Chiral Anomalies In Supersymmetric Gauge
Theories,"
Nuovo Cim. A 90 , 111 (1985).



E. Witten,
"Chiral ring of Sp(N) and SO(N) supersymmetric gauge theory in four 
dimensions,"
arXiv:hep-th/0302194.



E. Brezin, C. Itzykson, G. Parisi and J. B. Zuber, "Planar
Diagrams," Commun. Math. Phys.  59 , 35 (1978).



L. F. Alday, M. Cirafici,
"Effective Superpotentials via Konishi Anomaly,"
arXiv:hep-th/0304119.




