


.9 








theorem Theorem [section]
prop Proposition [section]
lemma Lemma [section]
cor Corollary [section]
definition Definition [section]


1I   
 
_i _i I   
_i _i I   
()_   
()_   
()_   
(W)_W    
(W)_W    
()_   
()_   
Modular Stability Condition  
diag   
spec   
Im   
A  
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
H  
I  
J  
K  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
Q  
R  
S  
T  
U  
V  
W  
X  
Y  
Z  
(_1)  
(_2)  
()_   
(W)  
(,)  
(_ ,_ ,)  
_+ ^   
_+ ^   
(,,U(^4),)  
(,,U(),)  
(,)  
((_1),(_2))  
1I   
I R   
I N   
I F   
I P   
height 6pt width 1pt C   
Z Z   
height 7pt width 1pt Q   

ad   
diag   
spec   
(,)  
(_ ,_ ,)  
_+ ^   
_+ ^   
(,,U(^4),)  
(,,U(),)  
(,)  
((_1),(_2))  
  



On Deriving Space-Time From Quantum Observables and States  

 Stephen J. Summers 

Department of Mathematics, University of Florida,

Gainesville FL 32611, USA

X 

and Richard K. White   

Department of Mathematics, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania,

Edinboro PA 16444, USA
 



Dedicated to Rudolf Haag on the occasion of his eightieth birthday
   



We prove that, under suitable assumptions, operationally 
motivated quantum data completely determine a space-time in which
the quantum systems can be interpreted as evolving. At the same time,
the dynamics of the quantum system is also determined. To minimize 
technical complications, this is done in the example of three-dimensional
Minkowski space. 

Introduction 

     The problem of determining from which physical observations one
can derive the properties of the space-time in which the observer is
located is as old as the theory of general relativity itself, and has
received many sorts of answers. As this is not the place to give
either a review of these or a discussion of their relative advantages
and disadvantages, we shall content ourselves with referring the
interested reader to the papers and the
further references to be found there. Some of these approaches use
only classical objects and data as input, others use a mixture of
classical and quantum data, while yet others begin with purely quantum
data.  In this paper we propose a novel approach to the problem which
is based upon recent advances in algebraic quantum field theory.

     Over a quarter century ago, groundbreaking workrevealed a connection between the Poincare group and the modular
objects which Tomita-Takesaki theory associates with
the vacuum state on Minkowski space and certain local algebras of
observables. This has led to many unexpected applications of modular
theory to quantum field theory - see for a recent
review. One line of research growing out of
Bisognano and Wichmann's work has drawn attention to the group 
generated by the modular involutions  associated to the algebras
of observables  localized in the wedge-shaped regions  in
Minkowski space. That program (which has been generalized to curved
space-times) will also not be reviewed here. But it is essential to
understand that the modular involutions  are uniquely determined
by the state, which models the preparation of the quantum system, and
the algebras , whose self-adjoint elements model the
observables of the system. In other words, the group  is
determined, at least in principle, by operational quantum data. To
eliminate the tacit reference to Minkowski space in the local
algebras, and to strengthen the purely operational nature of the
initial data, we shall consider a state  on a collection  
of algebras  indexed by "laboratories"
.(More detailed definitions will be given in Section
3.)  The algebra  will be thought of as being generated by all
the observables measurable in the laboratory . One then has a
collection of modular involutions  acting on some Hilbert space,
and they generate a group , which has been called the modular
symmetry group.

     We therefore have an abstract group  generated by
involutions.  This is precisely the starting point of the program of
absolute geometry, see e.g. . From such a group
and a suitable set of axioms to be satisfied by the generators of that
group, absolute geometers derive various metric spaces such as
Minkowski spaces and Euclidean spaces upon which the abstract group
acts as the isometry group of the metric space. Different sets of
axioms on the group yield different metric spaces. This affords us with
the possibility of deriving a space-time from the group , 
i.e. , the operational data  
would determine the space-time in which the quantum systems could 
naturally be considered to be evolving. Different sets of algebraic
relations in  would lead to different space-times.

     It is the purpose of this paper to indicate how this could be
possible. To minimize technical complications which would detract from the
point of principle we wish to make, we shall illustrate this program
using the example of three-dimensional Minkowski space. We emphasize 
that we are establishing a conceptual point of principle - we are
not proposing a concrete operational procedure to determine space-time.

     In Section 2 we shall present the absolute geometry relevant for
our immediate purposes. Although Minkowski space is one of the cases
the absolute geometers have already treated, their tacit geometric
starting point is different from ours, and so we are obliged to
provide another chain of arguments to derive three-dimensional
Minkowski space from the group . The quantum data which then
"determine" three-dimensional Minkowski space will be discussed in
Section 3. It will be shown that under purely algebraic conditions on
the group , there exists an identification of laboratories 
 with subregions  of  such that (1)  contains a
representation of the Poincare group on  and (2) the
collection  is a Poincare covariant and local
net of von Neumann algebras on  satisfying Haag duality. Some
further results are proven in Section 3, as well. We make some final
comments in Section 4.


Absolute Geometry and Three-Dimensional Minkowski Space 

     We first provide an overview of our reasoning in this section.
Three-dimensional Minkowski space is an affine space whose plane
at infinity is a hyperbolic projective-metric plane. In
, Bachmann, Pejas, Wolff, and Baur (BPWB) consider an abstract
group  which is generated by an invariant system 
of generators in which each of the generators is involutory and which
satisfies a certain set of axioms. From this they construct a hyperbolic
projective-metric plane in which the given group  is
isomorphic to a subgroup of the group of congruent transformations
(motions) of the projective-metric plane. By interpreting the elements
of  as line reflections in a hyperbolic plane,
BPWB show that the hyperbolic projective-metric plane can be generated
by these line reflections in such a way that these line reflections
form a subgroup of the group of motions of the projective-metric plane.

     Coxeter shows in that every motion of the hyperbolic
plane is generated by a suitable product of orthogonal line
reflections, where an orthogonal line reflection is defined as a
harmonic homology with center exterior point and axis the given
ordinary line and where the center and axis are a pole-polar pair. In
the following we show that Coxeter's and BPWB's notions of motions
coincide in the hyperbolic projective-metric plane and that the
reflections can be viewed as reflections about exterior points.

     Then we embed our projective-metric plane into a
three-dimensional projective space. By singling out our original plane
as the plane at infinity, we obtain an affine space whose plane at
infinity is a hyperbolic projective-metric plane, which is the
well-known characterization of three-dimensional Minkowski space.
We show that the motions of our original plane induce motions
in the affine space and, by a suitable identification, we show that
any motion in this Minkowski space can be generated by reflections
about spacelike lines. Thus, to construct a three-dimensional
Minkowski space, one can start with a generating set  of
reflections about spacelike lines, equivalently, reflections about
exterior points in the hyperbolic projective-metric plane at infinity. 
This equivalence is important for our argument. We therefore
obtain a three-dimensional affine space with the Minkowski metric, which is
constructed out of a group generated by a set of isometries. 

     The approach in this paper differs from the method used both in
 for two-dimensional Minkowski space and in for
four-dimensional Minkowski space. In these papers one begins by
constructing the affine space. In the two-dimensional case,
the elements of the generating set  are identified with
line reflections in an affine plane, while in the four-dimensional
case, the elements of the generating set  are
identified with reflections about hyperplanes in an affine
space. Thus, in each of these papers, the generating set 
is identified with a set of symmetries. A map of affine subspaces is
then obtained using the definition of orthogonality given by commuting
generators. This map induces a hyperbolic polarity in the hyperplane
at infinity, thereby yielding the Minkowski metric.

     In our approach, we take the dual view, beginning with points
instead of lines and constructing the affine space out of the plane at
infinity. The definition of orthogonality induced by the commutation
relations of the generators in the hyperplane at infinity is used to
obtain the polarity and then the hyperplane at infinity is embedded in
an affine space to get Minkowski space. This argument is necessitated
here not only because of the different dimensionality of the space,
but also because, for reasons made clear in Section 3, our generating
involutions must ultimately have the geometric interpretation of
reflections about spacelike lines.  Despite the new elements in our
approach, much of our argument in this section consists of appropriate
re-interpretations and modifications of work already in the
literature.

Construction of  

     As the ideas and results of the absolute geometers are not widely
known, particularly among theoretical and mathematical physicists,
we shall give here the definitions, axioms and main results we shall
need and also provide a sketch of some of the pertinent arguments. 
For detailed proofs, the reader is referred to or to.

     One begins with a group  generated
by an invariant system  of involution elements. The elements 
of  will be denoted by lowercase Latin
letters. Those involutory elements of  which can be
represented as a product , where , will be denoted by
uppercase Latin letters. If  and  is
an involution, we shall write . The notation 
 means  and  and 
 and .

     The axioms we shall use to derive three-dimensional Minkowski space
from  are:

Axioms 

A.1: For every  there exists a  with  

A.2: If   then  or 

A.3: If   then 

A.4: If   then 

A.5: There exist  such that   but 

A.6: For each  and  with  there exist exactly two
distinct elements  such that 
 and  for any  and .   

We shall call a pair 
consisting of a group  and an invariant system
 of generators of the group  satisfying the
axioms above a group of motions.

     In the elements of  are interpreted as
secant or ordinary lines in a hyperbolic plane. In our approach, we
view the elements of  initially as exterior points in a
hyperbolic plane. After embedding our hyperbolic projective-metric
plane into an affine space, we will be able to identify the elements
of  with spacelike lines and their corresponding
reflections in a three-dimensional Minkowski space. After realizing
that statements about the geometry of the plane at infinity correspond
to statements about the geometry of the whole space where all lines
and all planes are considered through a point, we see that the axioms
are also statements about spacelike lines - the elements of
 - and timelike lines - the elements  of
 - through any point in Minkowski 3-space.

     These algebraic axioms have a geometric interpretation in the 
group plane , which we now indicate.
The elements of  are called lines of the group plane, and
those involutory group elements which can be represented as the product of
two elements of  are called points of the group plane. Two
lines  and  of the group plane are said to be perpendicular if 
. Thus, the points are those elements of the group which can 
be written as the product of two perpendicular lines. A point  is 
incident with a line  in the group plane if . Two lines 
 are said to be parallel if , for all ,
in other words, if they have neither a common perpendicular line nor a 
common point. Thus, if , then by A.1 and A.2, the
points  and  in the group plane are joined by a unique line. If 
 then A.6 says that there are precisely two lines through 
parallel to 

  For each , the mappings 
  and 
 
are one-to-one mappings of the set of lines and the set of points, each 
onto itself in the group plane.

  Let  and consider the mapping 
 of 
 onto itself. It is easily seen that this mapping is
bijective. Since  is an invariant system (
 for every )  will 
be mapped onto
itself, and if  is a point, so that  with  then 
 and , so that 
 is also a point. Thus, , 
 are one-to-one mappings of the set of lines and
the set of points, each onto itself in the group plane.

  A one-to-one mapping  of the set of points
and the set of lines each onto itself is called an orthogonal
collineation  if it preserves incidence and orthogonality.

Since the "" relation is preserved under the above
mappings, orthogonal collineations also preserve incidence and
orthogonality as defined above.

  The mappings 
 and  are
orthogonal collineations of the group plane and are called motions of the
group plane induced by 

In particular, if  is a line , we have a reflection
about the line  in the group plane, and if  is a point
 we have a point reflection about  in the group plane.

     If to every  one assigns the motion of the group
plane induced by  one obtains a homomorphism of 
onto the group of motions of the group plane. Bachmann shows in that
this homomorphism is in fact an isomorphism, so that points and lines in the
group plane may be identified with their respective reflections. Thus, 
 is seen to be the group of orthogonal collineations of 
 generated by .

  Planes which are representable as an isomorphic
image, with respect to incidence and orthogonality, of the group plane of a
group of motions  are called metric planes.

     In, BPWB show how one can embed a metric plane into a
projective-metric plane by constructing an ideal plane using pencils of
lines. We shall outline how this is done.

  Three lines are said to lie in a pencil if their
product is a line; i.e. ,  lie in a pencil if 

 

  Given two lines  with  the set
of lines  satisfying equation () is called a pencil of
lines and is denoted by , since it depends only on the product


     Note that the relation () is symmetric, i.e.  it
is independent of the order in which the three lines are taken: since
 is a line, the invariance of  implies
that  is a line and that every motion of the group
plane takes triples of lines lying in a pencil into triples in a
pencil. The invariance of  also shows that
() holds whenever at least two of the three lines
coincide.

     Using axioms implied by A.1 - A.6, BPWB then show that there are
three distinct classes of pencils.

   (1) If  then . In this case,  is
called a pencil of lines with center  and is denoted by .

   (2) If   then . In this case,  is
called a pencil of lines with axis  and is denoted by .

   (3) By A.6, there exist parallel lines . Thus, in this case 
 where  which we denote by 
. 

     An ideal projective plane  is constructed in the
following manner. An ideal point is any pencil of lines  of
the metric plane. The pencils  correspond in a one-to-one way
to the points of the metric plane. An ideal line is a certain set of
ideal points.  There are three types:

   (1) A proper ideal line  is the set of ideal points which have in
common a line  of the metric plane.

   (2) The set of pencils  with   for a fixed point  of
the metric plane, which we denote by .

   (3) Sets of ideal points which can be transformed by a 
halfrotation(see p. 161 in)  about
a fixed point  of the metric plane into a proper ideal line; these we
denote by .

     The polarity is defined by mapping  and 
  and 
 and  and 
 In, Bachmann shows that the resulting ideal
plane is a hyperbolic projective plane in which the theorem of Pappus and
the Fano axiom both hold, i.e.  a hyperbolic projective-metric plane.

     In this model, the ideal points of the form  are the
interior points of the hyperbolic projective-metric plane; thus the
points of the metric plane correspond in a one-to-one manner with the
interior points of the hyperbolic projective-metric plane. The ideal
points  for  are the exterior points of the
hyperbolic projective-metric plane.

  Each  corresponds in a one-to-one
manner with the exterior points of the hyperbolic projective-metric plane.

  Since each line  of the metric plane is incident with at
least three points (Theorem 5 in) and a point is of the form 
with , it follows that each  is the axis of a 
pencil. From the uniqueness of perpendiculars (Theorem 4), 
each  corresponds in a one-to-one manner with the 
pencils . Hence, each  corresponds in a one-to-one 
manner with the exterior points of the hyperbolic projective-metric plane.

     Thus, one may view the axioms as referring to the interior and exterior
points of a hyperbolic projective-metric plane. The ideal points of the
form , where , are the points on the
absolute, i.e. , the points at infinity in the hyperbolic
projective-metric plane.

     We turn to the ideal lines. A proper ideal line  is a set of
ideal points which have in common a line  of the metric plane.

  A proper ideal line  is a secant line of the
form  and  
where 

  By Theorem 23 of, any two pencils of lines of the
metric plane have at most one line in common. By A.6, each line belongs to at
least two pencils of parallels and by Theorem 13 of and A.6 
again, each line  belongs to precisely two such pencils. 
Thus, a proper ideal line contains two points on the absolute, interior 
points, and exterior points. Hence, a proper ideal line is a secant line. 
A secant line is the set  and 
 where .

  The ideal line which consists of pencils 
with    for a fixed point  of the metric plane consists only of
exterior points, i.e. , it is an exterior line. Therefore, 


     The final type of ideal line is a tangent line. It contains only one 
point  on the absolute. Denoting this line by 
, we have 
 and 
 where  Recalling that each 
 corresponds to an exterior point in the hyperbolic
projective-metric plane, we see that a tangent line consists of one point on
the absolute and every other point is an exterior point.

     We also note that under the above identifications, each secant line 
 corresponds to a unique "exterior point"  ,
since one only considers those   such that 
 and . Each exterior line
corresponds to a unique interior point  and each tangent line
corresponds to a unique point on the absolute.

  The map  given by

(i)  

(ii)  

(iii)  


is a polarity.

  Let  be the set of all points of  and 
 the set of all lines of . From the remarks above
it follows that  is a well-defined one-to-one point-to-line mapping
of  onto  and a well-defined one-to-one
line-to-point mapping of  onto . 

     Next, it is shown that  is a correlation and for this it 
suffices to show that  preserves incidence. Let 
 and 
where  be a secant line. Let 
 where 
 and 
 Then  and  Now 
  
, and 
 Thus, it follows that 
 so that 
 
and  preserves incidence on a secant line.

     Consider an exterior line , and let 
. Then  and it follows that 
, i.e.  
 and  preserves incidence
on an exterior line.

     Finally, let 
 where  be a tangent line. Clearly, since 
, one has 
. 
Now suppose that  Then  and
 and  
where  Thus,  
and , which implies that  
and . Hence, 
preserves incidence and is a correlation.

     It follows from the above observations that  transforms
the points  on a line  into the lines 
through the point . Thus,  is a projective
correlation. Since  is the identity map, then  is a
polarity. Moreover, since 
with  then  is a
hyperbolic polarity.

  The definition of orthogonality given by the polarity
coincides with and is induced by the definition of orthogonality in 
the group plane.

  Declaring a perpendicularity with respect to the
polarity defined above, one has, on the one hand,  
if and only if  and, on the other, 
 if and only if . Similarly, one has
 if and only if  if and
only if . In addition,  if and only if 
 if and only if . In fact, this is
excluded by Theorem 2.1(c) in, in conformity with hyperbolic 
geometry, since two interior points cannot be conjugate under the 
hyperbolic polarity.

     Further, one sees that  if and only if 
 and  if and only if 
. Finally, one also has  if and only if 
 and  if and only if
.

     We also see that if instead of interpreting our original
generators as ordinary lines in a hyperbolic plane, we interpret them
as exterior points, then we can construct a hyperbolic
projective-metric plane in which the theorem of Pappus and Fano's
axiom both hold and which is generated by the exterior points of the
hyperbolic projective-metric plane.

     With the identifications and the geometric objects defined above,
we show in the next subsection that the motions of the hyperbolic
projective-metric plane above can be generated by reflections about
exterior points, i.e.  any transformation in the hyperbolic plane
which leaves the absolute invariant can be generated by a suitable
product of reflections about exterior points.

Reflections About Exterior Points 

     In Coxeter showed that any congruent
transformation of the hyperbolic plane is a collineation which preserves the
absolute and that any such transformation is a product of reflections about
ordinary lines in the hyperbolic plane, where a line reflection about a line 
 is a harmonic homology with center  and axis , where  and 
are a pole-polar pair and  is an exterior point. A point reflection is
defined similarly: a harmonic homology with center  and axis  where 
 and  are a pole-polar pair,  is an interior point, and  is
an exterior line. Note that in both cases,  and  are nonincident.
We recall a series of definitions for the convenience of the reader.

  A collineation is a one-to-one map of the set of
points onto the set of points and a one-to-one map of the set of lines onto
the set of lines that preserves the incidence relation.

)  A perspective collineation is a collineation which
leaves a line pointwise fixed - called its axis - and a point 
line-wise fixed - called its center.

  A homology is a perspective collineation with
center a point  and axis a line  where  is not incident with 

  A harmonic homology with center  and axis 
where  is not incident with , is a homology which relates each point 
 in the plane to its harmonic conjugate with respect to the two points 
 and  where  is the line joining  and  and 
 is the point of intersection of  and 

  A complete quadrangle is a figure consisting of
four points (the vertices), no three of which are collinear, and of the six
lines joining pairs of these points. If  is one of these lines, called a
side, then it lies on two of the vertices, and the line joining the other
two vertices is called the opposite side to . The intersection of two
opposite sides is called a diagonal point.

  A point  is the harmonic conjugate of a point 
 with respect to points  and  if  and  are two vertices
of a complete quadrangle,  is the diagonal point on the line joining 
 and  and  is the point where the line joining the other two
diagonal points cuts  One denotes this relationship by 

     In keeping with the notation employed at the end of  
let  be an exterior point and  its pole.

  The map 






 is a collineation.

  This follows from the earlier observation that the motions
of the group plane map pencils onto pencils preserving the " relation.

   is a perspective collineation and, hence, a
homology.

  Recall that  
and where  lies in the pencil . For any 
and  in  one has  and , since  
and if  then 
 and   and 
. Thus, .

   Recall also that 
where  and  have neither a common point nor a common perpendicular . 
Now  is a secant line, so that it contains two such distinct points, 
 and , say, on the absolute. Since the
motions of the group plane map pencils onto pencils preserving the ""
relation it follows that if  then 
 and hence, 
 and .
Moreover, if , then it follows that 
. Thus,  leaves 
pointwise invariant.

     Let , and  be a secant line,
exterior line, and tangent line, respectively, containing  For 
 one has   and , since ,
thus . For ,  , so 
. Similarly, it follows that if 
then , and . One easily
sees that  and .
Thus,  leaves every line through  invariant and 
is a perspective collineation for each .

   is a harmonic homology.

  Since  is again a point in the original group plane
and since  is again a line in the original group plane, 
it follows that, for each 
,  maps interior points to interior points,
exterior points to exterior points, points on the absolute to points
on the absolute, secant lines to secant lines, exterior lines to
exterior lines, and tangent lines to tangent lines.  Moreover, since
 for any ,  is
involutory for each . But in a projective plane in
which the theorem of Pappus holds, the only collineations which are
involutory are harmonic homologies. Thus  is a
harmonic homology for each .

  Point reflections about interior points are generated
by reflections about exterior points.

  Arguing in a similar manner, one sees that for each 
interior point ,  is a harmonic homology with center 
 and axis , where  is the polar of ,
, and where  is defined analogously to 
. Thus, each  is a point reflection, and since 
 is the product of two exterior points, one sees that point reflections 
about interior points are generated by reflections about exterior points.

  The reflection of an interior point about a secant
line coincides with the reflection of the same interior point about 
an exterior point. Moreover, since any motion of the hyperbolic plane 
is a product of line reflections about secant lines, any motion of the 
hyperbolic plane is generated by reflections about exterior points.

  Consider a line reflection in the hyperbolic plane, i.e. 
the harmonic homology with axis  and center . Let 
be an interior point and  a line through  meeting .
Since , one has  and  is orthogonal to .
Let  be the point where  meets . Since ,
then  and  for some . It follows
that the reflection of  about  is the same as the reflection
of  about . Since  and , then  and
one has  with . Thus, by A.2, . Hence,
 and  as .

     Since the motions of the projective-metric plane are precisely those
collineations which leave the absolute invariant, we have the 
following result.

  Reflections of exterior points about exterior points
and about exterior lines are also motions of the projective-metric plane.
Hence, the 's for  acting on exterior points
and exterior lines are motions of the hyperbolic projective-metric plane.
 

     We also point out that the proof that each  is an involutory
homology also shows that the Fano axiom holds, since in a projective plane
in which the Fano axiom does not hold no homology can be an involution 
.


Embedding a Hyperbolic Projective-Metric Plane Into a Projective
3-Space 

     We embed our hyperbolic projective-metric plane into a
three-dimensional projective space, finally obtaining an affine space
whose plane at infinity is isomorphic to our original
projective-metric plane. Any projective plane  in which the
theorem of Pappus holds can be represented as the projective
coordinate plane over a field . (The theorem of Pappus
guarantees the commutativity of .) Then by considering
quadruples of elements of , one can define a projective
space  in which the coordinate plane corresponding
to  is included. Since the Fano axiom holds, the corresponding
coordinate field  is not of characteristic 2
. In fact, A.6 entails that  is a Euclidean
field. By singling out the coordinate plane corresponding to 
as the plane at infinity, one obtains an affine space whose plane at
infinity is a hyperbolic projective-metric plane, i.e. 
three-dimensional Minkowski space.

     To say that a plane  is a projective coordinate plane over a field 
 means that each point of  is a triple of numbers 
, not all zero, together with all multiples 
, . Similarly,
each line of  is a triple of numbers , not all 
zero, together with all multiples 
 . 
In P all the quadruples of
numbers with the last entry zero correspond to . One can now obtain an
affine space  by defining the points of  to be
those of P, i.e.  those points whose last entry
is nonzero; a line  of  to be a line  in 
 minus the intersection point of the line 
 with ; and by defining a point  in  to be
incident with a line  of  if and only if  is
incident with the corresponding . Planes of  are
obtained in a similar way.

   Thus, each point in  represents the set of all lines in 
parallel to a given line, where lines and planes are said to be parallel
if their first three coordinates are the same, and each line in 
represents the set of all planes parallel to a given plane. Since parallel
objects can be considered to intersect at infinity, we call  the
plane at infinity.

Exterior Point Reflections Generate Motions in an Affine Space 

      In, Coxeter
shows that three-dimensional Minkowski space is an affine space whose plane
at infinity is a hyperbolic projective-metric plane. He also classifies the
lines and planes of the affine space according to their sections by the
plane at infinity:

Line or Plane                          
                              
Section at Infinity 

Timelike line                               
                        Interior point

Lightlike line                               
                        Point on the absolute

Spacelike line                               
                       Exterior point

Characteristic plane                            
                 Tangent line

Minkowski plane                              
                    Secant line

Spacelike plane                              
                      Exterior line

He shows that if one starts with an affine space and introduces a
hyperbolic polarity in the plane at infinity of the affine space, then the
polarity induces a Minkowskian metric in the whole space. With this
hyperbolic polarity one considers as perpendicular any line and plane or any
plane and plane whose elements at infinity correspond under this polarity.
Two lines are said to be perpendicular if they intersect and their elements
at infinity correspond under the polarity.

     The proof that the group of motions of three-dimensional Minkowski
space is generated by the "reflections about spacelike lines" defined
above is the final step of our argumentation in this section. 

  Exterior point reflections generate any motion in the affine space. 
Moreover, since exterior points correspond to spacelike lines,
any motion in Minkowski 3-space is generated by reflections about
spacelike lines.

  Since any motion in Minkowski space can be generated by a
suitable product of plane reflections, it suffices to show that reflections
about exterior points generate plane reflections.

     Let  be any Minkowski plane or spacelike plane (note that
reflections about characteristic planes and lightlike lines do not exist
since they are self-perpendicular or see). Let  be any point in
Minkowski space. Let  be the line through  parallel to .
Let  denote the section of  at infinity.
Applying the polarity to , one obtains a point 
. Let  be a line through  whose 
section at infinity is , so that  is a line through 
orthogonal to . Since each line in the plane at infinity contains
at least 3 points, there exists a line  in  which is
orthogonal to  as . Now let 
 be a line through  not in  which intersects . It
follows that the reflection of  about  is the same as
reflecting  about  and taking the intersection of the image of 
under the reflection with . By the construction of the affine space and
the definition of orthogonality in the affine space, it follows that  and 
 must act as their sections at infinity act. Since any point reflection
in the hyperbolic projective-metric plane can be generated by reflections
about exterior points, it follows that the reflection of  about 
is generated by reflections of  about spacelike lines.

     From  we have therefore constructed a model
of three-dimensional Minkowski space in which each element of  is
identified as a spacelike line (and every spacelike line in the
Minkowski space is such an element) and on which each element of 
acts adjointly as the reflection about the spacelike line. Such
reflections generate the proper Poincare group  on
three-dimensional Minkowski space. The group  is
therefore isomorphic to , and the adjoint action of the identity
component of  upon  is transitive.

From States and Observables to Space-Time 

     An operationally motivated and mathematically powerful approach
to quantum field theory is algebraic quantum field theory (AQFT) (cf.
). The initial data in AQFT are a collection 
of unital -algebras indexed by a suitable set of open subregions
 of the space-time of interest, with  understood as
being generated by all the observables measurable in the spacetime
region , and a state  on these algebras, understood as
representing the preparation of the quantum system under
investigation. For the reasons mentioned in the Introduction, we shall
replace the index set of subregions of a specified space-time with
some abstract set , which for our purposes may be viewed as
indexing possible laboratories.  Hence,  is interpreted as the
algebra generated by all observables measurable in the "laboratory" 
. It is understood that the description of the laboratory would
include not only "spatial" but also "temporal" specifications. 
These specifications would be made with respect to suitable measuring
devices, which themselves do not presuppose a particular space-time.
There may be some structure on the index set . For example,
it makes sense to represent the fact that laboratory  is contained
in the laboratory  with . Then one would certainly have
the relation , i.e.   is a subalgebra
of .(This property of the net  is called isotony 
in the AQFT literature.)  
Hence, if  is a partially ordered set, then one may expect
that the property of isotony holds. We would therefore be working with two 
partially ordered sets,  and , 
and we require that the assignment  be an order-preserving 
bijection (i.e.  it is an isomorphism in the structure class of partially 
ordered sets). Any such assignment which is not an isomorphism in 
this sense would involve some kind of redundancy in the description. To 
different laboratories should correspond different algebras.(This
truism need not hold in certain space-times such as anti-de Sitter 
space-time, where there exist closed timelike curves.) 

     If  is a net, then the inductive limit  of  exists
and may be used as a reference algebra. However, even if  is not a net, 
it is still possible to naturally embed the algebras 
 in a -algebra  in such a way that the inclusion relations 
are preserved. In the following we need not distinguish these two
cases and refer, somewhat loosely, to any collection  
of algebras, as specified, as a net. Any  state on  restricts to
a state on , for each . For that reason, we shall speak of a 
state on  as being a state on the net . 

     Given a state  on the algebra , one can consider the 
corresponding GNS representation  and the 
von Neumann algebras , . We
shall assume that the representation space  is separable. We 
extend the assumption of nonredundancy of indexing to the net 
, i.e.  we assume that also the map 
 is an order-preserving bijection.(This is 
automatically the case if the algebras  are -algebras and
 induces a faithful representation of 
.)  If the GNS vector  is cyclic and 
separating for each algebra , , then from the modular theory 
of Tomita-Takesaki, we are presented with a collection 
 of modular involutions 
(and a collection  of modular 
operators), directly derivable from the state and the algebras. This 
collection  of operators on  generates a group 
. Note that  for all . 
In the following we shall denote the adjoint action of  upon the 
elements of the net  by , i.e.  
. 
Note that if , then one necessarily has 
, in other words the map  is
order-preserving. 

     The Condition of Geometric Modular Action (CGMA) was first
introduced in and has received a great deal of development
since then - see, e.g. ,. In the
present abstract setting, the CGMA is the condition that each map 
 leaves the set  invariant, 
i.e.   is a net
automorphism, for each . By the uniqueness of the modular
objects, it follows that  is an invariant
generating set of involutions for the group , as required for the
purposes of absolute geometry. Furthermore, we note that the CGMA implies 
that, for each , there exists an order-preserving bijection 
 on  such that  and 
, . The group generated 
by the involutions , , is denoted by  and forms a
subgroup of the permutation group on the index set . The set 
 is also an invariant generating set of involutions
for the group . Thus, the pair  also 
provides a candidate for an absolute geometric treatment. In fact, as 
shown in, the group  is a central extension of  by a 
subgroup  of the center of . So, in general, one should possibly
consider the pair  as the initial data
for the considerations of the previous section. However, in the case
we are examining, the center of  turns out to be trivial, so that
 and  are isomorphic. Hence, we shall avoid some technical
complications and impose the axioms A.1 - A.6 on the pair
. And to avoid certain degeneracies, we
shall assume all algebras  to be nonabelian.

     For the convenience of the reader, we summarize our standing assumptions. 

Standing Assumptions  For the net  of nonabelian 
-algebras and the state  on  we assume    (i)  is an order-preserving bijection;    (ii)  is cyclic and separating for each algebra , ;
   (iii) each  leaves the set  invariant.

Already these assumptions restrict significantly the class of
admissible groups  and . In general, it may be
necessary to pass to a suitable subcollection of  
in order for the Standing Assumptions to be satisfied -
see the final section for a brief discussion of this point. 
Note also that the Standing Assumptions imply

 

for all . Hence, the surjective map  is
two-to-one, since .

     Consider three-dimensional Minkowski space with the standard metric








given in proper coordinates. The isometry group of this 
space is the Poincare group  and the family  of wedges 
is obtained by applying the elements of  to a single wedge-shaped region 
of the form



i.e.  , where
. We remark that,
in fact, one has , where
 is the identity component of the Poincare group. Each wedge
 determines a spacelike line called the edge  of 
the wedge: , where



Note that  and its causal complement(The causal complement of a
set  is the interior of the set of all points in 
which are spacelike separated from every point in .)   share the 
same edge, i.e.  . Moreover, the equality 
 entails that either  or . 
Conversely, each spacelike line  determines a pair of 
wedges  with  - in fact, the causal complement of
 consists of two connected components, each a wedge, each the causal 
complement of the other, and each having  as its edge.

     Now assume that  and  satisfy the Standing Assumptions, 
and that the pair  fulfills Axioms A.1 - A.6 
in Section 2.1. With  and ,
the results of Section 2 entail that there exists a realization of
three-dimensional Minkowski space  in which each  corresponds
uniquely to a spacelike line  and on which each  acts 
adjointly as the reflection about . Hence, to each  corresponds a 
pair  of complementary wedges whose common edge is 
(recall that in this construction  is, in fact, equal to ). 
One of these spacelike lines is the set 
. Define 
. 
From the results in Section 2, the adjoint action of the identity
component (isomorphic to ) of the group  
upon  is transitive. In light of (),
this entails that the adjoint action of  upon  is also
transitive. Hence, for every  there exists a  such that 

 

By the Standing Assumptions, this implies , for
every . Of course, for fixed  the group element 
 is not unique - it is determined only up to an element 
of the subgroup of  which leaves the algebra  fixed, 
i.e.  the commutator subgroup of , which in our construction
is also the subgroup of  leaving the line  fixed. 
 itself can be expressed as a product of a finite number of elements in 
, and  acts adjointly upon our model of 
Minkowski 3-space as the product of the corresponding reflections.

     Let  denote the 
image under  of the wedge ;  is itself 
a wedge. For each  and a particular choice of  as above, define 
 to be . Note that
 is independent of the choice of  satisfying
equation (), since any element of  leaving 
fixed also leaves  fixed. 
One then has

 


     Since the results of Section 2 entail that  is isomorphic to
the proper Poincare group ,  contains an (anti-)unitary
representation  of ; indeed, from the results of
Section 2, one actually has . We define the algebra
 corresponding to the wedge  to be . 
Using (), one then finds that




for every . This implies that the net 
is covariant under the representation . In addition,
since by construction  ( is the reflection about
the line  and the edge of the wedge  is 
), it follows that one has




This is the property known as Haag duality in AQFT.

     We have therefore proven the following theorem.

   Let  and  satisfy the
Standing Assumptions, and let the pair 
fulfill Axioms A.1 - A.6 in Section 2.1. Then there exists a
bijection  such that 
, for all . The group  
forms an (anti-)unitary representation of the proper Poincare group , 
wherein each  represents the reflection about the spacelike line in 
 which is the edge of the wedge .  Moreover, the bijection
 can be chosen so that with , the
collection  forms a collection of von
Neumann algebras satisfying Haag duality which is covariant under this
representation of . 

     We have at present no proof that the bijection  can be 
selected in such a manner that the resulting set
 satisfies isotony. This is because
 is isotonous if and only if
the map  is order-preserving, and we
do not know how to assure this. If the order structure on  expresses
the ordering of the laboratories discussed above, then unless such a 
choice of  can be made, the conceptual problem at hand has not yet been
satisfactorily solved. We feel it likely that the 
group  can only satisfy all the assumptions A1 - A6 if the
order structure on  is consistent with the order structure
on , but a proof to this effect would
require a development of modular theory in a direction which has
hardly been considered in the literature. In anticipation of such 
a future theory, we can at least prove the following theorem.

   Let  and  satisfy the
Standing Assumptions, and let the pair 
fulfill Axioms A.1 - A.6 in Section 2.1. If the bijection 
 from Theorem  is order-preserving, 
then  is a net of von Neumann algebras 
satisfying locality. Furthermore, the CGMA is satisfied by the pair 
.

  In light of the assumed isotony of 
 and the Haag duality from 
Theorem , it follows that if 
, then 
, i.e.  the
net is local. The fact that the CGMA is
satisfied by  is a trivial
consequence of the construction and isotony.

     Once one has such a net of wedge algebras, it is then standard
 to generate a maximal local net  which also contains
algebras of observables localized in compact regions and is
Poincare covariant under .  For the sake of completeness,
we mention that there exist examples of quantum fields, e.g.  the
free scalar Bose field on three-dimensional Minkowski space in the
vacuum state, which fulfill the hypotheses of Theorems and .
 
     An immediate consequence of these theorems is that the
modular symmetry group  must also contain a strongly continuous
unitary representation of the time translation subgroup of ,
which is usually interpreted as describing the dynamics of the
covariant quantum system. Hence, also the dynamics of the quantum
system is determined by  and , under the stated 
conditions.

     In a purely algebraic stability condition called the
 was identified for reasons we shall not explain here.  The  requires that the modular unitaries
 associated with  in Tomita-Takesaki
theory are contained in , for each  and .

  If, in addition to the hypotheses of Theorem 
, the pair  fulfills the ,
then the modular unitaries  associated with
 are contained in , 
for each  and , and represent the boost group
leaving the wedge  invariant.(This property is 
called modular covariance in the AQFT literature.) 

  In Section 5.2 of are given sufficient 
conditions for the adjoint action of the modular unitaries
 upon the net constructed above to be implemented by
the specified Poincare transformations. All of those conditions are
satisfied here with the possible exception that the adjoint action of
all modular unitaries may not act transitively upon the net and that
the conditions (ii) and (iii) of the CGMA in may not
hold. However, in it is shown that the former assumption
may be dropped. Furthermore, the role of conditions (ii) and (iii) in
 was to assure that the adjoint action of modular objects
was implemented by Poincare transformations - but this is assured
here by the construction above and the . Hence, here these
assumptions may also be dropped.

Conclusion and Outlook 

     We have shown that it is possible to derive a space-time from
the operationally motivated quantum data of a state modelling the
preparation of the quantum system and a net of algebras of the
observables of the quantum system which is indexed in some suitable
manner, e.g.  by the laboratories in which the observables were
measured. This has been done for the simplest nontrivial case -
three-dimensional Minkowski space.  A similar derivation of
four-dimensional Minkowski space has been made in, though
surely not in the optimal manner. Although it is not yet clear which
class of space-times could be attainable through this approach,
it is likely that one could at least be able to derive in this manner
all space-times with a sufficiently large isometry group.

     We mentioned above the likelihood that a given net  will
not satisfy the Standing Assumptions and that it may be necessary to
pass to a subnet. This is because experience has shown that only the
modular involutions associated with algebras localized in certain
types of regions will have a suitable adjoint action upon the net -
cf. for a discussion of this matter.  However, a subnet of
the original net may well satisfy the Standing Assumptions. From this
point of view, the results of assert that in any finite
component quantum field theory on Minkowski space satisfying the
Wightman axioms to which can be locally associated a net  of
local von Neumann algebras, there always exists a subnet 
which satisfies our Standing Assumptions. Hence, given a net ,
one would proceed to a subnet satisfying the Standing Assumptions and
suitable absolute geometric axioms, construct the space-time,
make a suitable identification between the elements of the subnet and
algebras associated with special regions of the space-time, then
attempt to use the inclusion relations in the original net  to
identify the remaining algebras in  with algebras associated
with suitable regions in the derived space-time.

     In Theorem  the crucial hypothesis that Axioms A.1
- A.6 are satisfied is imposed upon the auxiliary (and
non-operational) object . And in order to obtain Theorem
 it was necessary for us to posit that  was
order-preserving. It would be desirable to determine conditions upon
the net  directly which would, by some suitable extension of
the current state of modular theory, imply that the group 
fulfills the said axioms and that  is order-preserving. This
will involve making progress in a field of mathematics which is yet in
its infancy. The modular theory of Tomita-Takesaki was initially
formulated and developed for a state on a single algebra. Only
relatively recently, particularly motivated by questions in AQFT, have
researchers considered a state on a pair of algebras and studied
relations among the modular objects implied by relations between the
algebras. A notable extension of the theory to more than two algebras
can be found in the recent papers (though the essential
nature of the insights there were for pairs of algebras, as well).  To
attain a theorem of the type we would like to see some day, it will be
necessary to develop the modular theory of a state and a net of
algebras. Such a theory would have many applications besides the one
we envision.

     

Acknowledgements :  The authors profitted from discussions
with Prof. Detlev Buchholz. We also wish to thank one of the anonymous
referees, whose advice led us to a simplification of the axiom system. 



 Bor 
J. Ahrens, Begrundung der absoluten Geometrie des Raumes aus dem
Spiegelungsbegriff, Math. Zeitschr., 71 , 154-185 (1959).
J. Audretsch, Riemannian structure of space-time as a 
consequence of quantum mechanics, Phys. Rev., D27 , 2872-2884
(1983).
J. Audretsch and C. Lammerzahl, The conformal structure
of space-time in a constructive axiomatics based on elements of
quantum mechanics, Gen. Rel. Grav., 27 , 233-246 (1995).
F. Bachmann, Aufbau der Geometrie aus dem Spiegelungsbegriff ,
second edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, 1973.
F. Bachmann, A. Baur, W. Pejas and H. Wolff, Absolute
geometry, in: Fundamentals of Mathematics , Vol. 2, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1986.
U. Bannier, Intrinsic algebraic characterization of space-time 
structure, Int. J. Theor. Phys., 33 , 1797-1809 (1994). 
U. Bannier, R. Haag and K. Fredenhagen, Structural definition of
space-time in quantum field theory, unpublished preprint, 1989.
A. Bauer and R. Lingenberg, Affine and projective planes, in:
Fundamentals of Mathematics , Vol. 2, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1986.
J. Bisognano and E.H. Wichmann, On the duality condition for a 
hermitian scalar field, J. Math. Phys., 16 , 985-1007 (1975).
H.-J. Borchers, On modular inclusion and spectrum condition, 
Lett. Math. Phys., 27 , 311-324 (1993).
H.-J. Borchers, On revolutionizing quantum field theory with 
Tomita's modular theory, J. Math. Phys., 41 , 3604-3673 (2000).
O. Bratteli and D.W. Robinson, Operator Algebras and
Quantum Statistical Mechanics I , Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
New York, 1979.
D. Buchholz and S.J. Summers, An algebraic characterization of 
vacuum states in Minkowski space, Commun. Math. Phys., 155 , 
449-458 (1993).
D. Buchholz, M. Florig and S.J. Summers, An algebraic 
characterization of vacuum states in Minkowski space, II, Lett. Math.
Phys., 49 , 337-350 (1999).
D. Buchholz, O. Dreyer, M. Florig and S.J. Summers, Geometric 
modular action and spacetime symmetry groups, Rev. Math. Phys., 12 , 
475-560 (2000).
D. Buchholz, M. Florig and S.J. Summers, The second law of 
thermodynamics, TCP, and Einstein causality in anti-de Sitter space-time, 
Class. Quant. Grav., 17 , L31-L37 (2000).
D. Buchholz, J. Mund and S.J. Summers, Transplantation of local 
nets and geometric modular action on Robertson-Walker space-times, Fields 
Inst. Commun., 30 , 65-81 (2001).
D. Buchholz and S.J. Summers, An algebraic 
characterization of vacuum states in Minkowski space, III: Poincare
covariance, manuscript in preparation.
D. Buchholz and S.J. Summers, Geometric modular action and 
modular covariance, manuscript in preparation.
D. Buchholz and S.J. Summers, The second law of 
thermodynamics and vacuum states on anti-de Sitter space-time, manuscript
in preparation.
H. Busemann and P. Kelly, Projective Geometry and 
Projective Metrics , Academic Press, New York, 1953.
H.S.M. Coxeter, A geometrical background for DeSitter's
world, Amer. Math. Monthly, 50 , 217-228 (1943).
H.S.M. Coxeter, Introduction to Geometry , Wiley and
Sons, Inc., New York, 1961.
H.S.M. Coxeter, Non-Euclidean Geometry , fourth edition, 
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1961.
H.S.M. Coxeter, Projective Geometry , second edition,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, 1987.
J. Ehlers, F.A.E. Pirani and A. Schild, The geometry of
free fall and light propagation, in: General Relativity , edited
by L. O'Raifeartaigh, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1972.
M. Florig, Geometric Modular Action , Ph.D. Dissertation, 
University of Florida, 1999.
K. Fredenhagen, Global observables in local quantum physics, in:
Quantum and Non-Commutative Analysis , Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Amsterdam, 1993. 
R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics , Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  
1992. (A second edition was released in 1996.)
R.V. Kadison and J.R. Ringrose, Fundamentals of the 
Theory of Operator Algebras , Volume II, Academic Press, Orlando, 1986.
R. Kahler and H.-W. Wiesbrock, Modular theory and the 
reconstruction of four-dimensional quantum field theories, J. Math. 
Phys., 42 , 74-86 (2001).
B. Klotzek and R. Ottenberg, Pseudoeuklidische Raume im 
Aufbau der Geometrie aus dem Spiegelungsbegriff, Zeitschr. f. math. 
Logik und Grundlagen d. Math., 26 , 145-164 (1980).
S.J. Summers, Geometric modular action and transformation groups,
Ann. Inst. Henri Poincare, 64 , 409-432 (1996).
M. Takesaki, Tomita's Theory of Modular Hilbert Algebras and 
Its Applications , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 128, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 1970.                       
R. White, An Algebraic Characterization of Minkowski Space , 
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Florida, 2001.
H.-W. Wiesbrock, Modular intersections of von Neumann algebras in
quantum field theory, Commun. Math. Phys., 193 , 269-285 (1998).
H. Wolff, Minkowskische und absolute Geometrie, I, Math. Ann., 171 , 144-164 (1967).




A.6: There exist elements  such that 
 for any  and  (There exist lines which have neither a 
line nor a point in common.) 

A.7: For each  and for each  there exist at most two elements 
 such that   but  for any 
 and  and  for any  and 

A.8: An equality of the type  is impossible.

