

  
 
 
  
k  
q  
v   
w   
  
  
R  
_  

Wigner's little group and Berry's phase for massless particles 
Netanel H. Lindner and Asher Peres 
Department of Physics, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel 
Daniel R. Terno 
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada N2J 2W9 

 
The "little group" for massless particles (namely, the Lorentz
transformations  that leave a null vector invariant) is
isomorphic to the Euclidean group E2: translations and rotations
in a plane. We show how to obtain explicitly the rotation angle of
E2 as a function of  and we relate that angle to Berry's
topological phase. Some particles admit both signs of helicity,
and it is then possible to define a reduced density matrix for their
polarization. However, that density matrix is physically meaningless,
because it has no transformation law under the Lorentz group, even
under ordinary rotations.

03.65.Ta, 03.30.+p. 


Eugene Wigner considered his paper "On unitary representations of
the inhomogeous Lorentz group" as his most
important contribution to physics. The key feature in
that article was the introduction of a little group ,
namely a subgroup under which a standard vector  is
invariant. For example, a timelike  is (1,0,0,0) and the
little group is the familiar rotation group SO(3). A null standard
vector can be taken as (1,0,0,1). Spacelike standard vectors have
no physical interest.

To find explicitly the little group that corresponds to the null
, let us introduce an auxiliary complex null vector 
such that
m_s^m_^*m^and a real null vector  that satisfies n_m^n_s^All these properties
are manifestly Lorentz invariant. Moreover they still hold under
the transformation

m_e^i m_+s_, n_n_+e^i ^* m_+
      e^-i m^*_+^2 s_,where  is any complex number.  Therefore the
above transformation of  and  is a subgroup of the
Lorentz group. We thereby obtain a representation of the generic
little group element

g=S(,)R_z(), where the  form a subgroup which is isomorphic to the
translations of a Euclidean plane and  is a rotation around
the origin of that plane, which in this case is also a rotation around
the -axis. We see that the little group is E2, as shown in various
ways by other authors.

In the case of infinitesimal transformations in Minkowski space,
we have g=1 +A+B+M_12 ,
where , and  and  are
commuting generators of translations in the 12-plane, for example
,

A=M_01 +M_31 and  B=M_02 +M_32 .
 In general, let  denote the Lorentz
transformation matrix and  an arbitrary momentum.  The task
is to find the little group matrix  that corresponds to
 and , namely

W(,k)=L^-1 (k)L(k),  where spacetime indices were omitted for brevity, and  is
the standard Lorentz transformation (next equation) that converts
 to an arbitrary momentum .  For example, in the case of
massive particles for which the little group is SO(3), if
 is an ordinary rotation then  is the same rotation
irrespective of . However if  is a boost, then 
does depend on . Likewise the various terms in () may
depend on .

In this Letter, we shall examine the group properties of massless
particles.  For , the standard Lorentz
transformation , as defined in, is

L(k)=R()B_z(),where 
is a boost along the -axis with velocity ,
and  is the standard rotation that carries the -axis
into the direction of the unit vector . Again following
, if the direction of  is given by spherical
angles  and , the standard rotation 
 consists of a rotation  around the -axis,
followed by a rotation  around the -axis:

R()=R_z()R_y(). In these formulas, all Lorentz transformations are passive, even
if we occasionally use an active wording.

We now prove by a classical geometric argument  that, if
the Lorentz transformation is a pure rotation (),
then it follows from Eq. () that 
simply is the unit matrix, and therefore . We also
give a simple expression for the rotation angle . From the
definition of the little group element we have

W(,)=B_z^-1 ()R^-1 ()R()B_z().
Since the action of  leaves the
-axis invariant, it is equivalent to some rotation
 around that axis,

W(,)=B_z^-1 ()R_z()B_z()=R_z(),
 and since  is a special case of (), it follows
that in Eq. () we have  and
. Equation () also gives ,
and the remaining problem is to find the explicit value of this angle.

To clarify the origin of the phase  in Eq. (), we
note that any rotation in a three-dimensional space can be described
by two angles that give the direction of the rotation axis, and a
third angle that gives the amount of rotation around that axis. A
rotation from  to  can be performed in many ways
(denoted below by ), in addition to the given  that we are
seeking to decompose. Since all such rotations satisfy

^-1 -1 , the difference between them is a rotation that preserves ,
if done after , or a rotation that preserves , if done
before .  In particular, , so that

R^-1 defomega  where  is a rotation around . Among the
infinity of possible  we choose

R-1 (),where  and  are standard rotations, as in
Eq. (). It follows that

 ()R()R^-1 (),  where  is a rotation around , while
 and  are the standard rotations that carry
the -axis to  and , respectively. We can thus
consider Eq. () as the definition of
.

Substituting this decomposition into Eq. (), we
obtain

W(,k)=R^-1 ()R_ ()R()=R_z(),
and we conclude that .

To obtain the rotation angle under a general Lorentz transformation,
we decompose the latter into two rotations and a standard boost 
along the -axis:

As shown below,  alone does not lead to a phase rotation.
Therefore,

where both  and  are due to the rotations and are
given by Eq. (). 

We now prove that  alone induces no phase rotation. 
Consider a pure boost along the -axis, , and a
generic null vector , where

= (, , ).
We define  where

= (Note that the angle  is the same for  and for . Thus

R^-1 ()=R^-1 _y(-1 ().  We now substitute Eqs. () and () into
Eq. (), to obtain

W(B_z(u),k)=B_z^-1 ()R_y^-1 (, where we used .

Consider now the effect of the little group element () on  the
spacelike vector . That vector is not affected by a boost
in the  direction, nor by a rotation around the -axis. Therefore

W(B_z(u),k)y=y,  so that in this case  is either  or . Since for 
we expect , by continuity  for all .

Note that although  alone does not lead to a phase rotation,
it can affect the value of , since it indirectly appears in
the definition of . Indeed, if we decompose   as in
Eq. (), we obtain

_2=R__2_2 (_2)R(_2_2)R^-1 (_2),where  is defined by

k_2=(_2,_2)=B_z(u)_1 k. Thus we see that  appears in the decomposition of 
and therefore affects .

Up to this point, the discussion and the formalism were purely
classical. In quantum theory, one needs the unitary
representations  of the little group, from which those of the
complete Lorentz group can be derived. Each irreducible
representation corresponds to some species of elementary
particles. According to Eq. (), the general
transformation law is 
U(),=_D_eqone  where  is a unitary representation of the
little group and

,is an
appropriate basis. The helicity  of a
massless particle is Lorentz invariant, so that if we use it for
labelling basis states, then the sum in Eq. () consists
of a single term, and

D_  where, for a Lorentz transformation which is a pure rotation,
 is a function of  and  which is explicitly given by
Eq. ().

It is experimentally known that some particles, like neutrinos (if
they are indeed massless), come with only one sign of helicity.
Others, like photons, may have it with both signs, but then the
phase angle  for them is different. In general, different
values of  refer to different species of particles, such
as photons and gravitons. Within the present formalism, we cannot
offer an explanation why, for a given species of particles,
half-integral helicities appear with a definite sign. Of course,
there can be no helicity-statistics theorem, since we deal with a
single particle. These properties must follow from quantum field
theory for interacting fields.

An application of the above results is a direct  derivation
of the Berry phase for massless particles.  Soon after the
introduction of Berry's phase the latter was
derived for photons in the adiabatic approximation and then for arbitrary changes in momentum.
Finally, derivations that are based on the analysis of connections
on Lie groups, and the Poincare group in particular, were given
in.

Consider a sequence of rotations that eventually restores the
particle momentum to its original value. Its net effect is some
active  rotation around the momentum's direction,
. According to Eqs. () and
(), the helicity eigenstates acquire phases
, where the minus sign arises from the fact that
the transformation law () is for passive rotations.  To
relate this phase to the area on the unit sphere that is enclosed
by the orbit of , consider an auxiliary unit vector  in
the plane perpendicular to . It is tangent to the sphere at
the endpoint of . Let the orthonormal triad , ,
and  be parallel-transported along that orbit.
When the latter closes, the orthonormal triad does not return to
itself, but ends up as another triad at the same point, which is
rotated by the angle  in the  plane. Owing to
properties of the holonomy group, the rotation angle
 is related to the spherical angle  by

K dS= dwhere  is the Gaussian curvature, which equals 1 for the unit
sphere. The above integral is over the area enclosed by the
trajectory of , and the sign of  depends on the
orientation of the trajectory. We thus obtain

As another application, consider the concept of reduced density
matrices which is fundamental in quantum information
theory. Their properties are significantly modified by
relativistic effects
. For massless particles that admit both signs of
helicity, such as photons, a generic one-particle state is

=d(k)_f_(),,
where  is a
Lorentz-invariant measure. Then the reduced density matrix for
helicity, according to the usual rules, would be

_ =d(k)f_()f^*_().

However, since  in Eq. () depends on the photon momentum
(even for ordinary rotations) the standard density matrix given by
Eq. () has no transformation rule at all. This makes
the standard density matrix a useless concept, even when only a
fixed reference frame is considered, since any POVM that describes
an experimental setup must have definite transformation properties
at least under ordinary rotations. It is only possible to define an
"effective" density matrix which depends on the detection method
. This behavior contrasts with that of massive particles,
for which the little group is SO(3) and reduced density matrices behave
properly under rotations, while there is no transformation law only
under boosts.

The absence of any  Lorentz transformation law for 
is due to the fact that the momenta  transform linearly, but
the law of transformation of helicity depends explicitly on .
When we compute  by summing over momenta, all knowledge of
them is lost and it is then impossible to obtain the new  by
transforming the old one.  There is an analogous situation in
classical statistical mechanics: a Liouville function can be
defined in any Lorentz frame, but it has no
definite transformation law from one frame to another. Only the
complete dynamical system has a transformation law.

In summary, we have shown how apparently disparate notions -
Wigner's little group and Berry's phase - are closely related.
It is curious that the proof made repeated use of ordinary
rotations, namely the SO(3) group, which is by itself another  little group of the Lorentz group.

Work by AP was supported by the Gerard Swope Fund and the Fund
for Promotion of Research.

 99   

E. Wigner, Ann. Math. 40 , 149 (1939).

Private communication to AP (1981).

A. Peres, Ann. Phys. (NY) 14 , 419 (1961).

F. R. Halpern, Special Relativity and Quantum
Mechanics  (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1968) p. 80.

 N. N. Bogolubov, A. A. Logunov, and I. T. Todorov, Introduction to Axiomatic Quantum Field Theory  (Benjamin, New
York, 1975).

N. N. Bogolubov,  A. A. Logunov, A. I. Oksak, and I. T.
Todorov, General Principles of Quantum Field Theory 
(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990).

S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996), Vol. I.

M. Hamermesh, Group Theory and its Applications to
Physical Problems  (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1962) p. 495.

Wu-Ki Tung, Group Theory in Physics  (World
Scientific, Singapore, 1985) p. 179.

A. J. Bergou, R. M. Gingrich, and C. Adami, e-print
quant-ph/0302095.

 M. V. Berry, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A392 , 45
(1984).

 R. Y. Chiao and Y.-S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 , 933
(1986)

 M. V. Berry, Nature 326 , 277 (1987).

I. Bialynicki-Birula, and Z. Bialynicka-Birula, Phys.
Rev. D 35 , 2383 (1987).

 R. Olkiewicz, Rep. Math. Phys. 33 , 325 (1993).

 T. Frankel, The Geometry of Physics: An Introduction 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods 
(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995).

 A. Peres and D. R. Terno, J. Mod. Opt. 50  (2003), in
press, e-print quant-ph/0208128.

 A. Peres and D. R. Terno, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75  (2003),
in press, e-print quant-ph/0212023.

A. Peres, P. F. Scudo, and D. R. Terno, Phys. Rev. Lett.
88 , 230402 (2002).

R. Balescu and T. Kotera, Physica 33 , 558 (1967).

A. Peres and D. R. Terno, J. Modern Optics 49 , 1255
(2002).

