































[3cm]

hep-th/0304261 



authors' name
 
'short' title
 


Gauge Fixing and Scattering Amplitudes in String

Field Theory around Universal Solutions
 




Tomohiko Takahashi (E-mail:
tomo@asuka.phys.nara-wu.ac.jp)  
and Syoji Zeze (E-mail:
zeze@sci.osaka-cu.ac.jp.) 
 


Department of Physics, Nara Women's University, Japan

Department of Physics, Osaka City University,
Japan
 







We study a gauge fixed action of open string field theory
around the universal solution which has been found as an analytic
classical solution with one parameter . 
For , we can reproduce open string scattering amplitudes in the
theory fixed in the Siegel gauge.
At , all scattering amplitudes vanish and there is no open
string excitation in the gauge fixed theory.
These results support the conjecture that the universal
solution can be regarded as pure gauge or the tachyon vacuum solution.
 



Introduction 

It has been proposed that
the tachyon vacuum
solution in open string
field theory has been 
analytically constructed as the universal solution which is found in the
universal subspace of string 
fields.This conjecture is strongly supported by the fact that
the modified BRS charge in the theory expanded around the universal
solution has vanishing cohomology in the Hilbert space of ghost number
one, and that a non-perturbative vacuum numerically
disappears in the theory. This fact
implies that there is no open string excitation perturbatively
around the solution and we have already stayed on the tachyon
vacuum in the theory.

There is another approach to describing the tachyon vacuum
instead of finding the tachyon vacuum solution, that is vacuum
string field theory. 
Though much progress has been
made in vacuum string field theory, we need a kind 
of regularization due to a pure ghost midpoint operator in
the kinetic term.On the other hand, string field theory around the universal solution has
the kinetic operator which is less singular than the pure ghost
midpoint operator. Moreover, as Drukker pointed out,the kinetic term around the universal solution may become a
pure ghost midpoint operator through a certain singular limit of it.
Hence, the theory around the universal solution is much more general and
less singular than vacuum string field theory.

In order to prove the equivalence of the tachyon vacuum and the
universal solutions,
we must show that the energy density of the universal solution cancels
the D-brane tension exactly. In addition, we should understand the
existence of closed strings in the theory around the universal
solution. At present, the exact cancellation seems difficult to be
proved due to 
technical problems and then
we should adopt other approaches to understand the relation between
these solutions. To find closed strings, we should firstly
discuss gauge fixing and scattering amplitudes in the theory.

The universal solution  given
in ref. rf:TT2  is expected to be regarded as pure gauge for 
and the tachyon vacuum solution at .
In ref. rf:Drukker2 , Drukker studies the
theory around this solution fixed in the Siegel gauge and suggests that
original open string 
amplitudes can be reproduced around the solution for .
In this paper, 
we will investigate this gauge-fixed theory more precisely and show more
explicitly the correspondence of physical
states and amplitudes between the original and expanded theories.
Moreover, solving the cohomology under
the Siegel gauge condition, we will prove that amplitudes become zero in
the theory around the non-trivial solution at .

In section 2,
we solve the equation of motion in the Siegel gauge
for  and we find
a one-to-one correspondence of spectra between the original and
expanded theories. Next, we derive the
Feynman rule in the expanded theory. We find that this
Feynman rule reproduces the same scattering amplitudes as in the original
theory. In section 3, we analyze the theory
around the solution at  and we find that
the resulting scattering amplitudes become zero.
We give some discussion in section 4.



String Field Theory around Pure Gauge Solutions 


Pure gauge solutions 

The equation of motion in cubic open string field theoryis given by
 
An analytic solution of the equation has been found as 
where  stands for the identity string field and the operators 
and  are defined as
 
Here  and  are the BRS current and the ghost field,
respectively. The function  in the solution satisfies
 and . The solution can be expressed by the
matter Virasoro generators and the ghost and anti-ghost oscillators
acting on the  invariant vacuum, because it is constructed by
the BRS current, the ghost field and the identity string
field. Then, we call it universal solution , since its
expression does not depend on any specific background.

If we expand the string field  as
 
the action for the fluctuation  becomes
 
where the modified BRS charge is given by 
The operators  and  are defined as
 

Let us consider the action around the universal solution
generated by the function
 
where  is a parameter larger than or equal to .Substituting this function into (),
we find that the modified BRS charge is expanded as 
where we expand the BRS current and the ghost field as 
 and . The function
 is defined by  and it varies
from  to  for .

If the parameter  is not equal to , the action can be
transformed into the action with the ordinary BRS charge through the string
field redefinition 
where the operator  is defined by using the ghost number current
 as
 
Substituting the function () into this definition,
we find the mode expansion form of  as
 
where  and  are written by the ghost oscillators as
 
Under the string field  redefinition, the modified BRS charge transforms
into the original one as follows, 
Hence we expect that the universal solution is pure gauge for
 as discussed in ref. rf:TT2 . Numerical analyses
strongly support this expectation.
Let us consider the BRS cohomology in
the theory around the universal solution for .
As the cohomology of the Kato-Ogawa BRS charge, we know that any state
 satisfying  can be written as 
 
where  and  are positive norm states in the matter
sector,  and if we consider flat backgrounds
they are DDF states.The perturbative equation of motion for the fluctuation is given by
.
Since the modified and original BRS charges are related by the
similarity transformation (), we can solve the equation
of motion as 
 
In this solution, the non-trivial cohomology parts possess the same
ghost number as the physical states in the original theory, and
 and  in the matter sector do not change. 
This result suggests that the 
physical spectrum dose not change from the original theory and 
it is natural if the universal solution for 
corresponds to pure gauge.


Gauge fixing and equation of motion 

Though the cohomology is solved in the above subsection,
we must fix the gauge to determine the
physical spectrum precisely. Here, we apply the Siegel gauge
condition to the theory around the universal solution:
 
Under the Siegel gauge condition, the equation of motion is given by
 
From (), we can write the operator  by an oscillator
expression as 
where  denote the total Virasoro generators. We can rewrite it by
the twisted ghost Virasoro generators
: 
Since the twisted ghost conformal field theory has the central charge
, the three operators ,  satisfy 
algebra. Then, it is useful to rewrite  as
 
where the operators  are defined by
 
and these satisfy the algebra
 

In order to solve the gauge fixed equation of motion
(), we 
try to diagonalize the operator . Since the operator
 is expressed by the  generators as in
(), it may be diagonalized through 
transformations. If we restrict the  group to a subgroup
written by 'normal ordered operators', arbitrary elements in the
subgroup can be represented as
 
where  are real parameters. Using the algebra
(), we can calculate the  transformation of
the operator  as
 
If the coefficients of  vanish, the
parameters  satisfy
 
From (),  is equal to  or . Substituting
these values of  into (), we obtain
 
It should be noted that there is no solution of the
equation () if  and  is a finite real
number. This fact implies that the operator  cannot be transformed
into the linear form of  through
regular  transformations. This difference between the cases
 and  is a natural consequence, because the theories
should have different physical 
spectrum in each case if our conjecture for the universal solution is
true.

In the case , we can set  in order to
diagonalize  . 
As a result, the operator  can be transformed into
 as
 
where  is given by
 
Therefore we can solve the gauge fixed equation of motion
() as 
, where  satisfies .

For later convenience we provide another procedure for the
diagonalization of  referring to conformal field theory.
In the twisted ghost conformal field theory, the operator  induces
a conformal mapping represented by the function 
Namely, if  is a primary field of dimension , the
transformation of  by  is given by
 
For , this conformal mapping is depicted in
fig. . In the  plane, there is a branch cut connecting
 and . The branch cut corresponds to a line
segment along the imaginary axis between  and
 in the  plane. There is another branch cut from 
 to infinity in the  plane. 
For , the mapping is represented by the figure
which is given by rotating fig.  clockwise 
degree. 

 
 
Conformal mapping of the  plane to  in
the case . 

From (), the operator  can be expressed in terms of the
twisted energy momentum tensor :
 
where the integration contour is a unit circle.
Generally, the kinetic operator can be written by using the twisted
energy momentum tensor in the theory around universal
solutions in the Siegel gauge. 
Then the transformation of  by  is given by
 
Through the conformal mapping ,
the twisted energy momentum tensor is transformed to
 
where the central charge  is  and  denotes the
Schwartzian derivative 
 
Using () and (), we see that
 
and then
 
Substituting () into () and then using
() and (), we find
 
In the first term in the right-hand side, we can change the variable of
integration to , since the integration contour
does not across the branch cut in the  plane as seen in
Fig. .  Then the first term becomes
 
If , the integral in the second term can be reduced to the
summation of the residues at  and ,
each of which can be evaluated as
 
If , the residues at  are replaced by the
ones at , but their values are unchanged.
Finally, substituting () and () into
(), we can derive the same result as obtained from operator
expressions:
 
Note that this result can not be applied to the case of ,
because the operator  becomes singular at  as seen in
().


Physical subspace 

First, we show that the modified BRS charge is transformed
into the original one through the similarity transformation by :
 

The commutation relations of  and  with  are given by
 
Then we obtain the commutation relation of  with  as
 
The first term in the left-hand side implies that  is transformed as
oscillators of 
a dimension two field in the twisted ghost theory.
Due to the second term, 
is not a oscillator of a primary field.
This is a natural result from the fact that
the BRS current is written by ,
where  and  denote the ghost field with dimension zero and
the matter energy momentum tensor with dimension two in the twisted
theory, and the abbreviations stands for the terms containing no matter
oscillators.

As a result, since  and  have the similar oscillator
expressions 
  
and  are oscillators of dimension 2 field, we can obtain the
transformation of  by referring to the previous
result for  as follows,
 
where the abbreviations denote pure ghost contributions.
Since the right-hand side of () is nilpotent, the pure ghost
contributions are determined to be zero. Because the operator of the
form  must be  or  if it
is nilpotent. Therefore we can show that the transformation
law of () holds.

Here, we should discuss the cohomology without the Siegel gauge
condition. Using the equation (), we show that the
state  with the condition  can be
written as
 
However, this expression is different from the state
(), though these states are imposed by the same
condition. Naturally, we can show that the apparent difference of these
states reduces merely to a BRS-exact state.

In order to see this fact, let us prove that
 
where  and  are the operators that implement the conformal
transformation  in the twisted and untwisted ghost conformal
field theory, respectively.

In the untwisted theory, the ghost and anti-ghost fields
are expanded in a unit disc as 
 
and in the twisted theory they are expanded as
 
Then the ghost and anti-ghost fields in the both theories can be
connected by the relations 
 
For these ghost fields, the operators  and  induce the
following transformations,
 
Combining () and (), we can
find the transformation of  through :
 
Similarly, from () and (), the transformation
of  is given by 
 
We can realize the same transformations of () and
() by .
For an arbitrary function , the operator  generates
the transformations 
Combining (), (), () and
(), we find that 
 
Comparing () and () with () and
(), we find that these transformation laws are equivalent
to each other if 
 is given by
 
The ghost part of 
is uniquely determined by the transformation laws
() and () up to a multiplicative constant.
The matter parts of  and  have a same form since they are
uncharged by the twist operation. 
Therefore the equation () is proved.
In appendix A, we generalize the equation to the case of general
background charge.

We apply the formula () to the mapping 
given by (). We can calculate the function in the operator
 as
 
Therefore we can represent the operator  in terms of the
untwisted Virasoro generators as
 
where the operator  is defined as
 
Here, the multiplicative constant is determined to be one by the fact
that  is a unitary operator.(The hermiticity property
is given by ,
 and .) 
Since the untwisted Virasoro generators commute with the BRS charge, it
is easily seen from () that () and
() are realized simultaneously.

Using (), we can express the operator  as
 
Then we can rewrite the first term of () as
 
where  is given by
 
Similarly, the second term of () can be
written as
 
Hence, from () and (),
we show that the difference between the cohomologies
() and ()
can be expressed by a BRS-exact state as stated before.

Now that the cohomology of  has been established, we can
obtain the physical subspace specified by the conditions
 
Since, through the same similarity transformation,   and 
are transformed into  and , the state 
satisfying () can be written as
 
where  denotes the terms of  which do not contain the ghost and
anti-ghost zero modes,  and .
Here, we have used the cohomology for the Kato-Ogawa BRS charge
() and the commutation relations .
Hence, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the spectra of the
original theory and of the
theory around the universal solution for . They are connected
through the similarity 
transformation by .


Scattering amplitudes 

We consider scattering amplitudes in the theory around
the universal solution. 
The general amplitude is calculated by evaluating an expression of
the form
 
where ,  and  are vertices,
reflectors and external states, respectively.  is
the propagator in the theory around the solution. From ()
and , we 
can rewrite the propagator as
 
From (), the external states can be
written as the 
similarity transform of the external states in the original theory:
 
It can be easily seen that on the reflector the operator

satisfies
 
and then we find
 
Using (), () and (), 
we can rewrite the amplitude to the form
 
The difference from the original amplitude is the normalization factor
of the propagator, and the change of the vertex to
 

The operator  is conserved on the
original vertex.Moreover we can find that the operator  is conserved on the
original vertex. Using these conservation laws and the
expression  
() of ,
we find that the
modified vertex is rewritten as
 
Under the SL(2,R) normal ordering, the zero mode  of the ghost
number current has the anomalous contribution on the vertex: 
Since ,  we find
 

As a result, the perturbative amplitude in the theory around the solution
is given by the form
 
The normalization factors of the propagators and the vertices
are canceled out each other and then the remained factors can be
absorbed into the normalization of external states as
. 
After all,  the amplitude becomes equal to the corresponding amplitude
in the original theory. 
Hence, we conclude that the theory for 
describes the same physics of the theory with the original BRS charge.



String Field Theory around Non-trivial Solutions 


Non-trivial solutions 

In this section we consider the theory expanded around the solution
which is obtained by setting the parameter  to .
At , the function () is given by
 
and the modified BRS charge () becomes
 

Through a similarity transformation, this modified BRS charge can be
transformed into the form which contains
specific level oscillators: 
where  and  are given by
 
Here we introduce the operator  to a certain operator
 which is defined by replacing the ghost oscillator modes 
and  in  by  and 
without changing their order.(
Notice that this notation  does not mean the operator  of
r -th string.) 
Under this definition, we can rewrite the equation () as
 

For this -shift transformation, it is important that
the original algebra of the operator  is realized to
the operator . This follows from
the anti-commutation relations
. Consequently, through the
relation (), we can determine 
the cohomology of  by referring the original cohomology of . We
find that any state  satisfying  can be
written as 
Here, the states  and  correspond to 
 and  in the original cohomology
(), respectively.

In gauge unfixed string field theory, all component fields of the string
field correspond to states with the ghost number one. Therefore the
resulting cohomology () implies that all of on-shell
modes are reduced to gauge degrees of freedom in the gauge unfixed
theory.

No open string theorem 

First, we show the formula
 

Since the -shift transformation preserves the form of commutation
relations, the operators  and  are transformed
as primary fields of dimension  and  through the similarity
transformation by :
 
The operators  and  can be written by the
twisted operators as
 
Then, from these relations and the equations (),
(), () and (), it follows that
 
If the function  is given by
 
these transformation laws coincide with the similarity transformation by
. Since the -shift transformation does not affect on
matter oscillators, the operators  and , in which
 is given by (), are equal up to a multiplicative
constant. Hence, the formula () is proved.

We consider the case of . For this function,
 is given by 
For , the function  is calculated as
 
Then, applying the formula () to this case, we obtain the
equation
 
where the multiplicative constant can be determined to be one by
expanding the both 
sides and using the relations  and
. 
Noting that , we obtain
the following 
relation by the Hermitian conjugation of ():
 
where the operator  is given by () and  is
defined as
 
The function corresponding to  is given by .

Since  and  are commutable,
the operator  is transformed to 
through the similarity transformation by : 
 
where we have used the equation ().
Consequently, 
from a similar derivation of (), it follows that if a
state  satisfies , 
the state can be written as
 
As the case of , the difference of the cohomologies
() and () turns out to be a merely
BRS-exact state by using the relation ().

At , the operator  becomes
 
Though it is impossible to transform the operator  to 
through the similarity transformation by  as seen in the
previous section, we can connect it to  through the
transformation by :
 

Finally, we consider scattering amplitudes in the theory around the
non-trivial solution.
Since  commutes with , the cohomology in the Siegel
gauge is given by the form
 
These states have the ghost number  or .
If we calculate a amplitude with these as external states, the
amplitude becomes zero since its total ghost number does not match with
the necessary ghost number to realize non-zero amplitudes.
Hence, we conclude that the theory around the universal solution at
 does not contain open strings perturbatively.



Discussion 

In this paper, we study open string field theory expanded around the
universal solution under the Siegel gauge condition. In the theory for
, we derive physical states and the Feynman rule, and then we
show that open string amplitudes in the original theory can be
reproduced. In the theory at , we prove no open string theorem,
which states that open string does not exist around the
non-trivial universal solution since perturbative amplitudes become
zero. These results provide another evidence for the conjecture that the
universal solutions correspond to pure gauge or the tachyon vacuum.
Though the function in the solution is restricted to the form of
(), it is possible to extend it to other functions, for
example to the function given in ref. rf:KT  in a straightforward
way. 

For , through a string field redefinition,
we can understand the coincidence of amplitudes between
the original and expanded theories.
The action of the gauge unfixed theory around the solution can be
transformed into the original action through the similarity
transformation generated by the operator .Similarly, as a result of subsection 2.4, 
if we perform a string field redefinition by the operator  and
we change the normalization of the string field,
we can transform the action in the Siegel gauge to the
original action fixed in the same gauge. Consequently, amplitudes in
both theories agree with each other. Here, this scale transformation of
the string field provides the factor absorbed into external states of
amplitudes. 

It is plausible that the universal solution at  is regarded as
the tachyon vacuum solution. If so, we should be able to observe closed
strings, at least as on-shell states, in the theory around the
solution. This is an important open problem in order to prove the
equivalence of these solutions and
furthermore Sen's conjectures.As Drukker pointed out, it would be
possible to reproduce closed string scattering amplitudes 
by the Feynman rule around the non-trivial solution.

Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Hiroshi Itoyama for his discussions and
encouragement. 



Generalization of () 

In the twisted ghost conformal field theory with a general background
charge, the energy momentum tensor is given by
) 
where  denotes a real number. 
The theory of  corresponds to the previous case.
The mode expansions of the ghost and anti-ghost fields in the twisted
theory are given by
 
Then, the twisted and untwisted ghost fields have the relations
 
The twisted Virasoro generators can be written by the untwisted
operators:
 
where  if .

If the operators  and
 implement the conformal mapping  in the untwisted and
twisted theories respectively, the primary fields  with
dimension  and  with dimension  in each theory satisfy
 
The ghost operators , ,  and 
have dimensions , ,
 and , respectively.  
Using () and (), we find that
 
Similarly, we obtain the equation for the anti-ghost as
 
If these transformation laws coincide with the conformal mapping
 in the twisted theory, the function  satisfies
 
then  is given by
 
Since the operator  which induces the conformal mapping 
can be uniquely determined up to a multiplicative constant, we obtain
the formula 
 
If we set , this formula reduces to the equation
(). 


 99 


















V. A. Kostelecky and S. Samuel,
"On a Nonperturbative Vacuum for the Open Bosonic String",
B336,1990,236 .

A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Tachyon Condensation in String Field Theory",
0003,2000,002 , (hep-th/9912249).

N. Moeller and W. Taylor,
"Level Truncation and the Tachyon in Open Bosonic String Field
Theory", 
B538,2000,105 , (hep-th/0002237).

"Experimental String Field Theory",
D. Gaiotto and L. Rastelli,
hep-th/0211012.

T. Takahashi and S. Tanimoto,
"Marginal and Scalar Solutions in Open Cubic String Field Theory",
03,2002,033 , (hep-th/020133).

I. Kishimoto and T. Takahashi,
"Open String Field Theory around Universal Solutions",
108,2002,591 , (hep-th/0205257)

T. Takahashi,
"Tachyon Condensation and Universal Solutions
in String Field Theory",
hep-th/0302182.

L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"String Field Theory Around the Tachyon Vacuum",
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 5  (2002) 353, (hep-th0012251).

D. Gaiotto, L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Ghost Structure and Closed Strings
in Vacuum String Field Theory",
(hep-th/0111129).

L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Boundary CFT Construction of D-branes in Vacuum String Field Theory",
hep-th/0105168;

L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Star Algebra Spectroscopy",
0203,2002,029 , (hep-th/0111281);

H. Hata and T. Kawano,
"Open String States around a Classical Solution in Vacuum String Field
Theory",
0111,2001,038 , (hep-th/0108150);

H. Hata and S. Moriyama,
"Observables as Twist Anomaly in Vacuum String Field Theory",
0201,2002,042 , (hep-th/0111034);

H. Hata and S. Moriyama,
"Reexamining Classical Solution and Tachyon Mode in Vacuum String Field
Theory", hep-th/0206208;

H. Hata and H. Kogetsu,
"Higher Level Open String States from Vacuum String Field Theory",
0209,2002,027 , (hep-th/0208067);

H. Hata, S. Moriyama and S. Teraguchi,
"Exact Results on Twist Anomaly",
0202,2002,036 , (hep-th/020177);

K. Okuyama,
"Ghost Kinetic Operator of Vacuum String Field Theory",
0201,2002,027 ;

K. Okuyama,
"Siegel Gauge in Vacuum String Field Theory",
0201,2002,043 , (hep-th/0111087);

K. Okuyama,
"Ratio of Tensions from Vacuum String Field Theory",
0203,2002,050 , (hep-th/0201136);

T. Okuda,
"The Equality of Solutions in Vacuum String Field Theory",
B641,2002,393 , (hep-th/0201149);

Y. Okawa,
"Open string states and D-brane tension from vacuum string field
theory",
0207,2002,003 , (hep-th/0204012).

N. Drukker,
"On Different for the Vacuum of Bosonic String Field Theory",
hep-th/0301079.

E. Witten,
"Non-Commutative Geometry and String Field Theory",
B268,1986,253 .

M. Kato and K. Ogawa,
"Covariant Quantization of String Based on
BRS Invariance",
B212,1983,443 .

M. Henneaux,
"Remarks on the Cohomology of the BRS Operator in String Theory",
177,1986,35 .

I. B. Frenkel, H. Garland and G. J. Zuckerman,
"Semi-Infinite Cohomology and String Theory",
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,83,1986,8442 .

M. Asano and M. Natsuume,
"The No-Ghost Theorem for string theory in Curved
Backgrounds with a Flat Timelike Direction",
B588,2000,453  (hep-th/0005002).

A. Leclair, M. Peskin and C. R. Preitscheopf,
"String Field Theory on the Conformal Plane (I)",
B317,1989,411 .

E. Witten,
"Interacting Field Theory of Open Superstrings",
B276,1986,291 .

L. Rastelli and B. Zwiebach,
"Tachyon Potentials, Star Product and Universality",
0109,2001,038 , (hep-th/0006240).
D. Gaiotto, L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Star Algebra Projectors",
hep-th/0202151.

D. Friedan, E. Martinec and S. Shenker,
"Conformal Invariance, Supersymmetry and String Theory,"
B271,1986,93 .

N. Drukker,
" Closed String Amplitudes from Gauge Fixed String Field Theory",
hep-th/0207266.

A. Sen,
"Universality of the Tachyon Potential",
9912,1999,027 , (hep-th/9911116).

A. Sen,
"Descent Relations among Bosonic D-branes",
A14,1999,4061 , (hep-th/9902105).







