
165mm 220mm 0pt 2mm
Re  
Im  
Tr  
sign  
e  
i  
d  
           

@addtoresetequation section 






R  
M  
C  
E  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
e^i   
e^j   
e^1   
1  
2  
i  
0  
 
  
, 
_9   
  
y  

 
 
12  
 
 
e  
*  
i  
E  


 
  


  
 
ECM-UB-03/12 

IFUM-756-FT

KUL-TF-2003/07

hep-th/0304210

 
Supertubes in reduced holonomy manifolds
 

Joaquim Gomis, Toni Mateos, Pedro J. Silva and
Antoine Van Proeyen
  

 Departament ECM, Facultat de Fisica, 

Universitat de Barcelona, Institut de Fisica d'Altes Energies and

CER for Astrophysics, Particle Physics and Cosmology, 

Diagonal 047, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain

 
  Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita  di Milano, via Celoria 16,
I-20133 Milano

and Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) - Sezione di Milano,
Italy
 
  Instituut voor Theoretische Fysica - Katholieke Universiteit Leuven


Celestijnenlaan 200D B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
 
 
Abstract 
We show that the supertube configurations exist in all
supersymmetric type IIA backgrounds which are purely geometrical and
which have, at least, one flat direction. In other words, they exist in
any spacetime of the form , with M any of the
usual reduced holonomy manifolds. These generalised supertubes preserve
1/4 of the supersymmetries preserved by the choice of the manifold M.
We also support this picture with the construction of their corresponding
family of IIA supergravity backgrounds preserving from 1/4 to 1/32 of the
total supercharges.  
 width 3.cm
E-mail: gomis@ecm.ub.es,
tonim@ecm.ub.es,
 pedro.silva@mi.infn.it,
Antoine.VanProeyen@fys.kuleuven.ac.be    
 

Introduction and Results 

The fact that D-branes couple to background fluxes can allow, under the
appropriate circumstances, a collection of D-branes to expand into
another brane of higher dimension. Also the inverse process is observed,
where higher dimensional D-branes collapse into smaller dimensional ones
or even into fundamental strings. Non-supersymmetric examples of such
configurations are the expansion of Born-Infeld
strings , the dielectric branes and the matrix string theory calculations
of . More recent supersymmetric cases
have also been constructed, like the giant gravitons in AdS
spaces . All these configurations
share the handicap that the perturbative quantisation of string theory is
still not possible due to the presence of  Ramond-Ramond fluxes.

Supertubes  are very different from the former cases
because they are expanded configurations that live in a completely flat
space, with all other background fields turned off. They correspond to a
bound state of D0-branes and fundamental strings that expand into a D2
with tubular shape due to the addition of angular momentum. Remarkably,
they also preserve 1/4 of the 32 supersymmetries of the Minkowski vacuum,
unlike some other similar (but non-supersymmetric) configurations that
were constructed in . Furthermore, the simplicity of
the background allowed for a perturbative string-theoretical study of the
supertube, beyond the probe or the supergravity
approximations .


The purpose of this paper is to show that it is possible to generalise
the construction of the original supertube configurations to other purely
geometrical backgrounds, while still preserving some supersymmetry. This
generalisation consists on choosing a type IIA background of the form
, with  a curved manifold. Since we do
not turn on any other supergravity field, supersymmetry restricts M to
be one of the usual manifolds with reduced holonomy :


 
cc   M  & Fraction of the 32 supersymmetries preserved     
   &          1/2           
   &          1/4           
   &          1/4           
   &        1/8           
   &     1/8           
 Spin(7)  &      1/8           
 Sp(2)  &        3/8           
 
We will show that it is possible to supersymmetrically embed the
supertube in these backgrounds in such a way that its time and
longitudinal directions fill the  factor, while its compact
direction can describe an arbitrary curve  in M.


The problem will be analysed in two different descriptions. In the first
one, we will perform a worldvolume approach by considering a D2 probe in
these backgrounds with the mentioned embedding and with an
electromagnetic worldvolume gauge field corresponding to the threshold
bound state of D0/F1. With the knowledge of some general properties of
the Killing spinors of the M manifolds, it will be shown, using its
-symmetry, that the probe bosonic effective action is supersymmetric.
As in flat space supertubes, the only charges and projections involved
correspond to the D0-branes and the fundamental strings, while the D2
ones do not appear anywhere. This is why, in all cases, the preserved
amount of supersymmetry will be 1/4 of the fraction already preserved by
the choice of background.

Note that, in particular, this allows for configurations preserving a
single supercharge, as is shown in one of the examples of this work.
(This is not in contradiction with the fact that the minimal
spinors in 2+1 dimensions have 2 independent components since, because of
the non-vanishing electromagnetic field, the theory on the worldvolume of
the D2 is not Lorentz invariant.)  In the other example that we present,
we exploit the fact that the curve  can now wind around the
non-trivial cycles that the M manifolds have, and construct a supertube
with cylindrical shape , with the  wrapping one of
the non-trivial  cycles of an ALE space. In the absence of D0 and F1
charges,  and  respectively, the  is a collapsed point in
one of the poles of the . As  is increased, the 
slides down towards the equator. Unlike in flat space, here 
is bounded from above and it acquires its maximum value precisely when
the  is a maximal circle inside the .



The second approach will be a spacetime description, where the
back-reaction of the system will be taken into account, and we will be
able to describe the configuration by means of a supersymmetric solution
of type IIA supergravity, the low-energy effective theory of the closed
string sector. Such solutions can be obtained from the original ones,
found in , by simply replacing the 8-dimensional
Euclidean space that appears in the metric by M. We will show that this
change is consistent with the supergravity equations of motion as long as
the various functions and one-forms that were harmonic in  are
now harmonic in M. It will also be shown that the supergravity solution
preserves the same amount of supersymmetry that was found by the probe
analysis.

Physically, the construction of these generalised supertubes is possible
because the cancellation of the gravitational attraction by the angular
momentum is a local  phenomenon. By choosing the worldvolume
electric field  such that , and an arbitrary non-zero magnetic
field , the Poynting vector automatically acquires the required value
to prevent the collapse at every point of  . This remains true
even after the replacement of the space where  lives from 
by a curved M.


This paper is organised as follows: in section  we analyse
the system where the D2-supertube probes the ,
and prove that the effective worldvolume action for the D2 is
supersymmetric using the -symmetry. In section  we
perform the Hamiltonian analysis of the system. We show that the
supersymmetric embeddings minimise the energy for given D0 and F1
charges, showing that gravity is locally compensated by the Poynting
vector. In section  we give to examples in order to
clarify and illustrate these constructions. Section  is
devoted to the supergravity analysis of the generalised supertubes. We
prove there the supersymmetry from a spacetime point of view. Conclusions
are given in section .


Probe worldvolume analysis  
In this section we will prove that the curved direction of a supertube
can live in any of the usual manifolds with reduced holonomy, while still
preserving some amount of supersymmetry. The analysis will be based on
the -symmetry properties of the bosonic worldvolume action, and its
relation with the supersymmetry transformation of the background fields.


The setup 



As announced, we consider a general IIA background of the form 
, with  a possibly curved manifold. In the absence
of fluxes, the requirement that the background preserves some
supersymmetry(In , a first attempt to
construct supertubes in curved spaces was performed. Their configurations
are not supersymmetric because the backgrounds already destroy all
supersymmetries.)  implies that  must admit covariantly constant
spinors and, therefore, a holonomy group smaller than . The
classification of such manifolds is well-known , and the
only possible choices for M are shown in the table of the introduction.

Let us write the target space metric as
 
where  is the vielbein of a Ricci-flat metric on M.
Underlined indices refer to tangent space objects.
We will embed the supertube in such a way that its time and
longitudinal directions live in  while its
curved direction describes an arbitrary curve  in .
By naming the D2 worldvolume coordinates ,
such an embedding is determined by
 
where  are arbitrary functions of . The assignment of 
 and , i.e. the fact that  is independent of 
 and , is a choice of parametrization.(In this
sense, the apparently rotating supertubes considered in are indeed equivalent, through a worldvolume reparametrisation, to the
ordinary supertubes in flat space.) 




Let us remark that, in general, the curve  will be contractible in
M. As a consequence, due to gravitational self-attraction, the compact
direction of the D2 will naturally tend to collapse to a point.

Following , we will stabilise the D2 by turning on an
electromagnetic flux in its worldvolume
 
which will provide the necessary centrifugal force to compensate the
gravitational attraction. In this paper we will restrict to static
configurations.

The effective action of the D2 is the DBI action (the Wess-Zumino term
vanishes in our purely geometrical backgrounds),
 
where  is the induced metric determined by the embedding 
,
and  is the electromagnetic field strength.  denotes the
spacetime components , and  labels the worldvolume
coordinates . The -symmetry imposes restrictions on the
background supersymmetry transformation when only worldvolume bosonic
configurations are considered. Basically we get 
 (see e.g. ), where  is the
background Killing spinor and  (see
e.g. ) is a matrix that squares to 1:
 
Here  is the chirality matrix in ten dimensions (in our conventions
it squares to one), and the other definitions are
 
where  are the vielbeins of the target space and
 are the flat gamma matrices. We are using Greek
letters for worldvolume indices and Latin characters for the target
space.

We are now ready to see under which circumstances can the
configuration (), () be supersymmetric. This is
determined by the condition for -symmetry, which becomes
 
where
 
The solutions of () for  are the Killing spinors of the
background, determining the remaining supersymmetry.

Proof of worldvolume supersymmetry 

In this section we shall prove that the previous configurations always
preserve  of the remaining background supersymmetries preserved by
the choice of M. We will show that the usual supertube projections are
necessary and sufficient in all cases except when we do not require that
the curve  is arbitrary and it lies completely within the flat
directions that M may have. Therefore we first discuss the arbitrary
case, and after that, we deal with the special situation.

Arbitrary Curve:  If we demand that the configuration is
supersymmetric for any arbitrary curve in M, then all the terms
in () that contain the derivatives  must vanish
independently of those that do not contain them. The vanishing of the
first ones (those containing ) give
 
which signals the presence of fundamental strings in the
longitudinal direction of the tube. Now, when ,
then , and the vanishing of the terms independent
of  in () give
 
which signals the presence of D0 branes dissolved in the worldvolume of
the supertube. Since both projections, () and (),
commute, the configuration will preserve  of the background
supersymmetries as  long as they also commute with all the
projections imposed by the background itself. 

It is easy to prove that this will always be the case. Since the
target space is of the form 2 the only nontrivial conditions that
its Killing spinors have to fulfil are
 
with all indices only on M (which in our ordering, means 
). If one prefers, the integrability
condition can be written as
 
In either form, all the conditions on the background spinors involve
only a sum of terms with two (or none) gamma matrices of M. It is then clear
that such projections will always commute with the F1 and the D0
ones, since they do not involve any gamma matrix of M.

To complete the proof, one must take into account further possible
problems that could be caused by the fact that the projections considered
so far are applied to background spinors which are not necessarily
constant. To see that this does not change the results, note
that () implies that all the dependence of  on the M
coordinates  must be of the form
 
with  a constant spinor, and  a matrix that involves only products of even number
of gamma matrices on M (it may well happen that ).
Now, any projection on  can be translated to a projection on
 since




 
The only subtle point here is that, if some of the  have to
survive, the product of  must be a constant
matrix(Note that it is not necessary that  commutes with
.) . But this is always the case for all the projections
related to the presence of M, since we
know that such spaces preserve some Killing spinors.
Finally, it is also the case for the F1 and D0 projections, since
they commute with any even number of gamma matrices on M.

The conclusion is that, for an arbitrary curve in M to preserve
supersymmetry, it is necessary and sufficient to impose the F1 and D0
projections. In all cases, it will preserve  of the background
supersymmetry. We will illustrate this with particular examples in
section .

Non-Arbitrary Curve:  If we now give up the restriction that the
curve must be arbitrary, we can still show that the F1 and D0 projection
are necessary and sufficient, except for those cases in which the curve
lies entirely in the flat directions that M may have. Of course, the
former discussion shows that such projections are always sufficient, so
we will now study in which cases they are necessary as well.

In order to proceed, we need to prove an intermediate result.

Lemma: If the velocity of the curve does not point in a
flat direction of M, then the background spinor always satisfies at
least one projection like
 
with  and  a non-vanishing sum of terms involving only an even
number of gamma matrices, and  invertible .

To prove this, we move to a point of the curve that lies in a curved
direction of M, i.e. a point where not all components of
 are zero. We perform a rotation in the
tangent space such that the velocity of the curve points only in one of
the curved directions, e.g. 
 
at least one choice of ,  and , and where we use the definitions
of (). With this choice,  becomes simply
. Therefore, at least one
of the equations in () can be split in
 
with the definitions
 
The assumption () implies that  is nonzero and
invertible, as the square of  is a negative definite multiple of the
unit matrix. This implies that also  is non-zero since, otherwise,
 would have to be zero and this is against the fact that all the
listed M manifolds admit covariantly constant spinors. It is now
immediate to check that  commutes with  while it
anticommutes with , which completes the proof. We can now apply this lemma and rewrite one of the conditions
in () as an equation of the kind ().
We then multiply the -symmetry condition () by .
Clearly only the first two terms survive, and we can write
 
Since  cannot be zero if the curve is not
degenerate, we just have to multiply with  to find
again (). Plugging this back into () gives the
remaining D0 condition ().

Summarising, the usual supertube conditions are always necessary and
sufficient except for those cases where the curve is not required to be
arbitrary and lives entirely in flat space; then, they are just
sufficient. For example, one could choose  to be a straight line in
one of the  factors that some of the M have, and take a constant
, which would correspond to a planar D2-brane preserving  of the
background supersymmetry.


Hamiltonian analysis 
We showed that in order for the supertube
configurations (), () to be supersymmetric we
needed , but we found no restriction on the magnetic field
. We shall now check that some conditions must hold in
order to solve the equations of motion of the Maxwell fields. We will go
through the Hamiltonian analysis which will enable us to show that these
supertubes saturate a BPS bound which, in turn, implies the second-order
Lagrange equations of the submanifold determined by the constraints. We
will restrict to time-independent configurations, which we have checked
to be compatible with the full equations of motion. The Lagrangian is
then given by ()
 
where we have defined , and
. To obtain the Hamiltonian we first need the displacement field,
 
which can be inverted to give
 

The Lagrange equations for  and  give two constraints
 
the first one being the usual Gauss law. Together, they imply that
, i.e., the magnetic field can only depend on .
Finally, the equations for  and  give,
respectively,
 

The Hamiltonian density   is given by
 
In order to obtain a BPS bound , we rewrite the
square of the Hamiltonian density as
 
from which we obtain the local inequality
 
which can be saturated only if
 
It can be checked that the configurations saturating this bound satisfy
the remaining equations of motion ().

Note that the Poynting vector generated by the electromagnetic field is
always tangent to the curve  and its modulus is precisely .
We can then use exactly the same arguments as in .
Equation () tells us that, once we set , and
regardless of the value of , the Poynting vector is
automatically adjusted to provide the required centripetal force that
compensates the gravitational attraction at every point of . The
only difference with respect to the original supertubes in flat space is
that the curvature of the background is taken into account in
(), through the explicit dependence of  on the metric of
M.


Finally, the integrated version of the BPS bound () is
 
and the normalisation . Similarly, the integrated bound
is saturated when
 
where  is precisely the proper length of the curve ,
and the last equality is only valid when both  and  are constant,
as will be the case in our examples.

Examples  
After having discussed the general construction of supertubes in reduced
holonomy manifolds, we shall now present two examples in order to
illustrate some of their physical features.


Supertubes in ALE spaces: 4 supercharges 

Let us choose M, i.e. the full model being
. We take the  to be an ALE space
provided with a multi-Eguchi-Hanson metric  
with . These metrics describe a  fibration over
, the circles being parametrized by . They present
 removable bolt singularities at the points , where the
 fibres contract to a point. Therefore, a segment connecting any
two such points, together with the fibre, form (topologically) an .
For simplicity, we will just consider the two-monopoles case which,
without loss of generality, can be placed at  and
. Therefore, the complete IIA background is
 
with
 
Let us embed the D2 supertube in a way such that its longitudinal
direction lies in  while its compact one wraps and  inside
the  that connects the two monopoles. More explicitly,
 


 

Since any  is contractible inside an , the curved part would
tend collapse to the nearest pole, located at  or . As in
flat space, we therefore need to turn on a worldvolume flux as
in (),
with  and  constant for the moment.

According to our general discussion, this configuration should
preserve  of the 16 background supercharges already
preserved by the  space. In this case, the -symmetry equation
is simply
 
where  are the Killing spinors of the background (). They
can easily be computed and shown to be just constant spinors subject to
the projection
 
Then, the -symmetry equation can be solved by
requiring () and (),





which involve the usual D0/F1 projections of the supertube. Since they
commute with (), the configuration preserves a total of 
of the 32 supercharges.

It is interesting to see what are the consequences of having  for
this case. Note that, from our general Hamiltonian analysis, we saw that,
for fixed D0 and F1 charges, the energy is minimised for . When
applied to the present configuration, () reads
 
which determines , and therefore selects the position of
the  inside the  that is compatible with supersymmetry.
Since  is invariant under ,
the solutions always come in mirror pairs with respect to the
equator of the . The explicit solutions are indeed
  Note that a solution exists as long as the product of
the charges is bounded from above to
 
The point is that this will always happen due to the fact that,
contrary to the flat space case, the  cannot grow arbitrarily
within the . As a consequence, the angular momentum acquires its
maximum value when the  is precisely in the equator. To see
it more explicitly, setting  and computing
 and  for our configuration gives
 
which guarantees that () is always satisfied.

Finally, note that we could have perfectly chosen, for instance, a more
sophisticated embedding in which  was not constant. This would be
the analogue of taking a non-constant radius in the original flat space
supertube. Again, by the general analysis of the previous sections, this
would require the Poynting vector to vary in order to locally compensate
for the gravitational attraction everywhere, and no further supersymmetry
would be broken.

Supertubes in  spaces: 1 supercharge 

The purpose of the next example is to show how one can reach a
configuration with one single surviving supercharge in a concrete
example. One could take any of the -preserving backgrounds of the
M Table. Many metrics for these spaces have been recently found in the
context of supergravity duals of non-maximally supersymmetric field
theories. Let us take the  that was found
in  since the Killing spinors have been
already calculated explicitly . This space is a
 bundle over , and the metric is
 
where
 
By writing the complete IIA background metric as
 
and using the obvious vielbeins, with the order
 
the corresponding Killing spinors are
 
with  a constant spinor subject to
 
To analyse -symmetry, let us take
the compact part of the supertube to lie along, say, the 
direction, while setting to constant the rest of the  coordinates.
As in the previous example, this would have the interpretation of
an  embedding in one of the two  in the base of the . Imposing
-symmetry:
 
Now, the first projection of () happens to anticommute with
the  defined in ()
) 
In other words, this just illustrates a particular case
of () for which the direction  plays the
role of , and for which  and
. We can now follow the steps in
section  and multiply () by . This
yields again the usual supertube conditions () and ().






Since all the gamma matrices appearing in (), ()
and () commute, square to one and are traceless, the
configuration preserves only one of the 32 supercharges of the theory. Of
course, this is not in contradiction with the fact that the minimal
spinors in 2+1 dimensions have 2 components, since the field theory on
the worldvolume of the D2 is not Lorentz invariant because of the
non-vanishing electromagnetic field.


Supergravity analysis) 
In this section we construct the supergravity family of solutions that
correspond to all the configurations studied before. We start our work
with a generalisation of the ansatz used
in  to find the original solutions.
Our analysis is performed in eleven dimensional supergravity, mainly
because its field content is much simpler than in IIA supergravity.
Once the eleven-dimensional solution is found,
we reduce back to ten dimensions, obtaining our generalised supertube
configurations.

The first step in finding the solutions is to look for supergravity
configurations with the isometries and supersymmetries suggested by the
worldvolume analysis of the previous sections. Then, we will turn to the
supergravity field equations to find the constraints that the functions
of our ansatz have to satisfy in order that our
configurations correspond to minima of the eleventh dimensional
 action.
Finally, we choose the correct behaviour for these functions so that they
correctly describe the supertubes once the reduction to ten dimensions is
carried on.


Supersymmetry analysis) 

Our starting point is the supertube ansatz
of   
where the Euclidean space () coordinates are labelled by
, with , ,  and
 and  are respectively, the Neveu-Schwarz and
Ramond-Ramond potentials.  depend only on the 
coordinates.

To up-lift this ansatz, we use the normal Kaluza-Klein form of the eleven
dimensional metric and three-form,
 
where  is the eleventh dimensional three-form.
The convention for curved indices is  and
for flat ones
.
The explicit form of the eleven-dimensional metric is given by,
 
where . This background is a solution of the
equations of motion in eleven dimensions derived from the action
 
when the two functions  and , as well as the one-form ,
are harmonic in , i.e.,
 
where  is the Hodge dual with respect to the Euclidean flat metric
on . It describes a background with an M2 brane along the
directions , together with a wave traveling along , and
angular momentum along   provided by .

Next, we generalise the ansatz above by replacing  by one of the
eight dimensional M manifolds of the table, and by allowing , 
and  to have an arbitrary dependence on the M coordinates
. We therefore replace the previously flat metric on  by a
reduced holonomy metric on M, with vielbeins . Hence, in
(), we replace
 











We use a null base of the cotangent space, defined by
 
This brings the metric and  into the form
 
As customary, the torsion-less condition can be used to determine the
spin connection 1-form . In our null base, the only
non-zero
components are 
 
were we have defined various tensor quantities through the relations
 
and  are the spin connection one-forms corresponding
to , i.e. 
.

We now want to see under which circumstances our backgrounds preserve
some supersymmetry. Since we are in a bosonic background i.e. all the
fermions are set to zero, we just need to ensure that the variation of
the gravitino vanishes when evaluated on our configurations. In other
words, supersymmetry is preserved if there exist nonzero background
spinors  such that(For the components of -forms we use
the notations of .) 
 
We will try an ansatz such that the spinor depends only on the
coordinates on M. It is straightforward to write down the eleven
equations () for each value of . The
equation for  is
 
Assuming that  and  are arbitrary and independent we
find
 
Using these projections, it is a straightforward algebraic work to see
that the equation for  and  are automatically satisfied.
Finally, the equations for  simplify to
 

By the same arguments as in the previous sections, the
projections () preserve 1/4 of the 32 real supercharges. On
the other hand, () is just the statement that M must admit
covariantly constant spinors. Depending on the choice of M, the whole
11d background will preserve the expected total number of supersymmetries
that we indicated in the table written in the introduction.

To reduce back to IIA supergravity, we first go to another flat basis
 
which implies that
 
We reduce along , i.e. replace  by . The
projections () become the usual D0/F1 projections, with the
fundamental strings along the -axis.
 




Equations of motion 

Now that we have proved that the correct supersymmetry is preserved
(matching the worldvolume analysis), we proceed to determine the
equations that ,  and  have to satisfy in order that our
configurations solve the field equations of eleven-dimensional
supergravity. Instead of checking each of the equations of motion, we use
the analysis of  that is based on the
integrability condition derived from the supersymmetry variation of the
gravitino (). The result of this analysis is that when at
least one supersymmetry is preserved, and the Killing vector
 is null, all
of the second order equations of motion are automatically satisfied,
except for
 
  The equation of motion for ,
  The Einstein equation ,
where  and  are the Einstein and stress-energy tensors
along the components  in a base where 
. Let us explain why the above statement is correct. The
integrability conditions give no information about the field equation for
the matter content, therefore the equation of motion for  has
to be verified by hand. Also, in most cases all of the Einstein equations
are automatically implied by the existence of a non-trivial solution
of ().

With () and in the base where the metric takes the
form (), and thus , we
have
 
This vanishes for all  except , implying that our
configuration falls into the classification of those backgrounds that
admit a null Killing spinor and as a consequence the associated Einstein
equations escape the analysis. 













We thus have to check the two items mentioned above.

Let us start with the equation for , which is
 
Using the fact that the Hodge dual of a p-form
with respect to  is related to the one with respect to
 by
 
where
 
it is easy to see that () becomes
 
This implies that  and  must be harmonic with respect
to the metric of M, i.e.,
 
Finally, using () and (), one can explicitly compute
the  components of the Einstein and stress-energy tensors, and
obtain
 
Therefore, the last non-trivial equation of motion tells us
that also  must be harmonic on M,
 


Constructing the supertube 

In order to construct the supergravity solutions that properly describe
supertubes in reduced holonomy manifolds, we reduce our
eleven-dimensional background to a ten-dimensional background of type IIA
supergravity, using () again. We obtain () with the
replacement (), and the constraints ()
and ().














At this point we have to choose ,  and  so that they
describe a D2-brane with worldvolume , with 
an arbitrary curve in M. As it was done
in , one should couple IIA
supergravity to a source with support along , and
solve the M Laplace equations () and ()
with such a source term in the right hand sides. If this has to
correspond to the picture of D0/F1 bound states expanded into a D2 by
rotation, the boundary conditions of the Laplace equations must be such
that the solution carries the right conserved charges. In the appropriate
units,
 
Here, as in ,  would have to
match with the angular momentum carried by the electromagnetic field that
we considered in the worldvolume approach.

The Laplace problem in a general manifold can be very complicated and, in
most cases, it cannot be solved in terms of ordinary functions. We will
not intend to do so, but rather we will just claim that, once , 
and  have been determined, they can be plugged back
into (), with (), and the background will describe
the configurations that we have been discussing in this paper. It will
have the expected isometries, supersymmetries and conserved charges.


Conclusions We have shown that the expansion of the D0/F1 system into a D2 can happen
supersymmetrically in all the backgrounds of the form 
, with M the manifolds of the table. We have shown this in the
worldvolume as well as in the supergravity setting. By a Hamiltonian
analysis, we connected the result to a BPS bound on charges that are also
well defined in the curved background. We remark that our research is
different from , where it was shown that the
supertube itself , after some T-dualities, can be described by a special
Lorentzian-holonomy manifold in eleven dimensions.


Acknowledgments. 

We are grateful to Roberto Empara n, David Mateos, Guillermo A.
Silva, Joan Simo n and Paul Townsend  for useful discussions. Work
supported in part by the European Community's Human Potential Programme
under contract HPRN-CT-2000-00131 Quantum Spacetime, in which P. Silva is
associated with Torino Universita . This work is also supported by MCYT
FPA, 2001-3598 and CIRIT GC 2001SGR-00065. T. Mateos is supported by the
grant FI from the Generalitat de Catalunya. The work of A.V.P. is
supported in part by the Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and
Cultural Affairs through the Inter-university Attraction Pole P5/27.















 [2]#2 thebibliography 10 

R. Empara n, Born-Infeld strings tunneling to D-branes , Phys.
Lett.
  B423  (1998) 71-78,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9711106 hep-th/9711106  


R. C. Myers, Dielectric-branes , JHEP 12  (1999) 022,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9910053 hep-th/9910053  


R. Schiappa, Matrix strings in weakly curved background fields ,
Nucl.
  Phys. B608  (2001) 3-50,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0005145 hep-th/0005145  


P. J. Silva, Matrix string theory and the Myers effect , JHEP 02 
  (2002) 004,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0111121 hep-th/0111121  


J. McGreevy, L. Susskind  and N. Toumbas, Invasion of the giant
gravitons
  from anti-de Sitter space , JHEP 06  (2000) 008,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0003075 hep-th/0003075  


M. T. Grisaru, R. C. Myers  and O. Tafjord, SUSY and Goliath , JHEP
  08  (2000) 040,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0008015 hep-th/0008015  


D. Mateos and P. K. Townsend, Supertubes , Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 
  (2001) 011602,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0103030 hep-th/0103030  


T. Harmark and K. G. Savvidy, Ramond-Ramond field radiation from
rotating
  ellipsoidal membranes , Nucl. Phys. B585  (2000) 567-588,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0002157 hep-th/0002157  


D. Mateos, S. Ng  and P. K. Townsend, Tachyons, supertubes and
  brane/anti-brane systems , JHEP 03  (2002) 016,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0112054 hep-th/0112054  


M. Berger, Sur les groupes d'holonomie homoge ne des
varie te s
  a  connexion affine et des varie te s riemanniennes , Bull. Soc.
  Math. France 83  (1955)
279-330


R. Empara n, D. Mateos  and P. K. Townsend, Supergravity
supertubes ,
  JHEP 07  (2001) 011,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0106012 hep-th/0106012  


D. K. Park, S. Tamaryan  and H. J. W. Mu ller-Kirsten, General
  criterion for the existence of supertube and BIon in curved target space ,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0302145 hep-th/0302145  


J.-H. Cho and P. Oh, Rotating supertubes ,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0302172 hep-th/0302172  


E. Bergshoeff, R. Kallosh, T. Ortin  and G. Papadopoulos,
  -symmetry, supersymmetry and intersecting branes , Nucl. Phys.
  B502  (1997) 149-169,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9705040 hep-th/9705040  


E. Bergshoeff and P. K. Townsend, Super D-branes , Nucl. Phys. B490 
  (1997) 145-162,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9611173 hep-th/9611173  


J. P. Gauntlett, J. Gomis  and P. K. Townsend, BPS bounds for
worldvolume
  branes , JHEP 01  (1998) 003,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9711205 hep-th/9711205  


T. Eguchi and A. J. Hanson, Asymptotically flat selfdual solutions
to
  Euclidean gravity , Phys. Lett. B74  (1978)
249


J. Gomis and T. Mateos, D6 branes wrapping Ka hler four-cycles ,
Phys.
  Lett. B524  (2002) 170-176,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0108080 hep-th/0108080  


M. Cvetic , G. W. Gibbons, H. Lu   and C. N. Pope, Ricci-flat
  metrics, harmonic forms and brane resolutions , Commun. Math. Phys. 232 
  (2003) 457-500,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0012011 hep-th/0012011  


J. Brugues, J. Gomis, T. Mateos  and T. Ramirez, Supergravity duals
of
  noncommutative wrapped D6 branes and supersymmetry without supersymmetry ,
  JHEP 10  (2002) 016,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207091 hep-th/0207091  


P. Candelas, Lectures on complex manifolds , in
Superstrings '87 , proceedings of the Trieste spring school,
World
  Scientific, Eds. L. Alvarez-Gaume  et al., 1-88.


J. P. Gauntlett and S. Pakis, The geometry of  Killing
spinors , http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212008 hep-th/0212008  


N. E. Grandi and A. R. Lugo, Supertubes and special holonomy ,
Phys.
  Lett. B553  (2003) 293-300,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212159 hep-th/0212159  


