







 




theorem Theorem [section]
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
definition [theorem]Definition 
remark [theorem]Remark 






Ultraviolet Finite Quantum Field Theory on Quantum Spacetime 

D. BahnsII. Institut fur Theoretische Physik, Universitat 
Hamburg,Luruper Chaussee 149, D-22761 Hamburg, Germany. ,  
S. Doplicher Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita di Roma 
"La Sapienza",  P.le Aldo Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italy. Research supported
by MIUR and GNAMPA-INDAM. ,  
K. Fredenhagen,  
G. Piacitelli 


January 15, 2003 

Dedicated to Rudolf Haag on the occasion of his 
80 birthday. 


 
We discuss a formulation of quantum field theory on quantum space time where
the perturbation expansion of the -matrix is term by term ultraviolet
finite.

The characteristic feature of our approach is a quantum version of the Wick
product at coinciding points: the differences of coordinates 
 are not set equal to zero, which would violate the
commutation relation between their components. We show that
the optimal degree of approximate coincidence 
can be defined 
by the
evaluation of a conditional expectation which replaces each
function of  by its expectation value in optimally
localized states, while leaving the mean coordinates
 
invariant.

The resulting procedure is to a large extent unique, 
and is invariant under
translations and
rotations, but violates Lorentz invariance. Indeed, optimal
localization refers to a specific Lorentz frame, where the electric and
magnetic parts of the commutator of the coordinates have to coincide 
.

Employing an adiabatic switching, we show that   the S-matrix is
term by term finite. 
The matrix elements of the transfer matrix are determined, at each order in
the perturbative   expansion, by kernels with Gaussian decay in the
Planck scale. 
The adiabatic limit and the 
large scale limit of this theory 
will be studied elsewhere.



Introduction 

Spacetime quantization was proposed earlier than  
renormalization theory as a
possible way of regularizing quantum field theory.
Recently, a deeper motivation was given:  
the concurrence of the  
principles of quantum mechanics and of classical general relativity leads
to spacetime uncertainty relations;  the natural geometric
background that implements those relations is a noncommutative model
of spacetime. More precisely, in order to give localization in
spacetime  an operational meaning, 
the energy transfer
associated to the localization of
an event by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle 
should be limited so that the generated gravitational field does
not trap the event itself  inside an horizon; otherwise 
the observation would be prevented.  
This principle implies spacetime uncertainty relations  which in a weaker form
can be written as
* 
q^0(q^1+q^2+q^3)_P^2,

q^1q^2+q^2q^3+q^3q^1_P^2,
where  is the Planck length
.
It is possible to implement exactly these relations by appropriate commutation
relations between the components of the spacetime coordinates 
 
[q^,q^]=i_P^2Q^ ,

[q^,Q^ ]=0,

Q_ Q^ =0,

(1 2 Q_ (*Q)^ )^2=I,
where  is the Hodge dual of .
These relations are covariant under the full Poincare group. The irreducible
 representations of the spacetime commutation relations (1) take the familiar
form (in absolute units, where )
 
where  is a real antisymmetric matrix
in the manifold  defined by the conditions (,) with
. They evidently break Lorentz covariance.
Interest in the relations () was more recently raised by the
occurrence of closely related forms of noncommutativity
 also in string theory.
There exists, however,
an essentially unique, fully covariant representation where
the pairwise commuting, selfadjoint operators  have the full
manifold  as their joint spectrum.
The generalized Weyl correspondence



extends to any symbol ,
, where  
is the inverse Fourier transform of , for  fixed.
In the above
equation,    
is to be understood in the sense of 
the joint functional calculus of the s,
and




where  

and   , .
The above correspondence induces a generalized twisted   product



on the symbols, by 
. Moreover, 
. We denote by  the enveloping
C*-algebra of the resulting algebra; it is isomorphic
  to 
, the C*-algebra of the continuous
functions taking values in the algebra  of the compact
operators on the
separable, infinite dimensional Hilbert space,
and vanishing at infinity.  The Poincare group acts on the
symbols in  by




The manifold  is the orbit of the standard symplectic matrix

 (
 ) 
under the action  of the
full Lorentz group.

By definition, the states of  with optimal
localization  
 (both in space and in time) minimize 
.  This characterization is evidently invariant under
rotations and translations, but not under Lorentz boosts. It can
be shown (see) that the optimally localized states are
of the form 







where  is any probability measure on the
distinguished subset  of , 
the orbit of  under the action of
, and
 is the localization
map with localization centre ,
 
In what follows, we will need only the localization map with localization 
centre , and in order to simplify the notation we will denote it by 
. However, the results below also hold for a general .

It is convenient to introduce the enveloping
C*-algebra  generated by the restrictions 
 of the symbols to . Then the
localization map  is the composition 
of the restriction map ,
with a positive map  from  to 
, which is a conditional expectation in the sense
that(Note that, while  is not a
subalgebra of , it is a subalgebra (actually,
the centre) of the multiplier algebra .) 
, ,
.   will also denote  the normal extension to the 
multiplier algebra . Then, 
 
as a constant function of .

By analogy with the
definition of , the evaluation of an ordinary quantum field  on
the quantum spacetime is given  by  
* 
and is to be interpreted as a map from states on  to smeared
field operators,




where the r.h.s. is a   quantum field on the
ordinary spacetime, smeared with the test function 
defined by 
. 

If products of fields are evaluated in a state, the r.h.s. will
in general involve nonlocal expressions.




As in ordinary quantum field theory, due to
the singular properties of fields, products of fields are not a priori 
well-defined. On the ordinary Minkowski spacetime, well-defined products of
fields are given by the so-called Wick products. They may be defined by
bringing the positive and negative frequency parts of the fields in the product
into "normal order", which in momentum space corresponds to putting all
destruction operators to the right. Another definition, which, contrary to
normal-ordering may also be applied on curved spacetimes, is given in terms of
the formal evaluation on the diagonal of a suitably subtracted product; one has,
for instance, at
second order 
. 
The two constructions, while equivalent on the
ordinary Minkowski spacetime, lead to inequivalent generalizations
on the quantum spacetime.

In , for instance, an interaction Lagrangean was given in terms of
the usual  normal ordering of positive and negative frequency parts of
,
 
Another possibility will be investigated in . There, we consider
products of fields at different points as they arise in the context of the
Yang-Feldman equation, 
, . We then 
define the so-called quasiplanar Wick products by allowing only
terms which are local in a certain sense to be subtracted, and show that they
are well-defined on the diagonal, i.e. in the limit of coinciding points where
. 

In this paper we consider yet another approach. The evaluation on the
diagonal is replaced by a suitable generalization compatible with the
uncertainty relations, leading to a regularized nonlocal effective interaction. 
The idea is that a product of fields at different
points, , may be defined by
interpreting  as mutually independent quantum coordinates ,
that is, by defining
 
and




Now, the different spacetime components of each variable , ,
no longer commute with one another, hence the limit 
loses its natural meaning. 
We can, however, identify the central elements, i.e. take
 for all . This amounts to taking the 
tensor products in () not over the complex numbers, but over 
the centre 
 of (the multiplier algebra of) 
. The limit
 will then be replaced by 
a quantum diagonal map  
which on each function of  evaluates a state minimizing the
square Euclidean
length, while leaving the mean coordinates   invariant 
  (cf. , ).

As a consequence of taking the tensor product in () over , 
the mean coordinates  commute 
with the relative coordinates  (in the strong sense), e.g. for , 
 
This fact turns out to be crucial for the construction of the quantum
diagonal map and provides an additional motivation for taking the
tensor product over ,

Actually, the tensor product  of -moduli
can be defined as the completion relative to the maximal C*-seminorm of
the quotient of the algebraic tensor product over  modulo
the two sided ideal generated by the multiples in 
of , where  varies in . It may be equivalently
described as
the fibrewise tensor product of bundles of C*-algebras (continuous
fields of C*-algebras, in the terminology of) over
.

Another motivation to use a -module tensor product is to view the components
 of the coordinate's commutator as universal data which are
the same for the different variables corresponding to independent events. 
The s are thus treated as a point independent geometric 
background, which, however, is translation invariant and Lorentz covariant.

Since the C*-algebra  describes the regular representations of
(1), i.e. integrable to
a representation of the Weyl relations  






the uniqueness theorem of von Neumann , 
applied to each fibre at , ensures that
commutativity implies tensor factorization over . This fact will allow us
to obtain the desired map as a conditional expectation.

Furthermore,   we will use the tensor product of  copies of
the basic algebra as an auxiliary algebra, where the mean coordinates are
(affiliated to the algebra) in the first factor, and where 
the algebra to which the
difference variables  are affiliated is identified with a
subalgebra of the auxiliary algebra, associated to the factors from
  slot
 to . The desired quantum diagonal map



is then obtained by   evaluating
 on such tensor products, 
where  is the localization
map () with localization centre , and where 

is the restriction map. It  turns out that the application of
 to functions whose symbol do not depend on 
explicitely, yields expressions which in turn are independent of .


The quantum diagonal map replaces the ordinary evaluation
at coinciding points. Contrary to the ordinary case, it
yields a well-defined expression when applied to a product of fields, 
* 
since a nonlocal regularizing kernel  appears. We conclude that contrary 
to the ordinary case, no infinite counterterms have to be subtracted and 
 may be used directly to define the interaction in the quantum
theory. 
Regarding the combinatorics, it is, however, convenient to 
additionally apply ordinary normal ordering, and to define a
quantum Wick power  as
* 
The quantum Wick power  as well as  
may be understood as functions of
, not explicitly depending on , taking values in the field
operators. In other words,  and  
formally are elements
of , where  is the field algebra.

Once products of fields are given a precise meaning, one may apply an
appropriate perturbative setup. Since sharp localization in time is compatible
with the spacetime uncertainty relations (at the cost of complete
delocalization in space), one  possibility is, for instance, to follow the
standard approach to perturbation theory in the interaction representation,
involving integrations at sharp fixed times . If the Lagrangean is
symmetric, the resulting -matrix is formally unitary by construction (at
least before renormalization). 

In , such an approach was proposed, based on the interaction
Lagrangean (). Unfortunately, the resulting perturbation theory
is not free of ultraviolet divergences. Note that in , a
perturbative setup based on the Lagrangean   (with fixed
) was proposed, which, being not unitary, is not equivalent to the one
discussed here. Another inequivalent approach yielding a unitary
perturbation theory is based on the Yang-Feldman equation. It will not be
pursued in this paper.


Instead, we will again apply the standard approach to perturbation theory in the
interaction representation, this time employing the quantum Wick products. 
 
The interaction Hamiltonian on the quantum spacetime is then given by



as a constant operator-valued function  of 
 (i.e.  is formally in
).  
While in  one still had to handle the dependence of the Hamiltonian on
, in  the approach adopted here,  is a constant 
function of .

The resulting effective non local Hamiltonian is
 
where  is the effective nonlocal interaction Lagrangean
 
(x)= c_n_R^4n   da_1da_n(x+a_1)(x+a_n) 

-1 2 _j, a_j^ ^2
^(4) (1 n _j=1 ^na_j ).

It will be shown in section  that the corresponding
perturbation theory
is free of ultraviolet divergences.
The ultraviolet regularization arises as a point-split regularization by
convolution with Gaussian kernels,  
and we will show that, by insertion of an adiabatic
switch, the perturbation series is order by order finite, and each term is
a well defined, closed operator with a common core. 
The only remaining source of divergences
  is then given by possible infinite volume effects arising in the 
adiabatic limit, which will be discussed
 elsewhere. 

It is noteworthy that the transition matrix elements
will vanish as Gaussian functions of the energies and momentum transfers
expressed in Planck units.

While in the high energy limit the transition amplitudes vanish rapidly as
a result of the quantum delocalisation of the interaction, in the low
energy limit one would expect that the corrections to the ordinary theory
on Minkowski space vanish. This is clearly possible only after a finite
renormalisation; the structure of the needed counterterms and the
dependence upon the Planck length of the renormalisation constants will be
studied elsewhere. Note that in the limit where the Planck length
can be neglected, the renormalized theory on quantum spacetime should
coincide with the ordinary renormalized theory on Minkowski space. 
  At the physical values of the Planck length, the
effect of the quantum nature of spacetime should manifest itself as quadratic
or higher order corrections, since gravitation is not explicitly taken into
account, but manifests itself only through the commutator of the
coordinates.


A weak point of the approach to quantum field theory on quantum
spacetime presented here is that, while, as was   first shown in, the
prescription leading to () does not alter the free  
Hamiltonian, the
prescription discussed here would indeed change it, 
replacing it by a deformed operator which
would no longer be the zero component of a Lorentz vector. 

The interaction itself, thus treated on a different footing than the
unperturbed Hamiltonian, violates Lorentz invariance in an essential way,
since
optimally localized states are defined relative to a particular Lorentz frame.
However, spacetime translation and space rotation invariance are preserved.
Moreover, the evaluation of optimally localized states on the difference
variables  automatically restricts the joint eigenvalues
 of  to , the basis of ,
where the electric and magnetic parts of  are equal or opposite.
This gives an a posteriori motivation for a similar choice, made in,
which was motivated by simplicity and by the need of preserving space rotation
invariance. 






The quantum diagonal map 

According to the previous discussion,





fulfill the relations (for any )
 
[q_i ^,q_j ^]=i_P^2_ij 
Q ^ ,

[q_j ^,Q ^ ]=0,

Q _ Q ^ =0,

(1 2 Q _ (*Q)
^ )^2=I.
The correspondence






extends to the generalized symbols 
as   usually, where




It induces a product and an involution on
the generalized -symbols, and the enveloping C*-algebra of the
resulting algebra is precisely 
.

 
Note that, since  as C*-algebras,

. Closed 2-sided ideals  in 
 are then in a 1-1 
correspondence with closed ideals in  (the kernel of the restriction to 
of the canonical extension to  of the projection map
mod ), hence are in a 1-1 correspondence with the closed subsets of
.

Let us now introduce the coordinates of the mean event, denoted 
mean coordinates for short,



as well as the separations



Then
 
Since the commutator

does not depend on , the following
strong commutation relations hold:
 

We have the following factorization. Let  be
coordinates with characteristic length , i.e. 
. Define
 
and
 
We immediately check that the above elements 
also fulfill the relations  (-) in the regular
form, where .
By  von Neumann uniqueness (at each fixed ; see
), there exists a faithful *-homomorphism



such that



This follows from the fact that regularity implies that the map 
 determines  
a *-homomorphism  (whose
canonical extension to  will still be denoted by );
the ranges of  and  commute for  and 
 is an isomorphism independent of . By the universal 
properties of the tensor product and its uniqueness for nuclear C*-algebras
(as ), there is a *-homomorphism  of 
 to , s.t.
, 
.
By assumption,  is faithful on , hence, by remark  
on page ,  is faithful.

Explicitly, 




where, of course,





  The quantum diagonal map
 is defined as




where  are the localization map and the restriction to
 (projection of  onto ),
respectively. Note that the generators  of the algebra
in which  takes values have characteristic length .

To motivate this choice, let us 
recall that the difference variables 
 
fulfill the commutation relations (-), and a short computation yields





(as constant functions of ; compare with ()).
In other words,  minimizes the Euclidean separation 
.  will also
denote the normal extension
of the above map to the multiplier algebra .

Note also that, had we used  instead of , we would
have defined the same map , since the separations 
are invariant under translations.
 

Let , .
The explicit form of the quantum diagonal map on  is given by








where 
 

Equivalently,



where





with  

and, with ,





In particular,  is a constant function of
.
  A simple computation yields, by the the definition
() of ,





By the above and (),(), we have
* 
as a constant function of ; () 
then follows by a straightforward computation.
Standard computations provide the configuration space kernel.



A class of ultraviolet finite theories on the quantum spacetime 

The uncertainty relations (2) are compatible with sharp localization
in time, at the cost of total delocalization in space. Consistently,
the centre valued map



extends to a a positive partial trace  (see
 for details), which commutes with the restriction  
to .

For a fixed choice of a frame of
reference, we formulate a traditional perturbative setup in the spirit of
. Consider for simplicity the  interaction; then the
formal interaction Hamiltonian will be defined as 




where the interaction Lagrangean  
may be either the n  quantum Wick power , 
defined by evaluating the quantum  
diagonal map on a normally ordered product of fields(We recall that a
monomial  
in  the creation an destruction operators () 
is called normally ordered or Wick ordered and denoted , 
if all creation operators stand left 
of the destruction operators.) ,
* 
or the regularized product , defined by evaluating the quantum
diagonal map on a product of fields as it stands, without application of normal
order, 
* 
Clearly, the first definition yields a well-defined expression, but, contrary to
the ordinary case, normal ordering is not necessary due to the regulating kernel
 which renders the second product well-defined as well(That this 
is true may be either checked by expanding the product of fields in normally
ordered products and check that all integrals are finite, or by employing the
method of wavefront sets to show that 
, where  denotes the ordinary
convolution, is well-defined.) . 
In fact, both the quantum 
Wick power  as well as  
may be understood as functions of
,   not explicitly depending on , 
taking values in the field
operators. In other words,  and  
formally are elements of 
, where  is the field algebra(In more rigorous 
mathematical terms,
 and  are affine maps from states 
on  to quadratic forms.) . 
 

In the following, however, we will  base our investigation on an interaction
given by a quantum Wick power.  For one thing, it simplifies the
combinatorics, and in view of the adiabatic limit, which we hope to study in a
later paper, normal ordering  may even be necessary.

The resulting Hamiltonian  is formally affiliated to 
,
where  is the free Bose field algebra on the ordinary spacetime. 
Roughly speaking,  is a function from
 to (formal) field operators, i.e. to quadratic forms.

In order to retrieve  the Hamiltonian of the equivalent theory on
the ordinary spacetime, one has to integrate over some probability measure
 over , defining . Since,
however,  is a constant function of , the choice of
 is irrelevant. This fact should be contrasted with the case  considered in
, where the non-irrelevant choice of a particular  measure - though
the most reasonable in that context - was to some extent  arbitrary, as well
as the special role plaid by .

The resulting Hamiltonian 
for the equivalent theory on the ordinary spacetime
can then be written in terms of the effective nonlocal Lagrangean
* 
(x)=dk(k)e^ikx ,


L _eff  (k)=
d^4k_1d^4k_n r_n(k_1,,k_n)
(k_1)(k_n) ^(4) (k-
_j=1 ^nk_j).


The fundamental result of this section is that the finite 4-volume theory
yields a finite perturbation series. More precisely, we turn the coupling 
constant  into a smooth function of  vanishing at infinity
sufficiently fast, of the form
, and we show that the 
corresponding Dyson series is well defined at all orders. Well-known methods   from ordinary quantum field theory are employed.


 
For any Schwartz function  of the form
, 
,
, 
the formal series 
 
is finite at all orders. More precisely, it is possible - 
by Wick reduction - to put the N  order contribution
in the form of a finite sum of closable
operators with common core  (the subspace of the Fock space
consisting of the vectors with finitely many particles
and with Schwartz -particle components for each ).
  By construction,  is unitary.


 
We shall
follow standard conventions (see e.g.
): in particular,
 are the destruction and creation operators
on the symmetric Fock space
, , and
 
a(g)=_R^3  d a()g(-) ,a^ (g)=_R^3  d a^()g(),

(t,)=1 (2)^3/2  _R^3 
d 2()  
e^ik_x^ a^()+
e^-ik_x^ a()

as quadratic forms on , where
, and .

The cutoff Lagrangian  is given by 




We introduce the following compact notations
 
a^ =(a_1^,,a_n^)R^n ,

a =
(a _1,,a _n)R^3n ,

a=(a^0,a )=
(a_1,, a_n)R^4n .

The translation of all the -vectors in  by the same
 vector  will be denoted by 
x,a_jR^4.

The symbol  will denote the canonical 
euclidean scalar product in , , 
, depending on the context; then 
ab=a_ b^=^0^0-,

a^2=.
Moreover, 
da=d^0da^ =
_j=1 ^n da^_j.

Finally, for any function  of , we write 
g^(n) ()=g(x_1)g(x_n),

and, in particular, 
^(n) (x) =(x_1)(x_n) .
Standard computations yield 
* 
where  is the time component of the mean point
 
of , and 
 
is a Schwartz function.



With  the set of all subsets
of 
  (including the trivial subsets), we shall write
 for any choice of  elements of , namely
 with , .
Then, by (), we get 
 
where
 

Here  is a diagonal  matrix,
with diagonal entries
 
and








By the second Wick theorem, each term in the above sum may be written
as a sum of terms with contractions, where the surviving creation
 and destruction operators appear in normal order (creation on the left), and
the contracted pairs are replaced by  distributions. Since
each integration variable  appears as the argument of
precisely one operator
, (), then the arising product 
of s is well defined by the following elementary
  The map
 
on the Schwartz functions, with  a real linear functional 
on , ,
is a well defined distribution
if and only if  the functionals  are linearly independent.
By performing  integrations, the above distribution always takes the form




where the linear maps , , 
provide a linear injection of  into .
After complete Wick reduction, the generic term 
will be of the form





where
* 
for a suitable set of linear maps (see remark ) 



with .(Of course, the case  corresponds to the 
term with no contractions; in that case, the above mentioned 
linear maps reduce to renaming the integration variables.) 
The proof is complete  by,
if we show that the function  is in .
To this end, it is enough to prove that
 is bounded by a Schwartz function. Due to
the form of ,
the integrations over the space and time variables in () factorize,
and  is the product of a function with Gaussian decay 
with the Fourier transform - evaluated at some point continuously
depending on the 's - of an  function; the latter is then a 
bounded, continuous function. Indeed, we will
show in appendix  that 
is a Schwartz function, by carrying out explicitly the above mentioned 
computations.

Note that the   kernels
 appearing in the above
proof are 
transition amplitudes of scattering processes with  incoming and
 outgoing particles. They decay as
Gaussian functions of the energies and momentum transfers
expressed in Planck units.


Time-ordering and Diagrammatics 


We complement our discussion with some formal remarks aiming to clarify the
relation between the approach followed here and the usual formulation of the
perturbation theory in terms of Feynman  diagrams.  We
have already shown in  
that the perturbative setup dealt with
in  (as well as the approach based on the Yang-Feldman equation) is
inequivalent to the  by now standard setup  in terms of the modified Feynman
rules . In this section we will make explicit that in the
framework of the regularized interaction proposed in this paper, Feynman
propagators are no more available at all.   

In this discussion we ignore all problems which may arise in the adiabatic
limit, and use the formal  (i.e. defined with constant coupling constant
)  time dependent
interaction Hamiltonian  throughout,




where the integral kernel  is of the form




and the Gaussian kernel  does not depend on .
Introducing the time ordered kernels







formal computations yield the formal Dyson expansion (see)
* 
where we use the notations (-).

By integrating over the time variables , we obtain
* 
Here 
is the ordering of the Wick monomials with respect to the average
time, i.e. the time of the mean position of each : more 
precisely, with
 
the time component of the four vector 
, 
we have
* 
where  can be
thought of as a "fat vertex",   i.e. a multi-vertex  
actually consisting of  Minkowski vectors.


The time ordering thus defined differs from the one discussed in . However, in both approaches causality is violated at
the Planck length scale   (cf. also ).
A typical manifestation of the violation of causality is the following:
suppose that  



 
i.e.
, then   it is not 
forbidden that  for some . 
In other words, a single field
 belonging to the first Wick monomial can be subsequent in time
to some field .


Note however, that the above picture is consistent with the request that the
large scale limit should reproduce the ordinary (non regularized) theory with
 interaction; in particular, as , the
multi-vertices shrink to their centres of mass, and the above average
time-ordering reduces to the usual one.


We conclude our discussion by showing that it is not possible to absorb the
time ordering in Feynman propagators, 
, as one usually does in the framework of
ordinary local theories. In fact, in the approach followed here, we cannot
construct Feynman propagators at all , while in the original Hamiltonian
approach based on () as well as in the approach based on the
Yang-Feldman equation it is still possible to rewrite the time ordering in
terms of Feynman propagators together with  advanced and retarded
propagators . 

To see what happens in the approach adopted here, 
consider as an example the second order contribution to the Dyson
series  with two internal contractions in quantum -interaction, as
depicted in figure . 
 
 
file=qfish.eps, height=3cm 

Multi-vertices are represented by the
points within a circle;  is the
average time of the multi-vertex , and the shadowed area
represents its causal completion.  

Here, the two multi-vertices are sets of four distinguishable points,


 and , and at most one
line originates from each of these points. A
kernel  belongs to each multi-vertex. The 
internal contractions lead to positive and negative frequency parts of the
commutator function,
, where . , while the
time ordering is done with respect to the time components of the mean
coordinates of each vertex, leading to the Heaviside functions
.
We may thus conclude that the distributions arising in the fish graph will not 
yield Feynman propagators at all. 

This is consistent with the fact that the usual interpretation of Feynman
graphs as pictorial representations of scattering processes ("first A is
annihilated, then B is created") should break down on quantum spacetime, as it
needs sharply localized events, which are no longer available. 


Appendix 
In this appendix, we explicitly compute the kernel , 
for future reference.

Recall that , for any , we write 
, and .
Let  be any Schwartz function, and 
. 
By equation (), 






where 
 is given by
* 
the orthogonal matrix  is given by ().

We now set 



Then, if  is the orthogonal projection of  onto 
, we set  as a projection onto 
, ;
In the same spirit, 
. Finally,
, and 
 is the identity. We finally need the maps
,  from 
to , with the corresponding maps 
,
 from  to 
.

With these notations, we have
* 
^0(^0)=^0 n =
V_ (^0) n ,

()=V'_ (^0) n ,()=V_ () n .
Moreover, the function  defined by ()
may be written as





and
* 

We may now take a  real orthogonal matrix , such that



Then,  is the orthogonal projection of 
onto , and , as   usually.
Furthermore, 
.
With the change of integration variables , we obtain
* 

The integration over the variables , 
, 
is completely separated from the integration over the variables
. Hence 
* 
The first factor is a Fourier transform of a Gaussian function.  
Renaming the integration variables 
, 
* 
where we used






Due to the form of , the integral in the
above expression may be further factorized  as an integral over the variables 
, times an integral over the variables 
:
* 

The integral over  in the above expression
is the Fourier transform of an  function, hence it 
vanishes at infinity. Moreover, it is the product of a Schwartz function
in , times a  function
of , vanishing at infinity.
As a consequence, 





is a Schwartz function.





 99 

 D. Bahns, S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, and G. Piacitelli, On the unitarity problem in space/time noncommutative theories ,
Phys. Lett. B 533  (2002) 178
[arXiv:hep-th/02012222] 


 D. Bahns, S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, 
 G. Piacitelli, in preparation.

 N. N. Bogoliubov and D. V. Shirkov, Introduction to the Theory of Quantized Fields , third edition, John Wiley  Sons, New York, Chichester, Brisbane, Toronto, 1980. 


 
H. Bozkaya, P. Fischer, H. Grosse, M. Pitschmann, V. Putz, M. Schweda and R. Wulkenhaar,
Space/time noncommutative field theories and causality ,
[arXiv:hep-th/0209253].



S. Cho, R. Hinterding, J. Madore and H. Steinacker,
Finite field theory on noncommutative geometries ,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 9  (2000) 161
[arXiv:hep-th/9903239].



 A. Connes, M. R. Douglas, and A. Schwarz,Noncommutative geometry and matrix theory: compactification on thori , JHEP9802 , 003 (1998). 


 J. Dixmier, Les C*-algebres et leurs representation , Cahiers  scientifiques, XXIX, Gauthiers-Villars, Paris, 1964.







 S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, and J. E. Roberts, Spacetime quantization induced by classical gravity , Phys. Lett. B, 331 ,  33 (1994).

 S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, and J. E. Roberts, The quantum structure of space-time at the Planck scale and quantum  fields , Commun. Math. Phys. 172  (1995), 187. 

 Dyson, The -matrix in quantum electrodynamics , Phys. Rev. 75 , 1736 (1949). 

 T. Filk, Divergencies in a Field Theory on Quantum Space ,
Phys. Lett. B 376 , 53 (1996). 


K. Fredenhagen, Quantum Fields and noncommutative
space-time , in F. Scheck, W. Werner, H. Upmeier (eds.),
Noncommutative Geometry and the Standard Model of Elementary Particle
Physics. Proceedings, Hesselberg March 1999 , Lecture Notes in Physics 596 , Springer (2002) 

 J. von Neumann, Die Eindeutigkeit der Schrodingerschen Operatoren , Math. Ann. 104  570 (1931).

 M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods Of Modern
Mathematical Physics. II. Fourier Analysis, Selfadjointness , Academic Press,
New York, 1975.

 V. Schomerus,
D-branes and deformation quantization ,
JHEP 9906  (1999) 030
[arXiv:hep-th/9903205],

 

 H. S. Snyder, Quantized Space-Time , Phys. Rev. 71 , 38 (1947). 










