= -10mm
1cm #Nice INLN 02/10   
#October 2002    4cm
 PROOF OF A MASS SINGULARITY FREE PROPERTY  IN  HIGH TEMPERATURE 
   
    

 Institut Non Lineaire de Nice UMR CNRS
6618; 1361, Route des Lucioles, 06560 Valbonne, France  e-mail:grandou@inln.cnrs.fr 
ABSTRACT 
It is shown that three series of diagrams entering the calculation of some hot 
process, are mass (or collinear) singularity free, indeed. This generalizes a result which was recently
established
up to the third non trivial order of (thermal) Perturbation Theory.
 PACS: 12.38.Cy, 11.10.Wx
Keywords:   Hot , Resummation Program, infrared, mass/collinear singularities,..




I. Introduction  During the past fourteen years, a
considerable amount of work has been devoted to the study of quantized
fields at high temperature and/or chemical potential (high temperature, e.g, means higher than any
bare or renormalized mass involved in the theory). The inherent non perturbative character of thermal quantum field theories has been
recognized, and naive perturbation theories accordingly reorganized.
This is achieved by means of a Resummation Program   (), which, in the high temperature limit, must
be
used whenever one
is calculating processes involving Green's functions with soft external/internal
lines. The soft scale is defined to be on the order of  where  is the
temperature and  some relevant and small enough coupling constant, so as to decide  , at least
formally,
of two separate hard
(on the order of ) and soft energy scales. The  is given by effective Feynman rules, consisting of
effective
field propagators and -points proper vertices, all at a given leading order of approximation
which turns out to be , and is referred to as  (Hard Thermal
Loops  ). While  vertices are purely perturbative objects, effective
propagators are not, as they give rise to pole residues and dispersion laws that
do not admit perturbative series expansions in the coupling constant. In the course of practical
calculations, effective propagators are easily handled, relying on analyticity properties and Cauchy's
theorem.Endowed with most beautiful symmetries, the  is an effective theory that has led to a number
of satisfying results, but has also met two serious obstructions, emanating both from the
infrared () sector.Now, Resummations   can in general be defined a number of consistent, still different ways. In this article,
we take advantage of a so called Perturbative Resummation   scheme, hereafter denoted  for short,
previously introduced in the context of the first obstruction, to address the problem of the soft real
photon emission rate of thermal
. This problem is the following. When use is made of the Resummation Program   to calculate the
soft real
photon emission rate, out of a Quark-Gluon plasma in thermal equilibrium, the answer comes out affected with a
collinear singularity  . In the context of massless Quantum Field Theories, it may be worth recalling that
collinear singularities manifest themselves as singularities of the angular integration, or equivalently, of
the
integration on the virtuality  , , and are thus also called mass singularities  . Though
of a different nature, mass/collinear singularities are regrouped with singularities of the integration on three-
momenta , under the common spell of Infrared singularities  .Several attempts to cure that  disease have been proposed ever since, which, though consistent at one
loop order, encounter further important difficulties when extended to higher number of loop calculations. Our present work is motivated by a recent study of the problem, projected out on a toy model, with the
conclusion that things come out very different according to the Resummation scheme in use,  or 
.
Then, the
case of interest, that is hot , has been studied in its first three non trivial perturbative orders :
Again, no collinear singularity did show up in a  resummation scheme. Moreover, both the questionable
nature of that singularity , and the very mechanism through which it comes about in an
 scheme, have been discovered thanks to an original comparison with the  scheme .However encouraging, this first analysis of the  case has only been performed up to three
loop
order. In order to see if a
 resummation scheme has any chance to avoid that serious problem, it is crucial to extend the
proofs of Ref.13 to any loop order, and this sets in, we think, the
strategical interest of the present analysis. By the same token, we note that the quite as much important
collinear enhancement   problem, which comes out of the latter
if one tries to solve the
difficulty by
introducing a so called asymptotic thermal mass  ,  , is circumvented also.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a reminder of the collinear singularity problem under
consideration, while introducing elements and notations necessary to the next sections. In Section 3, topologies
involving only bare vertices, with  -self energy insertions along the  internal fermionic
lines,
denoted by , are investigated in details. To do so, the matter of Ref.7 is exploited so as to show
that any  imaginary part is mass singularity free, or msf   for short. The same property can be
established concerning the contributions attached to
 topologies, with one -vertex correction included, and this is Section 4. The results of both
previous sections are obtained on the basis of purely technical calculations, but it seems almost impossible to
proceed furhter along this line of approach :
For contributions of type , involving two -vertex corrections, functions at play are so
complicated
that they preclude any control of the ensuing integrals. Remarkably enough, though, Section 3 is able to
provide enough
information so as to initiate an efficient, global and conclusive approach by induction. On the other hand, used
right from the onset, an induction procedure does not appear to be, by itself,
fully
conclusive. This efficient articulation of Section 3 calculational approach, to an induction process is the
matter
of Section 5. All three series of diagrams are definitely shown to possess mass/collinear singularity free
imaginary parts, in the end.Our
conclusions are gathered in Section 6, whereas an Appendix displays the technical complexities encountered by a
calculational approach to -type diagrams.

Throughout the article, we work in the 
real time formalism, which is based on Retarded/Advanced free field functions . Also, we
will be using the convention of upper case letters for quadrimomenta and lower case ones for their components,
writing, for example, . Our conventions for labelling internal and external momenta can be
read
off Fig.1.

II. The soft real photon emission rate of hot QCD  It is convenient to work in the real time formalism with retarded/advanced  field functions, where a
concise and elegant derivation of the famous collinear singularity can be achieved . The soft real photon
emission rate is essentially related to the imaginary part of the quantity , trace of the
soft real photon
polarization tensor,
hereafter written as . At pure one loop order, this imaginary part is zero. However, when the
photon is soft, this result is incomplete and the Resummation Program   must be used instead of bare thermal
Perturbation Theory. This amounts to keep the one loop diagram of ordinary Perturbation Theory, while replacing
bare vertices
and propagators by their HTL  -dressed counterparts. In Feynman gauge, the resulting expression reads (with
, the Fermi-Dirac statistical factor, defined without absolute value),



The discontinuity is to be taken in the
energy variable , by forming the
difference of  and -indiced -dependent quantities. Within standart notations, the fermionic HTL  
self energies, effective propagators and vertices are respectively given by











where 
 is the lightlike four vector 
. In the sequel, it will reveal extremely useful to introduce a "self
energy four vector" (of course, not a genuine Lorentz-4-vector!), by writing, instead of standart expression
(2.2),


The  basic steps entering the soft real photon
emission
rate calculation of thermal  are as follows. In view of
(2.1) and (2.4), one gets three types
of terms: A term
with two bare vertices , two terms with one bare vertex  and the other
, and a term with two  vertices . In , the first three terms pose
no
problem: Terms of second type entail a collinear singularity which, thanks to a -Ward identity, cancels out
with a similar singularity coming from the last term. A
residual
collinear singularity remains though, induced by the latter, and we therefore focus on that particular
contribution including two vertices . One gets, 



 Then substituing the relevant 
expressions,
(2.2)-(2.5),
one can write, with the convention , 











Because of the factor 

 appearing in the numerator, there is no double pole but a simple collinear one at 
, whose residue just involes the  Ward identity alluded to above, that is,



and yields
for
 the
expression




The discontinuity in  can be
taken, and an appropriate choice of the integration
contour
in the -complex plane allows to write 




where a factor of  accounts
for
the two possibilities
 and 
, and where the relation  has been used. The angular integration develops a collinear
singularity at
, and is responsible for that singular part of
 which can be expressed as 







The two terms involving one bare vertex  and a one loop
 correction , entail a similar singularity which, when combined with (2.12), leave
uncancelled the  singular contribution








It is this result which, in the literature is most usually written in the form


where the overall  results of a dimensionally
regularized evaluation of the factored out angular integration of (2.13), and where  is related to
the effective fermionic propagator usual parametrization,

with , the
label
 referring to the two dressed fermion propagating  modes. Then one has,


III. Self Energy Diagrams, of type   The imaginary part of a general term of type , depicted in Fig.1, can be
written 



where the "Self Energy
four-vector" (2.2), has components, 

with  standing for the Legendre function of
the second kind The label

denoting one of the two Retarded   or Advanced   specifications of the real time formalism being used,
in the right hand sides of (3.2) these specifications are encoded in the logarithmic determinations.
It is elementary to prove that one has 

where  is the 
identity matrix, and the coefficients  and 
are polynomials in the variables  and  whose formation laws can be
found
to be given by  



The  are the binomial coefficients, and , the maximal value of  can
be expressed as  where  is
the usual
Heaviside
step function.Because of the decomposition law (3.4), four types of trace factors are found, that are




We will therefore begin with proving that
integrals
of the generic
type 


are mass singularity free, or msf  , for short. Then, since all of
the trace factors (3.8)-(3.10) come into play as multiplicative functions of the integrands appearing in (3.11),
we
will check
that they leave unaltered its msf   character.Integrals of generic type (3.11) : With , where 
 and  are the unit three-vectors in the directions of  and  respectively,
integration on 
can be traded for an integration on the virtuality  by writing,

where the restrictions on  and  come from the 
support of the distribution to be folded in (3.11). Now, particular to the thermal context, so called
Lebesgue non-integrable   mass (and/or ) singularities do arise, which cannot be
taken care of by means of a standart dimensional regularization procedure, and require that an extra 
regulator be introduced. This is achieved by proceeding to the following replacement


that is also,



where, as shown in Ref.7, Appendix , the auxiliary 
regulator , is choosen a small, negative parameter, to be taken to zero in the end. Gathering pieces,
integration on  can eventually be written as






where
we have defined  

and where 
is
 the distribution "sign of ".
 The    remaining  two integrations
are
 on  , and , and the latter can be translated into an integration on the virtuality variable
 .Now, if we consider the integral,
 
which enters (3.11) as a building block:



we get for (3.17) the expression,       







with the definitions,
 
Eventually, an integration on  
must
be
performed, which can symbolically be written as

 An upper bound of integration on  is introduced so as to avoid the
hard region  (a customary choice consists in taking  on the order of an
intermediate scale, say, on the order of ), whereas the lower boundary, , not relevant to our
concern here, will be discussed elsewhere. Note that in (3.15) and (3.19), we have written between
brackets expressions of the form
. This is because, irrespective of
the
sign of , these expressions can be
written with the help of a most efficient representation 


 Thanks to the  factor, this
representation is able to provide mass/collinear singularities with the same regularization as a
dimensional one would operate, while being far simpler. It is also endowed with interesting regularity
properties, since, in particular, the limit , commutes with both the sum over  and integral on
.
Using (3.22), one obtains an expansion 




which can be put back into (3.19). Introducing the following family of functions


we note that it is
convenient
to proceed as
for the moving fermion damping rate problem, keeping the
leading order term of the statistical weight high temperature expansion




Though no way mandatory (the same results being obtained otherwise), this
simplification is consistent with the leading order
calculation we are concerned with, preserves the correct parity in , and allows to recognize in
 the same expression as defined in Ref.7, Eq.(7.2). Whereof we know that (3.19) is rigorously integrable   and non-integrable   mass
singularity free: The expression (3.19) can effectively be written as







which is
Eq.(D.3) of Ref.7. Mass singularities of the non-integrable   type, , cancel out



whereas integrable   mass singularities obey arithmetical cancellation
patterns thanks to the identities




It can even be shown (Appendix D of Ref.7) that (3.26) defines a mapping of 
into  which is analytic for  choosen in the product of discs 
. The limit  therefore exists and is independent of the sequence along
which it is taken.

The entirely new feature is
of course that the integrand appearing in (3.19), gets
supplied, now,
with the extra function (3.15). Considered as a function of , the properties of (3.15) are therefore crucial
in
order to address the ensuing behaviour
of generic type (3.11) integrals, and this is what we now turn to examine in the particular case
of positive energies, , for the sake of a simpler illustration. As made obvious by inspection,
(3.15) is essentially
relevant of the same structure as displayed by
(3.19): Up to an overall multiplicative function of ,

 the difference is entirely
in the integration range 
 instead
of 
. Using the
representation (3.22) for the expression
, and the binomial expansion (3.23), the same
functions as in (3.25) can
effectively be identified, with accordingly, the same properties 

In the limit of , we learn out of Ref.7, that 
 Lebesgue
non-integrable   mass singularities cancel out: Up to the overall multiplicative factor (3.30), one is left for
the
full
expression (3.15), with an expression which still displays a finite series of Lebesgue
integrable  
mass singularities:






where we have defined the function,  

Type
-mass singularities are thus controlled by the finite sum,






 where the last term appearing in the right hand side of (3.35), stands for the -order
derivative of the function (3.32), taken
at . This means that, in deriving (3.35), we have interchanged the sum on , in the Taylor
expansion
of (3.32),


with the integration on . Such a permutation is proven to be licit in
Ref.7, Appendix  (note that in the present situation, this permutation is the more licit, as the integration
range (3.31) lies within the unit convergence radius of the series expansion for the
functions ).
Likewise, it is demonstrated (Eqs. (C.7)-(C.9), (C.12) of Ref.7) that each of the coefficients

admits a Taylor series expansion in the parameter . Now, whatever  and
,
the same property holds clearly true, for any of the other three factors of (3.35) which, with

, enter the sum over
.Then, forming the Cauchy's product of their -Taylor series expansions,
and relying on the set of arithmetical identities (3.28) and (3.29), we conclude that the  -limit
of (3.35) is
msf  , and reduces to a polynomial of degree  in the variable 
,

where , a
pure (real) number, is a shorthand notation for the derivative of order , taken at
, of the
product 




Gathering all pieces, the whole expression (3.15) can eventually be written as





Getting back to (3.18), one is now in a
position
so as to estimate the incidence on (3.19) of any of the extra -dependences which are introduced by
(3.39).For positive (as well as negative) energies, the auxiliary  regulator
 can safely be taken to zero in the prefactor of (3.39), and the latter expanded as 

where it easy to check that the existence
of
(3.40) does not depend on the relative magnitude of  and , contrarily, of course, to the explicit form of
the
coefficients . The same property is obviously shared by the function

 Eventually, such is also the case of factors like


The product of terms (3.40)-(3.42) can therefore be written as a
series in the variable , whose general term, no matters how complicated, just
redefines the integer power  of the function  introduced in (3.25). The properties of
(3.25) are
thus left the same, and the extra -dependences introduced through (3.40)-(3.42) preserve the msf  
character of (3.19).
The extra factors of (3.39),
redefine the power  of the scalar propagator appearing
in (3.11), according to the replacement 
This splits into the
distributions


which, with respect to the previous power of , require extra
differentiability of the -dependences they act upon. Now, this condition is clearly met thanks both to a full
identification of the new -dependences brought about by (3.39), and to
the introduction of the auxiliary 
regulator  of (3.20). Since, at  (which is just the condition for the
occurence
of
mass singularities), the overall compensation of mass
singularities does not depend on the relative magnitude of the integers  and , in mass singularity
compensation patterns of the generic type,





we deduce that the
same
mass singularity
compensations hold true of (3.44), with  replacing , and that extra factors of type
(3.43)
are msf  -preserving.
Eventually, the last extra -dependences introduced into (3.18) by (3.39), are the functions
Previous patterns (3.44) are now
taken
to the form 




As in (3.22), we
introduce the representation

and
interchange the sum on , which is finite, with the integration on . In the limit
, we get first the expression, 

At

, such a factor admits an  -Taylor series expansion, so that relying on
arithmetical identities
(3.28) and (3.29), the -limit of (3.48) is readily obtained to be given by


 At its
turn, (3.49) admits itself a Taylor series expansion in the variable . 
Since the whole expression (3.46) factors out a global factor
of


the -limit of
(3.46) is finite in view, again, of
arithmetical identities
(3.28) and (3.29), and extra factors of type (3.45) are msf  -preserving too.We thus reach the conclusion that generic type (3.11) integrals are msf  . Now, getting back to the
mass singularity issue of  self energy diagrams, it is immediate to realize that all of the trace
factors
(3.8)-(3.10) only involve (),(), and 
(
) msf  -preserving dependences (some of them will be treated in full details in next Section 5), as, for
example, the most involved piece of (3.10) 


Since the
same
 analysis can be carried through in the case of negative energies, we can
 conclude that  self energy diagrams have collinear singularity free imaginary parts.
  
 IV. Diagrams of type , with one effective vertex   Using (3.4), the trace factors associated with diagrams of type , depicted in Fig.2, are easily
obtained
 to  be, 






In -type diagrams, each
of the trace factors (4.1)-(4.3) must be integrated over  with the "measure",


Then the above trace factors yield respectively





One may observe
that the trace factors of  diagrams are more involved than those attached to
diagrams of type . In particular, it should be clear that at the exception of the last term of (4.7),
all
of the factors appearing in (4.5)-(4.7) will preserve the msf  
character of type (3.11) integrals.That is, the whole mass singularity issue of  contributions
is entirely in the
incidence, upon generic
type (3.11) integrals, of the very function


As it stands, (4.8)
can
be
calculated with the help of the three angular identities  ,












where a Feynman
parameter, , has been introduced so as to re-write (4.8) as


with,
At this point, and though not immediately relevant to our concern, the following remark
may
be in order.Some
years ago, the use of a Feynman parametrization in Thermal Quantum Field Theories has been
questioned. Feynman
parametrization was suspected delicate, using, for example, bare propagator determinations different from
the usual -Feynman's one. Of course, passing from (4.8) to (4.12), this situation is not
encountered, but the difficulty may come about, in particular in a real time formalism using
 propagator prescriptions. The solution to this difficulty has been given in Ref.21. Later
on, it has even been suggested that using a Feynman parametrization in a hot quantum field context could lead to
non gauge invariant results. This latter statement however was erroneous, based on incorrect
calculations,
and
indeed, taking the modification of Ref.21 into account, it must be stated that there is definitely no problem in
dealing with
Feynman parametrizations in non zero Temperature Quantum Field Theories.Getting back to (4.8), a
shortcut
to its calculation consists in writing, 


from which a remarkable relation may be deduced,


and likewise, in obvious notations,





where identity (4.9) only, has been used. Noting that , one recovers in
 (4.16) the full original symmetry of (4.8) under the exchange . Since the terms
appearing in (4.16) just redefine the integer numbers ,  and , they leave
totally unaffected the msf   structures of previous Section 3. The only new
feature is the factor . As observed in
Ref.13 for the topology , this factor is reminiscent of the
collinear singularity
plaguing  diagrams at the light cone, when an  treatment of the problem is adopted. In
the
end, recalling that (4.8) comes out affected with a multiplicative factor of , this means that
expressions 




do have msf   imaginary parts, if integrals 



have
msf   imaginary parts either. That it is
so can be demonstrated quite easily. However, a byproduct of the next section will provide this statement with a
systematic
derivation,
so that
we can here content ourselves with a heuristic, still instructive argument.The potential collinear
singularity
due to the  vertex comes from the factor , as  reaches zero. For example,
in
the  calculation of Sec.2, we learn out of Eqs.(2.12)-(2.14), that the collinear singularity expression
effectively
involves a  constraint. Now, as  tends to zero, one has indeed

 and this light cone potentially singular behaviour obviously gets mixed with
partial effective propagator  own light cone
potentially singular
behaviour,

the
whole just boiling down to a simple shift of power,
From previous Sec.3, Eqs.
(3.43)-(3.44), we know that the overall detailed balance compensation of mass
singularities is preserved by such a shift, and this is how we can see that  contributions to the
soft
real
photon emission rate
are msf  .This generalizes to any  contribution,
the observation first made in Ref.13, Sec.5, for the diagram , and simply enforces the conclusion we
drew
then, that  vertex collinear singularities should not be desentangled from
partial
effective propagator mass singularities, as they
all
mix up into structural patterns which grant their overall compensations. In an  resummation scheme,
unfortunately, a dissociation of Eqs.(4.19) and (4.20) potentially singular behaviours is achieved right from the
onset. There, in effect, the sum over  being performed before the integration on , partial effective
propagators , get replaced by full effective ones, , whose poles, contrarily to
-poles, are no longer lightlike
at ,
but timelike, at . It results that the light cone singular behaviour of (4.19) remains
isolated, with no other singular behaviour to cancel with.

V. Two effective vertex diagrams   
We now turn to the analysis of  topologies depicted in Fig.3, which are the most important to consider,
the famous collinear problem of hot  being induced by these double effective vertex insertions.In
Ref.13, it was shown that  is singularity free. While an encouraging result, it would certainly be
preposterous to take it for granted that the property trivially extends to any  diagram, and in our
opinion, this is why the present analysis had to be undertaken.The contribution to  of a diagram  reads,














Expanding the 
 factors as in (3.4), four types of traces come about,
















Integrated on both light-like vectors , the first trace (5.2) yields
the
expression
where
 is the double vertex function met in Ref.13,





The second trace (5.3) gives




The third trace (5.4) gives the same as (5.8) with  and
 interchanged,




Eventually, the fourth trace (5.5) yields








To summarize, the
whole expression (5.1) reads 





where the coefficients , polynomials of degree
 and  in the variable , respectively, are given in (3.5) and (3.6).
That is, one would have again to investigate the incidence upon generic type (3.11) integrals, of the new
multiplicative functions appearing through
(5.6)-(5.10). For example, we quote that an expression like (5.6) will contribute
 a quantity,






where the sums over  and , which are
finite, have
been
interchanged with the integral on .
Actually, things may be further reduced, and this helps identifying the new mutiplicative functions that
come out to be specific to the double effective vertex diagrams. To do so, we can make use of the relation








 and of a
similar one, with  and  interchanged, and likewise,
 
















where  is another double effective vertex
function, not encountered in Ref.13,





Deriving (5.13) and (5.14), identities (4.9) and (4.14) only, have been
used. As expected
on the basis of general gauge invariance arguments, (5.13) and (5.14) entail some potential collinear
structures similar those found in the case of one effective vertex diagrams, (4.16). Now, a
comparison with the previous cases of  and , also allows to identify with  and ,
the new extra mutiplicative functions that come out to be specific to the double effective vertex diagrams,
. But it seems difficult to proceed further : As shown in the Appendix, an explicit calculation of functions
 and 
is doable, relying this time, on the full set of angular identities (4.9)-(4.11). Results, however, come out so
cumbersome that controlling the ensuing integrals on  and on , is rendered extremely hazardous. In order
to proof
that
(5.11) does
have an msf   imaginary part, we must therefore proceed differently, and construct a proof by
induction.We consider the contribution to  of the diagram . It is, 












where some obvious shorthand notations have been introduced so as to
alleviate
too large
expressions,







Having,


Eq.(5.16) may be written as,















where the dots stand for all of those factors which are left the
same as in (5.16).
Next, we can form the difference of (5.16) with the first term of (5.19), obtaining









This difference is, of course, also given by,








Our induction hypothesis is that  is endowed with an
msf   imaginary part, that is, the expression







We will need the following result: Let there be 
some
function,
such that, for all integers  and , and all integers  and , with , the
following finite sum of integrals, 





has
msf   imaginary part in the limits  and , with no further specifications
required. Then we claim that so is the case of the finite sum
of integrals, 







with, 

Before we proceed further, the relation of structural patterns
(5.23) (and (5.24)),
with a general term  is worth making explicit. This is achieved by noting that the imaginary part
of
 can be written
as, 



with , and  the distributions,
















In the  real time formalism we are using, the imaginary part of
 is effectively obtained out of (5.1), by forming the difference (divided by a factor of 2) of
retarded   and advanced   -lines. Whereof results
(after integrating on ) functions of  which exhibit the features
of
distributions rather than of ordinary functions. As displayed for example by (3.43) in the  case, the
discontinuities in  of the
 may develop imaginary parts, and this is why they appear inside the discontinuity prescription
of (5.26), and not
simply factored out, as would be
overall real valued multiplicative functions.The
connection with
patterns (5.23) and (5.24) is made complete by recalling that, in virtue of (3.5) and (3.6), the coefficients
 and 
are polynomials of degree  in the variable . We have
then, for all , ,




 Now, the statement (5.23)-(5.24) is rather obvious indeed, because expression (5.25) is nothing but a linear
 combination  of  terms  whose general form reads 

The
first contribution of
(5.25) to (5.24), is at , and up to an overall multiplicative factor of , leaves (5.23) the
same
as it is. The second contribution, is at . Up to an overall multiplicative factor of , this
contribution leaves (5.23) unchanged, but for the only modification brought about by the shift of integer number , 
 The third contribution is at , and up to an overall
 multiplicative factor of  , it is
 entirely contained in the shift of integer number , with
 It results that, if (5.23) has an msf   imaginary part, then, so does
 (5.24). Somehow conversely, the very structure of mass singularity compensation patterns (5.23), makes it
clear
 that if (5.29) is msf  , then so is the case of the same whole expression, but taken at 
 instead  of  .   Next  we  need  to  proof  that  if  (5.22)  has  an  msf    imaginary 
part,  then,  so
 does  
 






where the difference with (5.22) is that, inside the trace, we have now a power
of 
instead of . This statement is again rather obvious if one considers that the only change is in the
substitution of the couple of polynomials  by the couple . However, the 
proof of the above statement can be obtained by induction either, assuming first that the involvement
holds true at , that is between (5.22) and (5.33). At next order,  is given by (5.16),
which decomposes into the sum (5.19). Now, it has just been assumed that (5.22), and hence (5.33) have
msf   imaginary parts. In view of statement (5.23)-(5.24), the same is therefore true of the second term in
(5.19), which only
differs (5.33) a multiplicative function of . It results that if  has an msf  
imaginary part, then
so
 does have the expression
 











That is, the involvement extends from  to . Eventually,
we learn out of Ref.13, that  and  have msf   imaginary parts. Whereof it is immediate to
check that the property of involvement under consideration is verified at ; and thus, at all .Getting back to our central induction hypothesis that  has an msf   imaginary part, the above
two statements allow
to conclude that (5.21) does have an msf   imaginary part either, and this establishes that the imaginary
part
of
the difference (5.20) is msf  .Two possibilities have to be considered whereupon: Either mass
singular behaviours of both members compensate for each others in
the
difference (5.20), or both members of (5.20) have, separately, msf   imaginary parts.Let us suppose that a compensation of singularities is at the origin of the difference msf   imaginary part.
The trace of (5.20) can be written as






As (5.35) stands, however, inspection shows that nothing conclusive can be derived.
Relying again on (3.4)-(3.6),
it is interesting to decompose (5.35) into a sum of terms 













where we have defined
At its turn, the first trace of
(5.36), decomposes into
a sum of terms,











where the two traces of the right hand side are the second and third traces
of (5.36), respectively, whereas the dots stand for terms which belong, in proper, to the trace under
consideration. If the latter induce further singular imaginary parts, the imaginary part msf   character of
(5.20) indicates that mass singularity compensations are taking place, that is,
If  is an even number, then, , and one has

For some given powers  to induce singular integrations to be further compensated in the
difference, the following
condition must therefore be satisfied,
Binomial coefficients are
positive definite, and if , then, the terms in the sum (5.41) are positive definite either, precluding any
compensations of possible singular contributions. That is, contributions attached to the range of powers 
 are necessarily msf   in imaginary parts, separately. Now, so are also all of the other powers,
, in virtue of the statement "somehow reciprocal" to (5.24). Since a similar argument can be
developed in
case
of an odd number , it results that the dots of (5.38) induce, in both members of the difference (5.20),
contributions whose
imaginary parts are msf  , separately.We consider the second trace, and note that in view of (5.36)
and (5.38), it has coefficient
If, when plugged into (5.20), the second trace of (5.36)
generates non msf   imaginary parts, then the latter have to compensate each others in the difference.
Now, selecting a power of
 in the variable 
, its coefficient reads
where an even value
of
 is choosen, for the sake of illustration. It is clear that for all , (5.43)
is a
never vanishing quantity. A compensation of possible singular subsequent integrations on , can only come from
(5.39), with the
conclusion that for this second trace of (5.36), both members of the difference (5.20) have, separately,
msf  
imaginary parts.The third trace of (5.36) comes into play with a coefficient of
which may be explicited as





The higher power in the variable
 is a power of , with coefficient . There is no available compensation
for this isolated term of (5.45) which has accordingly to yield a regular subsequent integration on . So is
therefore the case of all of the powers , because of the statement reciprocal to (5.24).
Whereof results that, irrespective of possible compensations among the other (regular) terms of (5.45),
both members of the difference (5.20) have msf   imaginary parts attached to the third trace of
(5.36).The fourth trace of (5.36) has coefficient,

If this trace generates any singular subsequent integration on , when put back into both
members of (5.20), the msf   character of the imaginary part of
(5.20) requires that  vanishes. This condition turns out to be the one just dealt with,
and
it results that, when put into both members of the difference (5.20), the fourth trace of (5.36) induce
subsequent
-integrations that have, separately, msf   imaginary parts.To summarize, both  and  diagrams, have been shown to possess msf   imaginary
parts in Ref.13. Then, assuming that a diagram  has msf   imaginary
part, we have been able to prove that the next diagram
, with one more -self energy insertion, has an msf   imaginary part either. We can
therefore
conclude that
any of the two effective vertex diagrams contribute msf   imaginary
parts to the soft real photon emission rate.The power and simplicity of the proof just developed appears the more clearly as one realizes that the
distributions
 introduced in full generality in (5.23), entail the double vertex function  and
  defined in (5.7) and (5.15) respectively. We have in effect, for the  the
expressions 













and whereas the
second term entails , the first one
entails both  and  which are so complicated functions of , that they practically exclude
any control of the ensuing integrations on , and a posteriori   on , contrarily to what could be achieved in Sections 3 and 4,
for
the topologies  and .An interesting byproduct of this analysis is obtained by
writing, 













and by recognizing that the imaginary part of a diagram  is hereby
expressed
as,



Then, knowing from Ref.13 that ,  and  have msf  
imaginary parts, the same steps as
followed throughout this section can be taken, and allow to conclude by induction that  diagrams
contribute msf  
parts to the soft photon emission rate. This is the more systematic derivation which was advertised
in
the end of Sec.4 : It encompasses all of the terms (4.5)-(4.7) of the  situation, and not solely
the
peculiar one, (4.8), which was treated there.Likewise, identifying now  and 
 the distributions,










and observing that the imaginary part of a diagram  can be expressed as




we can make use of the  character of  and  imaginary parts as established in Ref.13 so as
to
follow the
same steps as taken throughout this section and conclude, in agreement with the
calculational approach of Sec.3, that  diagrams contribute  parts to the soft photon emission
rate.



 VI. Conclusion  
Some years ago, we had suggested that the collinear problem met in hot  when the Resummation
Program   () is used, could be traced back to the particular perturbative series re-arrangement the 
amounts to. Strictly speaking though (and contrarily to what can be read off the existing
literature) the  should not be mistaken for any Feynman diagrams resummation,
possibly infinite. This happens
to be so, simply
because of the effective propagators non perturbative character : Pole residues and dispersion relations, in
effect,
cannot
be derived out of pure thermal Perturbation Theory.This suggestion has motivated our
construction of a coherent Perturbative Resummation   scheme () of the leading thermal effects (the
so-called Hard Thermal Loops  , ) enjoying by construction the same symmetry properties as the usual
, with the hope that things could come out at variance with the troublesome (undefined!)  results.
In the case of the so called rapid fermion damping rate   problem of both  and
, a first obstruction met by the , this hope revealed itself non deceptive indeed, whereas
the
collinear problem under consideration was subsequently projected out on a simpler toy model, with promising
results.In a recent publication, the physically interesting case of hot 
has been analyzed through its first non trivial perturbative orders, with very instructive new insights. As stated
in
the introduction, not only did the  analysis allowed to elucidate the so far questionable nature of
the collinear singularity encountered in hot , when the

is used, but a tight and original comparison of both  and  calculations made it
possible to understand how the collinear singularity unavoidably shows up in an  treatment.Now, a  calculation of the soft real photon emission rate, involves the infinite
resummations on  and , of any perturbative contribution of type ,  and ,
describing one loop photonic self energy diagrams at
()  self energy insertions along the () -fermionic line, respectively endowed with zero, one
and
two  effective vertex corrections. In order to set our  calculation a sound, significant result, in
contradistinction to
the yet confused  situation, it was therefore crucial to check that the properties that could be derived for
the
perturbative orders of
,  and , extended indeed to any contribution of order , and this is the task which has been
achieved throughout the present article. However tedious the calculational developments of Section 3, they eventually revealed extremely useful so as to
provide a proof by induction with sound enough a basis. In other words, a proof by induction is not reliable
until enough information is gained concerning the mass singularity cancellation patterns, and not before.

Physically, a salient aspect comes out to be the one of propagator's pole
migration. This migration in effect, from the light-like to the
time-like region, appears to be at the very origin of the  dramatic consequence
under
consideration, and in contrast to the  situation, is really peculiar to the thermal context.
This is because pole displacements involve a decoupling of partial effective
propagators
(potential) mass singularities, from effective vertices collinear ones : Whereas all singularities mix
up
into patterns which
grant their overall compensations in a  calculation, effective vertices mass/collinear singularities
remain isolated in an  calculation, with no singular counterpart to cancel against. This mechanism, first
guessed in Ref.11, then discovered in Ref.13 for the perturbative orders of ,  and , is easily
seen here to spread to any
perturbative orders, . As we have long been suspecting, the collinear singularity plaguing the soft real photon emission rate 
calculation is likely to be nothing but an artefact  ,
peculiar to the  resummation scheme itself. Here may be the place where to recall a part of our conclusion in
Ref.13: After all, whenever resummation is required by the context, a guiding principle could very well be
that
it be conceived and taken out of finite, well defined elements, and in particular, of mass singularity free
terms.
In this respect, it is instructive to come back to the original article where the  was mostly founded, and to
realize that the authors were conscious of difficulties that could be inherited from the fact that the  did
not
necessarily comply with this requirement.  
Acknowledgement   It is a pleasure to thank B.Candelpergher for encouraging discussions.
Appendix: Calculating the   
In this appendix account is given of the difficulty inherent to the explicit calculations of the double effective
vertex functions , . The first function,  is given in (5.15). It is given by the
integration on a Feynman parameter , of the squared norm of a would be  
-vector with components the right hand sides of (4.9) and (4.10),





As it stands however, the
remaining integration on  is not very easy. A more economic way to proceed consists in
writing 





This allows to write (A.1)
as,





The term  in the right hand side last parenthesis yields simply,

The contribution of the term
involving the cosine 

 is of course more involved. It is



where,
Introducing the three
functions,




one verifies that (A.4) cancels out, and that the integration of (A.1) can be
given the interesting following form, 






where the non vanishing  coefficients are given by








Calculating , given in (5.7), is the most tedious angular integration to be coped
with, "an order of magnitude" more difficult than the latter. One has,



The full set of angular
identities (4.9)-(4.11) must be used, but since the first two terms in the numerator of (A.16) are those which
have just been dealt with in the calculation of , we may focus on the contribution due to the third
term, . Relying on the angular identity (4.11),
one finds, with  as defined in (3.3), 







The second term
gives

where the shorthand
notation
 has been introduced. The first term of (A.17) gives





The fifth term of (A.17) gives

where the non vanishing  are given by,






The fourth term of (A.17) can first be expressed as,



allowing to see that the second term contribution, (A.18), cancels out with an
identical part
in (A.26). In terms of more elementary integrals, the remaining parts of (A.26) may be written,









The third term of (A.17) is the more involved one, and may be written as,














To summarize, the last piece of  can eventually be expressed in the
form,










We will not proceed further, giving for example the more elementary integrals displayed in (A.27) and (A.29), as
it
should already appear clear that the statement concerning "so cumbersome calculations that they practically
preclude any peer control of ensuing integrations on  and then on ..  " is not exaggerated.Before concluding this appendix we may stress that the calculation of  and  does not
display
singularities other than
(potentially) collinear ones, showing up by the light cone boundary, at . For the function 
of
(A.9), this property may be not so easy to see. However, it is straightforward to check that the denominator of
(A.9) reads as,
It vanishes at the light
cone only, at , and this corresponds effectively to a collinear singularity, at 
.













References  


 M. Le Bellac, "Thermal Field Theory" (Cambridge University
Press, 1996).  N.P. Landsman, "Quark Matter 90",
Nucl. Phys. A  
 525  , 397 (1991). E. Braaten and R. Pisarski,
Phys. Rev. Lett.   64  , 1338 (1990).Nucl. Phys. B  337  , 569
(1990).J. Frenkel and J.C Taylor, Nucl. Phys.   B334  , 199
(1990). E. Braaten and E. Petitgirard, Phys. Rev. D  
65  , 085039
(2002), Sec.4. R.D. Pisarski, Phys. Rev.
Lett.   63
  , 1129 (1989).  R. Baier, S. Peigne and D. Schiff,
Z. Phys. C   62  , 337 (1994). B. Candelpergher and T. Grandou,
Ann. Phys. (NY)   283  , 232 (2000); [arXiv:hep-ph/0009349]. T. Muta, "Foundations of Quantum Chromodynamics" (World Scientific,
1987).
 A. Niegawa, Mod. Phys. Lett.   A10  , 379 (1995);F. Flechsig and A. Rebhan, Nucl.
Phys.  
B464  , 279 (1996).
 P. Aurenche, F.
Gelis, R. Kobes and E. Petitgirard, Z. Phys. C   75  , 315 (1997);P. Aurenche, F.
Gelis, R. Kobes and H. Zaraket,Phys. Rev. D   58  , 085003 (1998), and references
therein. T. Grandou, Acta Physica Polonica B32    , 1185 (2001). F. Gelis, These presentee a l'Universite de Savoie, le 10 Decembre
1998. B. Candelpergher and T. Grandou,
Nucl. Phys. A   699  , 887 (2002). 
 P. Aurenche
and T,
Becherrawy, Nucl. Phys. B   379  , 259 (1992);M.A. van Eijck and C.G. van Weert, Phys.
Lett. B  278 , 305 (1992);M.A. van Eijck, R. Kobes and C.G. van Weert, Phys. Rev. D  
50  , 4097
(1994).   
 E. Petitgirard, These presentee a l'Universite de Savoie, le 25 Fevrier
1994[arXiv:hep-ph/9403320].
 E. Braaten, R.D. Pisarski, and T.C. Yuan, Phys. Rev. Lett.   64  , 2242
(1990).S.M.H. Wong, Z. Phys. C   53  , 465 (1992); Z. Phys. C   58  , 159 (1993).
 T. Grandou, M. Le Bellac and
D. Poizat, Nucl. Phys. B   358  , 408 (1991);O. Steinmann, Commun.
Math. Phys.  170 , 405 (1995);T. Grandou, "Puzzling aspects of hot quantum fields",Proceedings of
the  Workshop on ,H.M. Fried, B. Muller and Y. Gabellini, Editors,World
Scientific 2000[arXiv:
hep-ph/0009351].  A.K. Rebhan,
Phys. Rev. D   46  , 4779 (1992). T. Grandou, in preparation. P. Aurenche, E. Petitgirard and T. del Rio Gaztelurrutia,Phys. Lett. B
297  , 337 (1992). A.H. Weldon, Phys.Rev. D47  , 594
(1993). Some unpublished 1995's preprints. T. Grandou,
Phys. Lett.   B367  , 229 (1996). E. Braaten and R.D. Pisarski, second article of Ref.3, p.p 625-626.
Figure caption Fig.1:  A graph denoted by , with  insertions of  self energy along the
-line, and two bare vertices  of (2.4). 
Fig.2:  A graph denoted by , with  insertions of  self energy along the
-line, one bare vertex , and one  vertex correction (2.5). 
Fig.3:  A graph denoted by , with  insertions of  self energy along the
-line, and two  vertex corrections (2.5). 










 














