0 


     roll - draft - 16.01.03    





draftcontrol0 



by 60
255 
255 by-60255 by:255<10 0255  
//    
 




















































 


  #1  

 

  
   
   Abstract 1000
   
     
 







             to  
        -to   
     to   
           






                   



















#1                    
                    *() to -0.2cm#1   
                    equation  
                     
                    #1           
                                            
                                                                                 


  
    #1 #1  
  
    [#1]#2 #2  
  
    #1  
                  
                           
           
           























11in 
     -.3in   
   -.6in 






















section 








i.e.  
e.g.  

3pt 1em  
                     width3pt
                     width0pt height 0pt depth0.5em
                     to 0cm
                     #1       


A  
A  
  
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
G  
H  
I  
J  
K  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
Q  
R  
S  
T  
U  
V  
W  

C  
N  
P  
Q  
R  
Z  

 
 
e  
i  
  
tr  
Re  
Im  
id  

d ^#1 #2 
 #1 

12  
 '  

    #1 _#2    
height.#2pt  
 width.#2pt height#1pt #1pt
 width.#2pt height.#2pt    

  12 15  9 12  6.3 9  4.5 9    




theorem Theorem 
proposition Proposition 

 









The Decay of Unstable Noncommutative Solitons 


NSF-ITP-03-05 

hep-th/0301119 
January 2003 

Thomas Chen, Jurg Frohlich, 
and Johannes Walcher 

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 

New York University 


New York, NY 10012-1185, U.S.A. 

Institute for Theoretical Physics 

ETH Honggerberg 

8093 Zurich, Switzerland 

Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics 

University of California 

Santa Barbara, CA 93106, U.S.A.

 


We study the classical decay of unstable scalar solitons in
noncommutative field theory in  dimensions. This can, but does 
not have to, be viewed as a toy model for the decay of D-branes in 
string theory. In the infinite  limit, in which the gradient 
term is absent, there are no propagating modes and the soliton does 
not decay at all. If  is large, but finite, the rotationally 
symmetric decay channel can be described as a highly excited nonlinear 
oscillator weakly coupled to a continuum of linear modes. This system 
is closely akin to those studied in the context of discrete breathers. 
We here diagonalize the linear problem and compute the decay rate to 
first order using a version of Fermi's Golden Rule, leaving a more 
rigorous treatment for future work. 
2em
 Dedicated to Rudolf Haag, on the occasion of his
eightieth birthday, with admiration and affection
 





Introduction 

Solitons are interesting objects. Originally discovered in experiments on 
shallow water waves one and a half centuries ago, they have since then 
become a rich and fascinating area of theoretical and mathematical study. 
Today, solitons are playing an increasingly important role in modern field 
and string theories.

A general issue in the analysis of solitons is stability, in both the 
dynamical (small perturbations of the initial conditions within a theory), 
and the structural (small deformations of the theory) sense. Stability can 
often be established on the basis of topological properties of the solution, 
or by the integrability of the underlying theory. On the other hand, a 
problem that has attracted much less attention concerns the dynamical long-time 
evolution of decaying, unstable  solitons. The reason is apparently not 
because this question fails to be interesting, but rather because it is hard.

In this paper, we study the decay dynamics of a particularly simple class 
of solitons that were discovered only very recently, coined noncommutative 
solitons. The corresponding model can be derived from the action 
functional
 
which describes a real scalar field  in  dimensions.
Noncommutativity is introduced in the multiplication rule for ,
as we review below. We will only consider space-space noncommutativity
in this paper, governed by a single noncommutativity parameter
.

"Noncommutative field theories" of this kind appear for instance as 
world-volume theories of D-branes in string theory by turning on a large 
Neveu-Schwarz-Neveu-Schwarz B-field. In general, the resulting theory is 
more complicated than action , and will include gauge fields and so 
on, but here, we will restrict ourselves to action . We will not 
indulge here in a general discussion of noncommutative geometry, 
and its role in modern physics. As starting points for references and 
citations we refer to the short list
, as well as to the reviews.

Motivation from string theory 

Our interest in this problem arose from recent studies of tachyon 
condensation in string theory, hence let us briefly review this background
motivation here. Tachyon condensation in string theory is formalized 
in Sen's conjectures. Roughly, given a string theory 
background with an unstable D-brane or D-brane system, , given a 
solution of string theory with an open string tachyon, one should look 
for another solution of string theory that is related to the first 
solution by "tachyon condensation". This solution corresponds to a 
different background with other branes, and can either be stable or 
contain other tachyons. In bosonic string theory, all D-branes are 
unstable, and open string theory is conjectured to have a solution 
corresponding to the condensation of all these tachyons, characterized 
by:
 
[(S1)] There are no perturbative open string excitations around
this solution, which is hence also known as the "closed string vacuum of
open string field theory".
[(S2)] The energy difference between the solution with open strings
and the closed string vacuum is exactly equal to the D-brane tension computed
in perturbative string theory.
(To avoid confusion, we note that the bosonic string in  dimensions also 
has a tachyon in the closed string sector, whose role is, however, much less 
understood.)

A useful analogy in this context is to think of D-branes as 
"tachyonic solitons". For example, a codimension-one brane in bosonic 
string theory is analogous to the solitonic lump solution in a scalar 
 theory. This soliton and the D-brane are of course unstable. 
In superstring theory, a codimension-one brane is analogous to the stable 
solitonic kink in a scalar field theory with a  double-well 
potential. The topological charge of such a soliton that guarantees 
stability is analogous to the Ramond-Ramond charge of a brane. These 
analogies break down at some level because string field theory contains 
many more fields than just the tachyon, and they are all excited in the 
vacua representing the endpoint of tachyon condensation. 

Tachyon condensation can be formulated on the worldsheet (as worldsheet 
RG flow) or in spacetime in open string field theory. This 
has been quite successful and can be regarded as one of the major 
advances in the field over the last few years. Until recently, however, 
the research has focused on finding the endpoint of the condensation, and 
not on the decay of the unstable brane (the condensation of the tachyon) 
as a dynamical process in time.

Very recently, Sen has made precise proposals
for the construction of the time-dependent solutions corresponding to
the condensation process. This is based mainly on a worldsheet analysis,
and is motivated in part by the S-brane proposal of Gutperle and 
Strominger. Again, there are many different possible processes
one can study. The generic features characterizing the solutions are
 
[(S3)] If the initial configuration is an unstable brane configuration
of non-zero codimension (say a D-brane in bosonic string theory with
) then the energy stays localized in the plane of the original
brane, in other words, energy is not carried away from this plane by
classical radiation.
[(S4)] When computing the energy-momentum tensor of the solution
on finds that, asymptotically for late times, the energy density of 
the solution is constant (in the plane of the original brane) and the 
pressure vanishes exponentially in time.

It is important to emphasize that these are supposed to be classical  
solutions of string theory. In particular, the radiation in (S3) are 
open strings. It is very likely that in fact closed strings (which appear 
at one loop level in open string theory) do carry away energy 
. Furthermore, one may note that (S3) is in 
some sense a consequence of (S1). Namely, if one thinks of a 
lower-dimensional brane as a tachyonic soliton, then far away this 
solution looks like the closed string vacuum which does not allow 
open string excitations. Hence, there are no modes that could carry 
away energy. Also, (S2) and (S4) are of course partly trivial consequences 
of energy conservation.

All these questions are rather difficult to study in open string field 
theory. The underlying idea behind the present work was to study the 
dynamics of such decays in the so-called noncommutative (NC) field 
theory limit of string theory, in the hope that one could reproduce 
some of the above properties in a simple manner. 

The reason for this hope is the fact that solitons in noncommutative 
field theories (NC solitons) have many properties in common with D-branes 
as tachyonic solitons. NC solitons and instantons in gauge theories 
have been studied independently of strings for quite some time, most 
notably by Nekrasov and Schwarz, and more recently by Gross 
and Nekrasov, Harvey et al., and others. 
In NC scalar field theories, solitons were discovered by Gopakumar, 
Minwalla and Strominger. For a summary of the relation to 
D-branes, in particular as far as their charges and descent relations
are concerned, see Harvey's lectures.

An explanation of why NC solitons (in the infinite  limit)
are useful for describing tachyon condensation in string theory was 
given by Witten. The point of is that in 
the Seiberg-Witten limit, the open string field algebra factorizes into 
the Moyal algebra built on tachyon vertex operators and another algebra 
that "contains all the stringy mystifications". Therefore, in describing 
tachyon condensation, one can concentrate on the tachyon, the remaining 
pieces being added "trivially" at the end. 

Given all this, it becomes a natural problem, from the point of view
of string theory, to study the decay of unstable NC solitons, using
(S1)-(S4) as guiding questions, as a toy model for the dynamics of
open string tachyons on unstable D-branes.

Summary of Results 

We will see that it is in fact not possible to reproduce the 
qualitative behavior described above in the simple model 
action . A priori, one would not expect (S3) simply
because of the failure of (S1) in the context of NC tachyon
condensation. Indeed, while NC solitons have localized energy,
far away the field is in the usual vacuum that has local
propagating excitations. However, we note that intuitively
(S1) is sufficient but not necessary for (S3), and in this
sense, finding (S3) would have been a nice substitute for (S1).
And recall that the very existence of NC solitons at finite
 relies on the fact that the kinetic term is a small
perturbation that does not destroy the qualitative properties
at infinite . One could expect something similar in the 
time-dependent case.

What we will find is that, except for infinite , the
energy that initially is stored in the soliton does not stay
localized, but is carried away to infinity in the form of
classical radiation. Nevertheless, the qualitative properties of 
the decay do depend on the noncommutativity parameter . In 
particular, the decay rate is exponentially suppressed in , 
for large .

We will proceed as follows. We start with a review of NC scalar
solitons and their basic properties in section .
It turns out that restricted to rotationally symmetric configurations,
the system is similar to certain nonlinear lattices which exhibit 
the phenomenon of "discrete breathers", and we review those in 
section  for completeness. We will then present 
some numerical results in section  in order to 
illustrate the qualitative properties of the decay. In section 
, we turn to reproducing this behavior through an 
approximate calculation of the decay rate. The technical core is 
here the explicit diagonalization of the linear problem in 
section , that puts us in a position to give a closed 
expression for the estimated decay rate in section . 
The approximation method relies on a certain version of Fermi's 
Golden Rule that we will explain.

To conclude this introduction, we note that a different toy model
for tachyon condensation in string theory, based on conventional
field theory, has been considered by Zwiebach. It 
would be interesting to compare the dynamics of the decay with our
present results. Also, Moeller and Zwiebach have studied 
the time evolution of decaying solitons in -adic string theory. 
The relation to our work is not clear. Finally, we note that some of 
the problems that we study here have also been broached in 
and.


Noncommutative scalar field theory in  dimensions and
its solitons 

The theory of our interest action  is defined over a model of 
-dimensional spacetime in which time is an ordinary variable and 
space is the two-dimensional quantum mechanical phase space of a 
nonrelativistic particle in one dimension. In other words, we base space
on the Heisenberg-Born-Jordan commutation relation, 
  

It is well-known since the times of Weyl, Wigner, and Moyal that the algebra 
of functions on this space is a deformation of the ordinary algebra 
 along the parameter . In one particular ordering
prescription, the product can be written as
  

Upon representing the commutation relations nc  in the usual manner on
Hilbert space , eq. moyal  turns into a prescription for 
translating a function over phase space, such as our field , into a linear 
operator on . Moreover, derivatives become commutators,
 
and the integral a trace,
 
This yields, after setting
 
the following expression for .
 
We also record the equations of motion
 

Rotational symmetry 

These expressions simplify further on rotationally symmetric field 
configurations,
 
Here,  is the projector onto the -th excited state
in the harmonic oscillator basis for . One finds
 
The equations of motion eom  become
 
This is a hamiltonian system with Hamiltonian
 
where  are the momenta canonically conjugate to the .

To connect eqmot  and hamilton  to something more familiar,
we note that using moyal  to write the projector  as a function 
on , it has a peak around
 
and that substituting rton  into the radial part of the Laplace 
operator written in two-dimensional polar coordinates, one obtains
 
Upon discretizing  and writing  as a difference operator, one
reproduces eqmot  or hamilton .

In this paper, we study properties of the dynamical system eqmot .


Non-commutative solitons 

We start with static solutions of eom  and eqmot , the 
noncommutative solitons. It was pointed out in that in 
the limit , eq. eom  simply reduces to 
 and can be solved by a projector  with
 such that . One then treats 
the kinetic term as a perturbation and shows that the solutions 
continue to exist for . Since, according to Derrick's 
theorem, the solutions do not exist in the classical or "continuum" 
limit , there must be a critical  beyond which 
the NC solitons cease to exist. Of course, existence is not controlled 
by  alone, but rather by certain dimensionless quantities built 
out of  and the parameters of . 

The NC scalar solitons which are related to projectors in the 
 limit are referred to as the GMS 
(Gopakumar-Minwalla-Strominger) solitons. Instead of reviewing the 
large number of works devoted to GMS solitons, let us quote an 
existence theorem proved in, see also. 

 
For every sequence  
with  and  for all  (, 
a stable static solution of eqmot  at ), there exists a 
unique continuation 
 to static solutions of eqmot  for 
, with some  which depends on the chosen initial 
sequence .

 [We sketch the proof given in.]
We work on the Hilbert space 
. Let 

 be the discretized radial part of the Laplacian 
according to rlapl , with domain .

The equation we have to solve is then
 
where . 

The first step of the proof is to show that the operator
 is invertible with
bounded inverse as a map from  to . This essentially
follows from .

One then rewrites fix  as
 
and shows that  is a contraction in a
neighborhood of  (for reasonable regularity assumptions
on ). The Banach fixed point theorem then implies the existence of 
a solution, with smooth dependence on  in the appropriate
norms.

Stable and unstable solitons 

In order to simplify the following discussion, we assume that the 
potential  is such that it has one global minimum , 
one local minimum , and one 
local maximum . Corresponding statements should
hold for a general potential. 

In ref. , certain statements are proved concerning 
the stability of the solutions whose existence for  is 
established by the above Theorem . Stability is here 
defined as positivity of the Hessian of the Hamiltonian 
, eq. hamilton , viewed as a quadratic 
form. For example, if  is as decribed above, then 
the solutions obtained as continuations of  to 
 are stable if and only if  is of the form 

 for some  and  
for . 

It is interesting to note that the unstable direction of the unstable 
solitons of Theorem  (, the one connected to 
, 
) is not rotationally symmetric. More precisely,
there exists a non-rotationally symmetric instability whenever the
sequence  at finite
 is not monotonic. The nature of the instability implies that 
the decay of these solitons can not be studied with an ansatz of the form 
ansatz . 

Here, we shall be interested in a different kind of unstable soliton,
namely the one obtained from continuation to  of the static 
unstable solution , 
 for . It is in fact rather simple to adapt the
above proof to show existence of these solitons as static solutions.
(We thank M. Salmhofer for this suggestion.)  The essential 
point is that  is still invertible even 
if  is negative for a finite number of 's, but
positive elsewhere. This is because it differs from a positive operator 
only by a finite rank perturbation, so that  
can still be inverted for  in a finite neighborhood of .
This soliton is unstable, but the instability is rotationally symmetric.
Moreover, the sequence of 's is monotonic, so that at least
initially, the soliton does not suffer from the non-rotationally 
symmetric instability discussed above. This justifies an ansatz of the 
form ansatz .

Summarizing, we can imagine studying the decay and long time evolution 
of the following unstable initial conditions, slightly perturbing them away 
from the stationary point.
 
[(I1)] A GMS soliton at finite  obtained from an unstable
static solution at infinite , say with 
,  for .
[(I2)] A GMS soliton at finite  obtained from a stable
configuration at infinite , say 
, 
.
[(I3)] The unstable maximum, 
for all .

The questions to ask about the decay are quite different from case to
case. In view of the relation between the noncommutative tachyon and
string field theory explained in, one can draw an
analogy between (I1) and the decay of an unstable D brane in
bosonic string theory, in which one looks at the directions 
transverse  to the brane. In view of (S3), then, one can ask
if and how fast the energy that initially is localized is transported
away to infinity. We will see that while energy is indeed dissipating
whenever , the decay is very slow.

We emphasize, again, that the action action  is not a
good model for the tachyon of string field theory, even in the
large B-field limit. Rather, as explained in, not 
only does the algebra factorize, but also the equations of motion
do, and the tachyon has no dynamics in this picture. Thus, in the
large B-field limit, one always obtains the noncommutative "field"
theory at infinite . It is a nice, but rather trivial
observation of consistency that in this limit the energy does stay
localized.

We find it harder to give an interpretation of the decays that start
from (I2). We will not study these decays here, but we expect that
some generalization of the technology that we develop could be
applied in that case.

We finally comment on the initial conditions (I3). Again by analogy
with string field theory, one might regard (I3) simply as the decay
of the open string vacuum (or of a lower dimensional D-brane in which
one looks in the directions along  the brane). Then, one could 
ask for comparison with property (S4) of open string tachyons, in 
other words, can one see the formation of "tachyon matter" 
. We will not study this here, by let us 
observe that if the perturbation away from the stationary point is 
uniform, , independent of , then the equations of motion can 
be trivially solved to yield uniform oscillations. So, starting from 
(I3), one may want to ask what happens under non-uniform 
perturbations . It also makes little sense to restrict to rotationally 
symmetric decays in this case.

In this paper, we will only deal with initial conditions of the form (I1).


Discrete breathers 

In order to explain some intuition about the behavior of the system
eqmot , we here digress on the theory of discrete breathers.

Discrete breathers are localized periodic solutions of lattices of 
oscillators, in which localization is not due to disorder (as in the
usual case of Anderson localization), but to nonlinearities. A useful
review is. The original discovery can be traced back to
, in which numerical simulations on these lattices
were performed. A rigorous existence proof was given in, 
further and related earlier results appear in 
.

As an example, let us consider a Hamiltonian similar to hamilton ,
 
For , this is just an infinite collection of independent
classical oscillators. For oscillations around a minimum 
 of  (we have in mind a potential similar to the
one described in the previous section), we introduce canonical 
angle-action variables , with
 
and we let  correspond to the turning point of the oscillation, 
. These coordinates are valid until 
. Such oscillations are localized at whichever 
site of the lattice is excited. 

On the other hand, if we couple the oscillators with 
 but small and constant, the lattice has propagating 
small oscillations (the phonons). The spectrum of the linearized 
problem is 
 
where , and .

The linear spectrum is therefore bounded and given a nonlinear
oscillation of the problem at  that is not in resonance 
with , ,  for all 
, one can avoid resonances with the phonons, 
 for all  and , if
 is sufficiently small. It is therefore plausible that
such an oscillation can continue to exist and be localized for 
. This intuitive argument can be turned into a 
rigorous existence theorem for discrete breathers.
 
Every periodic solution of the decoupled nonlinear problem with
frequency  satisfying the nonresonance condition 
 for all  and the anharmonicity 
condition  for all 
and with initial conditions coded by a sequence , 
 
can be uniquely continued to a periodic solution of the 
full nonlinear problem , for 
sufficiently small. These oscillations are localized in
the sense that  decays exponentially 
in  whenever .

The proof, which can be found in, uses an implicit
function theorem and is rather elementary. A more geometric
formulation is given in. The periodic solutions given
by the theorem are dynamically stable, in the sense that small
perturbations of the initial conditions remain small for all times.
This is discussed in an abstract setting in.

We note that the solution that one wishes to continue has to be
strictly periodic at , , all excited oscillators 
have to be in resonance and they also have to be in phase, as
coded by initial . This resonance condition appears to be
opposite to the one found in the formulation of the KAM theorem.
However, it is completely in agreement with the intuitive argument.
If two frequencies are not rationally related, there will always
be a resonance of some higher harmonics with the phonon band,
leading to decay.

What can discrete breathers teach us about NC 
soliton decay?  

The analogy  with discrete breathers leads to the question whether
breather-like solutions could exist in NC field theories. The answer
seems to be no.

The obvious difference is that in hamilton  the coupling 
 is not bounded as soon as .
The linear spectrum, which will be discussed in detail in the next
section, is therefore unbounded. This leads to a failure of the
intuitive argument given above for existence of breathers. Any 
nonlinear oscillation will be in resonance with the phonons, no
matter how small . There could be some hope if the
linear spectrum was pure point, as in Anderson localization. 
However, as we will see below, the spectrum is purely absolutely 
continuous.

It is a little more difficult to understand what goes wrong with the 
proof of. But recall that one of the assumptions for the 
implicit function theorem is continuity of the derivative, and this 
seems to fail here, because the derivative with respect to  
is unbounded. While there might still be some hope that one could use 
slightly stronger versions of the implicit function theorem to 
prove existence, this will generically be restricted to very special 
conditions, and one cannot expect these breathers to be stable. 
In any case, our numerical results and the approximation computation 
of the decay rate clearly disfavor the existence of "noncommutative 
breathers".


Numerical Results 

We now turn to presenting some results obtained by studying the
system eqmot  using numerics on the computer. We use the 
potential
 
and initial conditions of the form (I1). Specifically, we take
  
For nonzero , this is not a stationary point, and will
lead to some decay.

We have to work with a finite system . Therefore, in order 
to see a decay, if it occurs, we have to allow for a leak of energy. We
do this by imposing "absorbing boundary conditions", , the discrete 
version of
 
(recall that spherical outgoing spherical waves in two dimensions behave 
asymptotically like ), which in view of 
rton  reads
 

We start by plotting, as a function of time, the energy 
that is stored in the first four (say) oscillators, ,
 
divided by the initial energy, . For different values of
, our results are shown in figs. -.


 
0.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
10  
20  
30  
40  
50  
t  
En  
file=decay1.eps,width=0.75 
Energy Eloc  stored in the first four oscillators of 
the system eqmot , truncated to  oscillators with boundary 
conditions bound  (). The initial conditions are init  
for  and , and . 


 
0.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
10  
20  
30  
40  
50  
t  
En  
file=decay2.eps,width=0.75 
Same as fig. , for . 


 
0.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
10  
20  
30  
40  
50  
t  
En  
file=decay3.eps,width=0.75 
Same as fig. , for . 


) 
0.2) ) 
0.4) ) 
0.6) ) 
0.8) ) 
1) ) 
10) ) 
20) ) 
30) ) 
40) ) 
50) ) 
t) ) 
En) ) 
file=decay4.eps,width=0.75) 
Same as fig. , for .) 

While the energy seems to always dissipate, there are apparently 
significant differences between large and small . For
small , the system dissipates most of the energy at
early times. For large , the system loses a small fraction
of its initial energy rather rapidly at early times, and after
a certain "transient" time the energy dissipation rate approaches
a constant but rather small value. To see this more clearly, we estimate
the energy that is left after the transient time by averaging
 over a certain late time interval, and plot the result 
as a function of . The result is shown in fig. .


 
0.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
theta  
rat  
file=trans.eps,width=0.75 
The energy left in the first four oscillator after the initial
transient time apparent in figs. -, obtained
by averaging  from  to , 
for varying . 

We see that the turnover happens roughly at . This
agrees rather well with the estimated critical  below
which the unstable NC soliton is expected to disappear. From 
, the most naive estimate is
 
for the potential pot . We also note for comparison that
the period of linear  oscillations is ,
where .

In the remainder of the paper, we will compute the rate of energy 
dissipation to a first approximation in the coupling .


The Setup 

We start from the classical Hamilton function
 
describing an infinite collection of oscillators, labeled by 
, with -dependent coupling. We want to understand the late time 
behavior at large , if at  we excite the zeroth oscillator 
highly into the non-linear regime. The numerics indicate that all other
oscillators remain weekly excited during the decay process, so that we 
may linearize around the minimum of . Furthermore, for large ,
the zeroth oscillator is weakly coupled to all the other ones (the
other oscillators are strongly coupled as ). Accordingly, we 
split the Hamilton hamilton2  into three pieces
 
where  describes the zeroth oscillator that we want to excite,
 
 describes the remaining oscillators linearized around
the minimum, which for convenience we assume to be at ,
 
and . Finally,  describes
the coupling between  and 
 
At this level, the equations of motion are
 

Our strategy is as follows. We intend to treat the RHS of the first two
equations in eqmot2  as a perturbation. Without this term, the first
line can be trivially integrated. By our assumptions on the potential ,
the solution, which we call , will be periodic, and we call 
the corresponding frequency , where 
is the action variable. We then feed this oscillation into the last two 
equations of eqmot2 , which we write as
 
where  is the linear operator
 
supplemented with appropriate boundary conditions (see below). We can
view radiate  as a radiation problem with  as
the source. It is then natural to decompose  into Fourier
modes,
 
and to first compute the energy radiated into the continuum modes of  by
a harmonic source. Summing over all Fourier modes, this will give an
estimate for the rate of energy loss of the zeroth oscillator due to the
coupling to the continuum modes. The expectation is that for large
, the energy loss per period is small, so that the coupling to
the continuum essentially amounts to adding a friction term for , 
with dissipation rate depending on the remaining energy. One can in 
principle study the resulting one-dimensional dissipative system, but 
we have not done this here. On the other hand, for small , in 
particular , the energy loss per period will become 
comparable to . In fact, this will give an estimate for the critical 
. 

Most of what follows is concerned with the operator . In the following
section , we will diagonalize , which means finding the
generalized eigenfunctions and in particular their asymptotics at .
This will allow in section  to compute the power radiated
into the continuum by a harmonic source. Finally, we estimate the Fourier 
coefficients of  to obtain a decay rate of the soliton.


The operator  

The operator  defined by Aop  has the form of a discrete version 
of the familiar class of Sturm-Liouville operators, and we will draw on some 
of the theory pertaining to the latter (see, for instance,).
First, however, we will obtain some elementary results on the nature of
the spectrum of .

The spectrum of  is unbounded and absolutely continuous 

We have
 
The spectrum of  is equal to  and purely absolutely
continuous.
The first part of the statement is easy to prove. Recall that the spectrum
of ,
 
on  is equal to . The spectrum is absolutely 
continuous and the generalized eigenvectors are  
with spectral parameter .

Now, for , and , let  be large enough
such that  has a real solution with . We 
can then choose  large enough such that whenever , there is an
almost-eigenvector  with 
support in  and . Then
 
It is possible to choose  such that 
. As a consequence,
 
Making  large, the Weyl criterion implies that  is in the spectrum 
of . Positivity of  is trivial.

To prove absolute continuity, there are two possible strategies. The
first is to construct, for given , the generalized
eigenvectors as solutions of the difference equation , 
and to show that these solutions do not grow exponentially as .
We will find these eigenfunctions in subsection  below.
The second method uses the so-called positive commutator method or Mourre theory
. The point of Mourre theory is that one can prove absolute 
continuity of parts of the spectrum of a self-adjoint operator such as  
by simply exhibiting another self-adjoint operator  such that the commutator 
 is positive on the part of the spectrum in question.

 [A positive commutator]
We write
 
where , , 
and . We have
 
Define  and find
 
This shows absolute continuity away from . But  is not an eigenvalue, 
because any solution of 
 is constant and either trivial or nonnormalizable.

We now turn to a more formal analysis of the discrete Sturm-Liouville
operator .

Boundary Conditions 

 is naively a second order difference operator, and it might seem that we
need to specify boundary conditions at . However, from the definition
Aop , it is obvious that  is a singular point  of the difference
operator (the order of the operator jumps there). Therefore, we do not 
need to specify boundary conditions , if we consider the operator on 
. We will denote this operator (called  in the
previous subsection) acting on  as in Aop  
without boundary conditions , by . An alternative definition of  
would be by a quadratic form.

For our radiation problem eqmot2 , radiate , we want to treat
 as an inhomogeneous term added to a homogeneous linear
equation (the LHS of radiate ). In order for radiate  to 
coincide with eqmot2 , we have to define  acting in 
 as in Aop , with in addition the boundary 
condition 
 

This boundary condition makes  self-adjoint. But note that, as we review
below, the solution of the radiation problem (computation of the resolvent
of ) requires the knowledge of the solutions of the finite difference 
equation with arbitrary boundary conditions. Also note that the particular 
form of the boundary condition bouco  is a result of the way we 
have separated the perturbation in eqmot2 . We could, for instance, 
also have left  on the LHS of the equations. Our
results should not depend on this choice.

The generalized eigenfunctions 

We know already that the spectrum of  is  and absolutely 
continuous. The same statement holds obviously for . Here, we want to
complement this result by explicitly diagonalizing . From the spectral
theory of Sturm-Liouville operators, it is well-known that we will need to
know the two linearly independent solutions of
 
for arbitrary . These two solutions will not necessarily
be  normalizable and satisfy linearly independent boundary conditions 
at . Specifically, we call the two solutions of eigen , 
 and , satisfying the 
boundary conditions
 
The reason for choosing phibouco  was that  then also
is a solution of , but this turns out
to be unimportant. The reason for choosing psibouco  as boundary 
conditions for  is that in this way, the Wronskian  of
the finite difference equation, which is given in the standard Sturm-Liouville
fashion, is equal to one,
 

We note that the equation eigen  has been studied in. 
It seems, however, that one of the functions given in is 
incorrect, and moreover, the asymptotics of the solutions in the regime where we will
need them have not been worked out. Quite a bit of work on eigen  shows 
that the two solutions are as follows.
 
where  are the "harmonic numbers"() 
 
It is trivial that Phi  and Psi  are entire functions
of .

We see from Phi , Psi  that  is a polynomial 
in  of order , while  is a polynomial of order 
 (it is easy to see that the coefficient of  vanishes). 
In fact,  is nothing but a Laguerre polynomial , which 
is also a particular confluent hypergeometric function . Namely,
 
A similar, but more complicated statement can be made for ,
see below.

Asymptotics 

We wish to determine the asymptotic behavior of  and 
 for  fixed, and  large, for 
 in the positive half plane 
. 
It was noticed before that for large 
, the operator , eq. Aop , can be approximated by the 
differential operator , where . 
Let us also recall that the Bessel functions  of order zero,
 
where  is the Euler-Mascheroni 
constant, are two linearly independent solutions of Bessel's 
differential equation 
 
We choose the standard branch for the logarithm in Y0 . Furthermore, 
it is easy to see that both J0  and the series appearing in 
Y0  are entire functions of . Hence, it is clear that 
 and  are analytic in .

Comparing eigen  with bessel , we expect an asymptotic
expansion of  and  in terms of the Bessel
functions  and , with . Here, and in 
all similar cases considered below, we choose the branch of the square root 
for which the signs of  and  are equal.

Asymptotics of  

For , such an asymptotic expansion is indeed known (see, ,
). It can be derived as follows. Because of conf , 
 satisfies the Laguerre differential 
equation 
 
where differentiation is with respect to . If we make the usual 
substitution  with  
in eq. laguerre , we obtain
 
where differentiation is with respect to .

For , which is equivalent to , this reduces to 
bessel , up to a perturbation of order . 
Thus, in this limit, any solution  of laguerre  is 
asymptotic to a linear combination of Bessel functions  and , 
where the deviation from the exact solution is an asymptotic series in 
powers of . The particular linear combination 
at hand can be determined from the behavior at .
 
  From the expressions for  in eq. Phi  and  
in eq. J0  it is easy to see that 
 
where , for any fixed value of .
Thus, by what has been stated above, it follows that for any fixed   

and  large,
 
with .
 
Asymptotics of  

The asymptotics of  for large  requires more 
work. It is natural to expect a connection to the second solution  of
Laguerre's differential equation laguerre . Surprisingly, it turns 
out that this solution is nowhere to be found in the usual references,
including. The point is that eq. 
laguerre  is a very special case of the  confluent hypergeometric
equation in which both parameters are integer, and the "logarithmic 
solution" given in the references reduces to the ordinary one in this case.
One has to go back to to find that a second solution is given
by
 
K_n() = L_n() + _k=1 ^n (-)^k k! 
n k  (H_n-k  - 2H_k - H_n) + Kn  

+(-1)^n_k=n+1 ^n! k!  (k-n-1)! k!  ^k ,
which one can easily verify by direct substitution, and where we choose
the standard branch of the logarithm. It is easy to see that both series 
on the RHS of Kn  define entire functions of .  

Before we relate  to , let us determine its
asymptotics for large , for .
We use the same logic as for  and first consider the limit
, , with  fixed. Defining 
, we easily see that
 
The same arguments that were used for  then imply that for 
any , and  large,
 
where .

To relate  and , we rewrite the sums in 
Psi  in terms of  and . 
This yields
 
Using this, we claim that for  and  large,
 
for a constant  that is uniform in  and . Indeed, the LHS 
of Psikappanest  is bounded by
 
since  for all , and 
. This straightforwardly implies
Psikappanest .

By noticing that the last term in Kn  is small in the limit
, with absolute value bounded by
  
one then infers that for any , and large 
,
 
with a small error bounded by the sum of Psikappanest  and 
Knest . Using Knasym , we finally find
 
for , where we have defined
 
It is possible to express  in terms of the incomplete Gamma 
function, but we do not need this here. As a check, one may note that 
the Wronskian of the Bessel functions corresponding to bessel  
is , which after the appropriate 
coordinate transformations confirms .

Resolvent and density of states 

We can now compute the resolvent of  and the spectral measure (density of
states) by following the usual Sturm-Liouville procedure. We introduce, 
for , , the functions 
 and , satisfying  
and , and characterized by the property 
that  satisfies the boundary condition bouco , 
, while  is normalizable at infinity.
We can express  and  as linear combinations of 
 and  and we normalize them such that the 
Wronskian is equal to one,
 
Using  and , the resolvent of  can be written as
 
Using phibouco  and psibouco , it is easy to see that 
 is given by
 
To determine , we recall that the Bessel functions  and 
 behave at infinity as
 
Using Phiasym  and Psiasym , and , we 
see that the normalizable solution, behaving as  for
, is given by
 
where  is determined by the requirement on the Wronskian,
 

The density of states or spectral measure  of  is
determined from the jump of the imaginary part of the resolvent across 
the real  axis. In the case at hand, one finds in the usual way,
 
which upon using fkappa  and gkappa  gives, for
,
 
For illustrative purposes, we show a plot of  in
fig. .

 
0  
2  
4  
6  
8  
10  
0.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
rho  
kappa  
file=rho.eps,width=0.75 
The density of states rho  of the operator  
Aop . 


Estimating the decay rate 

Equipped with the analysis of the linear operator , we now estimate
the decay rate in the approximation explained in section .

A harmonic source 
We first study the radiation problem radiate  with a harmonic
source.
 

There are in principle two ways to treat this problem. One is to 
make an ansatz of the form  
and to solve for , imposing outgoing boundary conditions 
at . The other is to use the spectral decomposition 
of  in eigenmodes of . As a check, we will compute 
with both methods.

Diagonalization of  

We introduce 
 
where  is given by fkappa . The inverse transformation
involves the density of states,
 
Using eq. trafo  in eq. rad  yields
 
where . This is a forced harmonic oscillator 
and can be solved in the usual way. Using inverse  to plug the 
solution back into the expression for the energy,
 
one finds that at late times,  is proportional to  and the 
radiated power  is given by
 
where  has to be positive,
and  is given by rho . The derivation of
Pone  is similar to that of Fermi's Golden Rule.

Modification of boundary conditions 

If we put  into eq. rad ,
we obtain
 
Thus, for ,  must be a linear combination of
 and , with 
. We require that  be outgoing at 
infinity , which from the behavior of  and  means that
 must behave as . Hence,
 
where  is determined by the equation at ,
 
yielding
 

To finish the calculation of the energy output, one has to plug the
solution into the expression for the "energy current ",
(We define  by the requirement that it satisfy
 on a solution of the
equations of motion, where

 is the "energy density".) 
 
Using the asymptotics of  and  and of 
and , one obtains for the average radiated power
 
which using D , reproduces exactly Pone ,
 
with , and 
is given by Fkappa .

The decay rate of the NC soliton 

As explained in section , the total decay rate of the NC 
soliton is obtained by decomposing the oscillation  
into Fourier modes, fourier , using Pthree  for each mode, 
and summing over Fourier modes, ,
 
where
 
are the Fourier coefficients of . The precise values
of the  of course depend on the details of the potential and the 
exact value of the basic frequency  (which, if we enforce energy 
conservation, is not fixed), so that we need an estimate to make further
progress on total .

There are two regimes in which one can estimate the Fourier coefficients.
The first is for almost harmonic oscillations, for which one can use 
perturbation theory to determine the . This will be the description 
when, for late times, the zeroth oscillator is in a small vicinity 
of the stationary point, and the soliton has almost completely decayed. 
The second regime is defined by . It describes the 
initial stages of the decay of the NC soliton, and it will be a consistent approximation if the 
energy loss per period is much smaller that the total energy in the 
zeroth oscillator, , we require
 
In this regime, the coefficients coeff  can be estimated as 
follows.

If the energy  is exactly equal to the critical value
, there is not only the static solution,
but also the separatrix solution that is not periodic, but
rather takes an infinite amount of time to fall off and come
back to the top of the potential. We call this separatrix
. 

For energies close to the critical point of , the oscillation, which 
has a frequency , is well approximated by 
the convolution of the separatrix with a sum of delta functions 
separated by , which is a much longer time scale than 
the scale typical of , ,
 
The Fourier transform of  is then given by the product 
of the Fourier transform of  with delta functions at 
, . In other words,
 
where  is the Fourier transform of the separatrix.

Plugging fourierestimate  in total , and using that 
 is finite everywhere to replace the sum over Fourier
modes by an integral, we obtain the final expression for the decay rate
of the NC soliton,
 
in which .

For some special potentials, one can explicitly compute the
separatrix and its Fourier transform. For instance, for
the quartic potential that we used in the numerics,
, one has
(Another simple example that can be solved explicitly
is the cubic potential.) 
 
For illustration, we show in fig.  the numerical 
evaluation of final  for this separatrix. We see that the 
value of  at which the energy loss per period becomes 
appreciable is around , in rough agreement 
with the estimate naive .


 
0.1  
0.2  
0.3  
0.4  
0.6  
0.8  
1  
theta  
P  
file=rate.eps,width=0.75 
The energy loss per period of  at
initial stages of the NC soliton decay, as a function of
. The potential is of the quartic form pot . 

Conclusions 

In this paper, we have studied some properties of the dynamical system 
eqmot , which is (the radial part of) the classical equations of 
motions for a scalar noncommutative field in  dimensions. We have 
in particular analyzed the long time evolution of initial conditions of 
the form (I1) corresponding to unstable noncommutative solitons. We have 
obtained numerical and analytical evidence that the energy is dissipated 
away to infinity in the form of classical radiation. For large, but 
finite values of the noncommutativity parameter , 
the decay rate of the soliton 
is exponentially small in . Our main technical result is the 
explicit diagonalization of the linear problem. 

Our paper will end here, but we would like to mention a number of open
problems that are worthwhile of further investigation, and to which we
hope to return in the near future.

In the context of NC field theory, there are several other unstable
solitons whose decays one might want to study. We have already mentioned
the scalar soliton decays of type (I2) and (I3). Decays of the type (I2) 
are particularly interesting because they have to proceed through non 
rotationally invariant configurations. Solution of this
problem will involve solving the linear problem for nonzero angular
momentum (, finding the "discrete Bessel functions" for degree
, the function  and  corresponding
to ). Furthermore, it is not a priori clear into what decay
products such a soliton will decay. For example, the soliton
corresponding to 
,  could
decay into either the stable soliton corresponding to
, 
 () or into the global vacuum. An additional question 
is whether there exist rotationally asymmetric stable
solitons, and if so, whether they can be formed as decay products
of the above process. It is natural to ask whether
there is a simple criterion to decide this question.

NC gauge theories, with or without couplings to scalar fields, also 
admit solitons, which in fact have a more direct interpretation in
terms of D-branes in string theory (see for a review).
Some of these solitons are unstable and hence can decay. Our solution 
of the linear problem is directly relevant in this context, but the
nonlinearities are rather different, leading to a markedly different
qualitative behavior.

Also from the point of view of string theory, it would be interesting to
compare our results with the qualitative properties of the decay of the 
lump in  theory in  dimensions, which is another natural
toy model for tachyon condensation. The fluctuations around the lump 
and the expression of the stable vacuum in terms of the fluctuations were 
studied in. However, it seems to be unclear whether 
in the time evolution, the field eventually settles down in the stable 
vacuum, and if so, how the energy is dissipated. 

Probably the most immediate problem from a mathematical point of view
is to substantiate our qualitative discussion with rigorous estimates
of the decay. As we have mentioned, our system is similar to systems
exhibiting the discrete breather phenomenon. One can also
expect a connection to the general theory of resonances in nonlinear
field equations and their radiative decay, studied, for example, in 
. This is the general framework in which we expect 
a more rigorous treatment of our problem.

 
This work is bearing fruits thanks to the valuable input from
a great number of people, including Tony Zee, Kay Wiese, Tristan 
Maillard, Gian Michele Graf, Stephen Gustafson, Chong-Sun Chu, 
Christopher Herzog, Manfred Salmhofer, Joe Polchinski, Shiraz Minwalla, 
Mark Srednicki, Doug Eardley, and Barton Zwiebach.
J.W. would like to thank the CERN Theory Division and the ITP 
at ETH for hospitality during early stages of this work, as 
well as the Perimeter  Institute during the final stages.
The work of J.W. was supported in part by the National Science 
Foundation under Grant No. PHY99-07949. T.C. was supported by
a Courant Instructorship.



 [2]#2  1 

A. Connes,
"C* Algebras And Differential Geometry,"
Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. (Ser. I Math. )A 290 , 599 (1980)
[arXiv:hep-th/0101093].


E. Witten,
"Noncommutative Geometry And String Field Theory,"
Nucl. Phys. B 268 , 253 (1986).


A. Connes,
"Noncommutative Geometry,"
Academic Press, San Diego (1994).

T. Banks, W. Fischler, S. H. Shenker and L. Susskind,
"M theory as a matrix model: A conjecture,"
Phys. Rev. D 55 , 5112 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9610043].


A. Connes, M. R. Douglas and A. Schwarz,
"Noncommutative geometry and matrix theory: Compactification on tori,"
JHEP 9802 , 003 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9711162].


N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"String theory and noncommutative geometry,"
JHEP 9909 , 032 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9908142].


J. Frohlich, O. Grandjean and A. Recknagel,
"Supersymmetric quantum theory, non-commutative geometry, and gravitation,"
arXiv:hep-th/9706132.


M. R. Douglas and N. A. Nekrasov,
"Noncommutative field theory,"
Rev. Mod. Phys.  73 , 977 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0106048].


R. J. Szabo,
"Quantum field theory on noncommutative spaces,"
arXiv:hep-th/0109162.


A. Sen,
"Tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system,"
JHEP 9808 , 012 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9805170].


A. Sen,
"Descent relations among bosonic D-branes,"
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 14 , 4061 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9902105].


A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Tachyon condensation in string field theory,"
JHEP 0003 , 002 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9912249].


A. Sen,
"Rolling tachyon,"
JHEP 0204 , 048 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203211].


A. Sen,
"Tachyon matter,"
arXiv:hep-th/0203265.


A. Sen,
"Field theory of tachyon matter,"
arXiv:hep-th/0204143.


M. Gutperle and A. Strominger,
"Spacelike branes,"
JHEP 0204 , 018 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0202210].


A. Buchel, P. Langfelder and J. Walcher,
"Does the tachyon matter?,"
Annals Phys.  302 , 78 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207235].


A. Strominger,
"Open string creation by S-branes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0209090.


N. Nekrasov and A. Schwarz,
"Instantons on noncommutative R**4 and (2,0) superconformal six  
dimensional theory,"
Commun. Math. Phys.  198 , 689 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9802068].


R. Gopakumar, S. Minwalla, and A. Strominger, "Noncommutative 
solitons," JHEP 05 , 020 (2000)
http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0003160 [hep-th/0003160] .


J. A. Harvey, P. Kraus, F. Larsen and E. J. Martinec,
"D-branes and strings as non-commutative solitons,"
JHEP 0007 , 042 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0005031].


D. J. Gross and N. A. Nekrasov,
"Monopoles and strings in noncommutative gauge theory,"
JHEP 0007 , 034 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0005204].


D. J. Gross and N. A. Nekrasov,
"Solitons in noncommutative gauge theory,"
JHEP 0103 , 044 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0010090].


J. A. Harvey, "Komaba lectures on noncommutative solitons and D-branes,"
http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0102076 hep-th/0102076 .


E. Witten, "Noncommutative tachyons and string field theory,"
http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0006071 hep-th/0006071 .


A. Sen,
"Some issues in non-commutative tachyon condensation,"
JHEP 0011 , 035 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0009038].


B. Zwiebach, "A solvable toy model for tachyon condensation in string field
  theory," JHEP 09 , 028 (2000)
http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0008227 [hep-th/0008227] .


B. Zwiebach, private communication

N. Moeller and B. Zwiebach,
"Dynamics with infinitely many time derivatives and rolling tachyons,"
JHEP 0210 , 034 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207107].


C. Acatrinei and C. Sochichiu,
"A note on the decay of noncommutative solitons,"
arXiv:hep-th/0104263.


C. Acatrinei,
"Noncommutative radial waves,"
arXiv:hep-th/0106006.


T. Erler, D. Gross, and J. Walcher, work in progress.

B. Durhuus, T. Jonsson, and R. Nest, "Noncommutative scalar solitons:
Existence and nonexistence," Phys. Lett. B500 , 320-325 (2001)
http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0011139 [hep-th/0011139] .


B. Durhuus, T. Jonsson and R. Nest,
"The existence and stability of noncommutative scalar solitons,"
arXiv:hep-th/0107121.


S. Takeno, K. Kisoda, and A. J. Sievers,
"Intrinsic localized vibrational modes in anharmonic crystals,"
Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 94 , 242 (1988).

D. K. Campbell and M. Peyrard,
"Chaos and order in nonintegrable model field theories,"
Chaos, ed. D. K. Campbell (New York, AIP), 305 (1990).

R. S. MacKay and S. Aubry,
"Proof of existence of breathers for time-reversible or Hamiltonian 
networks of weakly coupled oscillators,"
Nonlinearity 7 , 1623 (1994).

J.-A. Sepulchre and R. S. MacKay,
"Localized oscillations in conservative or dissipative networks
of weakly coupled autonomous oscillators,"
Nonlinearity 10 , 679 (1997).

R. S. MacKay and J.-A. Sepulchre,
"Stability of discrete breathers,"
Physica D 119 , 148 (1998).

S. Flach and C. R. Willis,
"Discrete Breathers,"
Phys. Rep. 295 , 181 (1998).

C. Albanese and J. Frohlich,
"Periodic solutions of some infinite-dimensional hamiltonians associated 
with nonlinear partial differential equations I,"
Comm. Math. Phys. 116 , 475 (1988).

C. Albanese and J. Frohlich,
"Perturbation theory for periodic orbits in a class of infinite dimensional
hamiltonian systems,"
Comm. Math. Phys. 138 , 193 (1991).

R. K. Richtmyer,
"Principles of Advanced Mathematical Physics", Vol. 1,
Springer, New York 1978.

E. Mourre,
"Absence of singular continuous spectrum for certain self-adjoint operators,"
Comm. Math. Phys. 78 , 391 (1981).

A. Erdelyi (Ed.), W. Magnus, F. Oberhettinger, F. G. Tricomi,
"Higher Transcendental Functions" (Bateman Manuscript Project),
McGraw Hill, New York 1953.

I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, "Tables of Integrals, Series, and
Products,"  4th Edition, Academic Press, New York 1965.

M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, "Handbook of Mathematical Functions,"
9th Printing, Dover Publications, Inc., New York 1970.

W. Magnus and F. Oberhettinger, "Formeln und Satze fur die speziellen
Funktionen der mathematischen Physik," 2. Auflage, Springer, Berlin 1948.



D. Eardley,
unpublished notes and private communication

I. M. Sigal, "Non-linear wave and Schrodinger equations I.
Instability of periodic and quasiperiodic solutions,"
Comm. Math. Phys. 153 , 297 (1993).

A. Soffer and M. I. Weinstein, "Resonances, radiation damping and
instability in Hamiltonian nonlinear wave equations,"
Invent. math. 136 , 9 (1999).










