






























Vacuum stress around a topological defect 
V. A. De Lorenci 
 delorenci@unifei.edu.br 
E. S. Moreira Jr. 
 moreira@unifei.edu.br 
Instituto de Ciencias,
Universidade Federal de Itajuba,
Av. BPS 1303 Pinheirinho, 37500-903 Itajuba, MG, Brazil 

January, 2003 



 
We show that a dispiration (a disclination plus a screw dislocation)
polarizes the vacuum of a scalar field giving rise to an energy
momentum tensor which, as seen from a local inertial  frame,
presents non vanishing off-diagonal components.
Such a new effect resembles that where an induced vacuum current
arises around a needle solenoid carrying a magnetic flux (the Aharonov-Bohm
effect). The results may have applications in cosmology 
(chiral cosmic strings) and condensed matter physics (materials with
linear defects). 
04.62.+v, 61.72.Lk, 11.27.+d 







It is fairly well known that a needle solenoid carrying
a magnetic flux makes virtual charged particles to run 
around the solenoid inducing a
non vanishing current density (see e.g. Ref).  
We wish to consider what seems to be  a gravitational
(geometric) analogue of  this Aharonov-Bohm effect,
by computing the vacuum expectation value of the energy momentum
tensor of a massless and neutral scalar field far away from a dispiration.





Let us begin by presenting the geometry of the background
(units are such that ),
 
where the points labeled by 
 and  are identified 
.
When  and  
Eq () becomes the
line element of the flat spacetime written in cylindrical coordinates.
Borrowing terminologies in condensed matter physics, the parameters
 and  correspond to a disclination and a screw dislocation,
respectively. 
We should remark  that Eq () may be  associated with   the gravitational
background of certain chiral cosmic strings(as has been suggested in Ref.), 
as well as can describe (in the continuum limit)  the effective geometry
around a dispiration in an elastic solid (see Ref. and references
therein).


The definitions
 and  lead to  
 
which should be considered together with the  peculiar identification
 
Although Eq. () expresses the fact that the background is 
locally flat, due to Eq. () we cannot use Eq. ()
(which is a local statement) to infer that 
the global symmetries of the background are the same as those 
of  the Minkowski spacetime (in this sense Eq. () is singular).
In fact, Eq. () disguises  a curvature singularity on the symmetry
axis(when , in the context of the Einstein-Cartan theory, 
there is also a torsion singularity at 
).









As is well known (see e.g. Ref.)
the vacuum expectation value of the energy momentum tensor can
formally be obtained by applying the differential operator 
 
to
the renormalized scalar propagator around a dispiration,
 
We have recently obtained

(classical propagators have been considered in Ref) by
using the Schwinger proper time prescription combined with the 
completeness relation of the eigenfunctions of .
Such eigenfunctions have the form
 
which, by observing Eq. (), leads to 
 
This boundary condition is typical of the Aharonov-Bohm set up
where  is identified with the flux parameter .
If we carry over to the four-dimensional context lessons from 
gravity in three dimensions, it follows that
the charge  and the magnetic flux  should be identified with
the longitudinal linear momentum  and , respectively
.  


The renormalized propagator 
is given by  

 

where , likewise for  and 
.
As  the dominant contribution
in Eq. () is the renormalized scalar propagator in
an ordinary conical background.
Therefore when ,  Eq. () yields
for the diagonal components essentially the expressions long 
known in the literature for the vacuum fluctuations around 
an ordinary cosmic string ().
Regarding the remaining components, the prescription in Eq.
() kills off the dominant contribution in Eq.
(), resulting that the subleading contribution yields two non
vanishing off-diagonal components,  
 
and 
 
where
 
It is worth remarking  that, unlike the diagonal components,

and  
 
do not depend on the coupling parameter .  



The plot of  against the disclination parameter  is
shown in Fig. . When , the
integration in Eq. () can be analytically evaluated,
resulting  which
corresponds approximately to the value of  suggested by the physics
of formation of ordinary cosmic strings.   




 Plot  versus .
 




It is instructive to display both disclination and screw dislocation
effects in a same array. When  (conformal coupling), for 
example,   with respect to the 
local inertial frame [cf. Eq. ()] can
be cast into the form  

 

where , and which holds 
far away from the defect 
(and for , when ).
[When , by setting  in Eq. (), 
 vanishes and subleading contributions depending on  take over.] 

Before closing this note, let us interpret the polarization effect
displayed in Eq. () in the light of the analogy
with the Aharonov-Bohm effect following Eq. ().
Observing Eq. (),
we can say that a dispiration (more precisely, a
screw dislocation) polarizes the vacuum of a scalar field, inducing a flux 
of longitudinal linear momentum around the defect. 
Such a flux depends on the direction of the screw dislocation 
(i.e., on the sign of ) in the same way that 
vacuum currents around a needle solenoid depend on the direction of the
magnetic flux. 

 
We are grateful to Renato Klippert and Ricardo Medina for clarifying discussions. 
This work was partially supported by the Brazilian research agencies
CNPq and FAPEMIG.



 88 

E.M. Serebryanyi, Theor. Math. Phys. 64 , 846 (1985).

 
D.V. Gal'tsov and P.S. Letelier,
Phys. Rev. D 47 , 4273 (1993).

 
K.P. Tod,
Class. Quant. Grav. 11 , 1331 (1994).

 
J.D. Bekenstein,
Phys. Rev. D 45 , 2794 (1992).

 
R.A. Puntigam and H.H. Soleng,
Class. Quant. Grav. 14 , 1129 (1997).

 
P.S. Letelier,
Class. Quant. Grav. 12 , 471 (1995).

 N. D. Birrel and P. C. W. Davies,
Quantum Fields in Curved Space 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1982).

 
V.A. De Lorenci and E.S. Moreira, Jr.,
Phys. Rev. D 65 , 107503 (2002).

V.A. De Lorenci and E.S. Moreira Jr.,
hep-th/0301194.

 
P.S. Gerbert and R. Jackiw,
Commun. Math. Phys. 124 , 229 (1989).

P.S. Gerbert, Nucl. Phys. B 346 , 440 (1990).

 
M.E.X. Guimara es and B. Linet,
Commun. Math. Phys. 165 , 297 (1994).

A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard,
Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1994).

 
I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, 
Table of Integrals, Series, and Products  
(Academic Press, New York, 1980).







