








theorem Theorem 
acknowledgement [theorem]Acknowledgement 
algorithm [theorem]Algorithm 
axiom [theorem]Axiom 
case [theorem]Case 
claim [theorem]Claim 
conclusion [theorem]Conclusion 
condition [theorem]Condition 
conjecture [theorem]Conjecture 
corollary [theorem]Corollary 
criterion [theorem]Criterion 
definition [theorem]Definition 
example [theorem]Example 
exercise [theorem]Exercise 
lemma [theorem]Lemma 
notation [theorem]Notation 
problem [theorem]Problem 
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
remark [theorem]Remark 
solution [theorem]Solution 
summary [theorem]Summary 

 
CAMS/03-02

 
Noncommutative Gravity   Ali H.
Chamseddine (Presented at TH-2002, Paris, France,
July 2002.  )      Center for Advanced Mathematical Sciences (CAMS) andPhysics
Department, American University of Beirut, Lebanon. 

 
Abstract 

Various approaches by the author and collaborators to define
gravitational fluctuations associated with a noncommutative space are
reviewed. Geometry of a noncommutative space is defined by the data 
 where  is a noncommutative involutive
algebra,  is a separable Hilbert space and  a self-adjoint operator on
 referred to as Dirac operator. Geometry on Riemannian manifolds
could be recovered by specializing to the data




where  is the spin-connection on a manifold  To
deserve the name geometry the operator  should satisfy certain conditions
.

At present there are only few noncommutative spaces which are well understood
such as the noncommutative space of the standard model, the noncommutative
torus, deformed plane  and the noncommutative spheres 
  It is relatively easy to develop gauge theories on
noncommutative spaces. To do this we first define the one-form



then define an involutive representation  of  on  such
that





The curvature is defined by  and integration by




where  is the Dixmier trace and  is defined by the condition
  

For gauge theories we consider  On a commutative space one
gets, in , the action



On the noncommutative torus  the triplet is taken to be  
 where 
is the left-twisting operator satisfying  .
 The star product is defined by





Then one gets


where 
.

The operator  includes the metric properties  on the space. One can extract
dynamics of fluctuations of the metric by one of two possibilities. The first
is by using the spectral action principle which states that the physical
action depends on the spectrum of . Good tests of this
principle can be made by considering the standard model of particle physics
and loop space of superstrings. As an example consider the noncommutative
space of the spectral model defined by




where  is the triple associated
with the Riemannian manifold , 
 is the triple associated with the discrete space




 is enumerated by quarks and leptons and  contains information
about the Yukawa couplings. The operator  satisfies the property that if
 then the fermionic action will be given by



which includes all fermionic interaction terms. The bosonic action is then
given by



where  is a cut-off scale. At low energies, the arbitrariness in the
choice of the function  would only reflect itself in having few measurable
parameters. We can use heat kernel methods to evaluate the above trace. For
example in  we first write  and use the
identity 
 and the expansion 

 to show that



where the  are the Seeley-deWit coefficients and




From the structure of the quarks and leptons denoted by 
 and  one can determine the discrete
triple  that will give rise to
the Higgs field. For the leptonic sector one obtains











and a similar expression for the Dirac operator of the quarks sector. The
bosonic action is then given by
* 
where  ,  are linearly related to  , 
respectively, and  and  are functions of the Yukawa couplings. By
normalizing the kinetic energies of the gauge fields, one obtains a relation
between the gauge coupling constants of ,  and  which is
the same as that of  mainly that 
 After rescaling the Higgs field one gets a relation for the Higgs
coupling  Using the fact that the
dominant Yukawa coupling is that of the top quark this relation simplifies to

 Combining this relation with the renormalization group
equations one obtains the bound on the Higgs mass  Gev  m
 Gev. The unification of the couplings also implies that 
 Gev. The spectral action thus unifies gravity with gauge and
Higgs interactions.

The second possibility is to  study the gravitational field of a
noncommutative space from the structure of the spectral triple by defining the
analogue of Riemannian geometry to be called noncommutative Riemannian
geometry. For this one must define connections, curvature, torsion,
etc. For example if  are basis and  a connection then we have
* 
which in component form gives




Applying these definitions to a product of a discrete two point space times a
Riemannian manifold  one finds that the basis is given by 





 and 





 and the Dirac operator by









The noncommutative Einstein-Hilbert action is
* 
where  To this we can add a cosmological constant
 and allow
matrix algebras for the discrete space. This would give rise to gauge fields
with curvature , where 






 The contribution of the gauge fields to the action is then

* 
which is the same at the Randall-Sundrum model of  dimensional
space with four-dimensional brane boundaries.

Allowing the Dirac operator  to fluctuate on noncommutative spaces based on
deformed spheres or deformed  poses a challenge. The operator  is
not arbitrary, and the interesting problem to solve is to find whether there
are gravitational fluctuations.  The presence of a constant background
B-field for D-branes leads to noncommutativity of space-time coordinates which
could be realized by deforming the algebra of functions on the world volume.
There are indications that the gravitational action on noncommutative branes
in presence of constant background B-field is non covariant.

Deformed gravity could be constructed by using the spectral action if one
knows the form of the deformed Dirac operator . At present this
is not known, and all one can do is to probe for possibilities. If one assumes
a constant background B-field then the commutator of space-time coordinates
gives



where  and 
 In this case the vielbein
would be deformed to the form




the complex part is dependent on  If a metric is defined by
 then the metric will be complex. We can
write  and then impose the hermiticity of
 which implies that  is a symmetric tensor and
 is antisymmetric tensor. This leads to complex gravity. At the
linearized level, the field  has the correct kinetic terms, but
the ghost modes present in  this field propagate at the non-linear level. The
reason for the inconsistency is that there is no symmetry similar to
diffeomorphism invariance associated with the field .

An alternative approach is to develop a gauge theory for the field 
 and formulate gravity as a noncommutative gauge theory without using a
metric. This can be done without much complications in four-dimensions. The
procedure is generalizable to higher dimensions, but the analysis will be more
complicated. The idea is to start from the gauge group  in
four-dimensions. The gauge field is expanded in the form




The gauge field strength is given by  where we have defined
 and  To
make the system dynamical without using a metric a constraint is imposed. It
is given by



This breaks the symmetry to , which is the relevant symmetry
for gravity. The constraint is solved by




An action which is invariant under the surviving  is given by
* 
This action consists of a Gauss-Bonnet topological term, an Einstein term and
a cosmological term, provided that  The advantage of this
formulation is that it immediately generalizes to a noncommutative action as
the metric is not used in the construction, but is generated as a function of
 Let   be
the gauge field over the noncommutative space where  are the group
generators. The curvature is then given by 
 Notice that we can write






where the symmetric and antisymmetric star products are defined to be,
respectively, even and odd functions of  Notice that this is
consistent with imposing the constraint



because these correspond to generators with an odd number of gamma matrices
and preserve the subgroup . The noncommutative action is then
given by
* 
The constraints could be solved by using the Seiberg-Witten mapwhich enables us to express all the deformed fields in terms of the undeformed
ones. The final result is





where  is the deformation to first order in
 of 

This deformed action gives deviations from the Einstein-action which are
evaluated explicitly. In this deformation there are no additional propagating
degrees of freedom, all new terms being functions of the vierbein 
 and its derivatives. This suggests that there should exist a formulation
of noncommutative gravity on deformed  obtained by allowing
fluctuations to the Dirac operator in the spectral triple of this space. The
nature of such extension is presently under investigation.

To conclude, it is clear from the above discussion that gauge theories on
noncommutative spaces are straightforward, but to define the gravitational
action on such spaces is more difficult. At present there are only partial
answers, and more intensive research in this direction is needed.

 99 
A. Connes, "Noncommutative Geometry" , Academic Press,
New York, 1994.

A. Connes, J. Math. Phys.  36  (1995) 6194.

A. Connes, M. R. Douglas and A. Schwartz, JHEP
 9802  (1998) 003.

A. Connes and G. Landi, math.QA/0011194.

N. Seiberg and E. Witten, JHEP  9909  (1999) 032.

A. H. Chamseddine and A. Connes, Comm. Math. Phys.
 186  (1997) 731. For details see D. Kastler, J.Math. Phys.
 46  (2000) 3867.

P. Gilkey, "Invariance Theory, the heat equation and the
Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem", Dilmington, Publish or Perish, 1984.

F. Lizzi, G. Mangano and G. Miele, Mod. Phys. Lett.
 A16  (2001) 1.

L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett.  83
 (1999) 3370.

F. Ardalan, H. Arfai, M. R. Garousi and A. Ghodsi, hep-th/0204117.

A. H. Chamseddine, G. Felder and J. Fro hlich, Comm.
Math. Phys.  155  (1993) 205; A. H. Chamseddine J. Fro hlich and O.
Grandjean, J. Math. Phys.  36  (1995) 6255.

A. H. Chamseddine, Comm. Math. Phys.  218
 (2001) 283.

A. H. Chamseddine, hep-th/0202137.

A. Connes and M. Dubois-Violette, math-QA/0206205.

