

check!    




[ []  




  #2     :=#2    -        b@ ?        Citation 'on page undefined  
b@   #1  


                      











 
Structures of -Deformed Currents 

 
Jian-zu Zhang




 
 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Box 316, East China
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, P. R. China

  Department of Physics, University of Kaiserslautern, PO Box
3049, D-67653  Kaiserslautern, Germany


 
The non-perturbation and perturbation structures of
the -deformed probability currents are studied.
According to two ways of realizing the -deformed Heisenberg algebra
by the undeformed operators,
the perturbation  structures of two -deformed probability currents
 are explored in detail.
Locally the structures of two  perturbation -deformed  probability
 currents are different,
one is explicitly potential dependent; the other is  not.
But their total contributions  to the whole space are the same.
 
PACS: 03. 65. -w 03. 65. ca

Keywords: -deformed dynamics, currents, perturbation structures 

 E-mail address:  jzzhang@ecust.edu.cn

 jzzhang@physik.uni-kl.de

Recently  the -deformed quantum theory, as a possible
modification of the ordinary quantum theory at extremely small
space scale, say, much smaller than   cm, has obtained
attention. In literature different frameworks of -deformed
quantum theories were established. In order
to establish a consistent framework in -deformed quantum
theories three delicate points must be considered: the
construction of the simultaneous hermitian position and momentum
operators; the establishment of the correspondence of the position
and momentum operators to the -deformed annihilation and
creation operators; and the reduction of the -deformed
annihilation and creation operators to the undeformed ones. In the
framework of the -deformed Heisenberg algebra developed in
Refs.  the above three aspects are
investigated in detail. This framework is self-consistent. New
features, both in the uncertainty relations and dynamics,
 in this framework are explored.
The -deformed uncertainty relation essentially deviates from
the Heisenberg one: Heisenberg's
minimal uncertainty relation is undercut. In a special
-deformed squeezed states  a new critical phenomenon  is
explored: at a critical point the variance of one
component of a quadrature of light field approaches zero, but the
variance of the conjugate component remains finite. Such critical
phenomenon  is forbidden by Heisenberg's uncertainty relations,
but allowed by the -deformed uncertainty relations. In dynamics
the non-perturbation energy spectrum of the -deformed
Schrodinger equation exhibits an exponential structure
 with new degrees of freedom and new
quantum numbers.
 Using such  an exponential structure the spectrum of quark-lepton is
 explained.
In the perturbation aspects the -deformed dynamics also
exhibits a new feature: the perturbation expansion of the
-deformed Hamiltonian possesses complicated structures, which
amount to additional momentum-dependent interactions
.
 Furthermore, corresponding to two ways of realizing the -deformed
operators by the undeformed ones there are two -perturbation
momentum-dependent Hamiltonians,
one originates from the perturbation expansion of the potential in one
configuration  space,
the other  originates from the perturbation expansion of the kinetic energy
 in the other configuration  space.
At the level of operators, they are different. But they contribute
the same shifts to the undeformed energy spectrum.
.

In this paper the non-perturbation and perturbation structures of
the -deformed probability currents are investigated.
The study of the perturbation -deformed currents  explores that
the essential deviation of the -deformed quantum mechanics from
the ordinary quantum mechanics is in their local  structure.
The perturbation  structures of the -deformed probability currents
in  these two -perturbation approaches are investigated in detail.
 In one approach the components of the -deformed  perturbation
probability current possess different ranks, describing space
derivatives of different order of the corresponding sub-current of
different levels. Locally the structures of two perturbation
-deformed   probability
 currents are different,
one is explicitly potential dependent;  the other is not.
But their total contributions  to the whole space are the same.

In the following we first review the background of the -deformed dynamics.
In terms of the -deformed phase space variables -
position and momentum operators  and 
the following -deformed Heisenberg algebra has been
developed:
 
where  and  are hermitian and  is unitary:
, , .
Compared to the Heisenberg algebra the operator  is a new member,
called scaling operator.
Necessity of introducing the operator  is as follows.

Simultaneous hermitian of   and   is a delicate point in
the -deformed dynamics.
Definition of algebra
() is based on definition of the hermitian momentum
operator .
However, if  is assumed to be a hermitian operator in a Hilbert space
the -deformed derivative 
which codes non-commutativity of space, shows that
 the usual quantization rule  does not yield a
hermitian
momentum operator. A hermitian momentum operator  is related to
 and  in a nonlinear way by introducing a scaling operator
 
where  is the conjugate of .
The operator  is introduced in the definition of the hermitian
momentum,
thus it closely relates to properties of dynamics and plays an
essential role in the -deformed quantum mechanics.
Nontrivial properties of   imply that the algebra ()
has a richer structure than the Heisenberg commutation relation.
In Eq. () the parameter  is a fixed real number.
It is important to make distinctions for different realizations of
the -algebra by different ranges of  values.
Following Refs.   we only consider the case

 in this paper. The reason is that such choice of  the parameter 
leads to consistent dynamics.
In the limit  the scaling operator  reduces
to a unit operator, thus the algebra () reduces to
the Heisenberg commutation relation.

Such defined hermitian momentum  leads to the -deformation effects,
which are exhibited by the dynamical equation.
Eq. () shows that the  momentum  depends  non-linearly
on  and .
Thus the -deformed
Schrodinger equation is difficult to treat.
The perturbation treatment of the -deformed Schrodinger equation
is based on realizing the -deformed operators  ,  and  
by undeformed variables.
There are two pairs of  undeformed variables.

(I) Variables ,  of the ordinary quantum mechanics,
where ,  satisfy:
, ,
 .
The -deformed operators ,  and  are related to ,
 by:
 
where  and
 is the -deformation of , defined by
.
It is easy to check that such defined ,  and  satisfy
Eq. ().

(II) Variables  and  of an undeformed algebra,
which are obtained by a  transformation
of  and :
 
where
 
 Such defined variables  and  also satisfy
undeformed algebra: , and 
,. Thus
. The operator  is
non-unitary: Using   and
 we have
* 
Though the transformation  maintains the
commutation relation  the essential point is
that it does not  maintain the inner product 
 It is not clear whether  leads
to the same physical consequences in the  system
and the  system. A detailed study of
perturbation aspects in these two systems is necessary. The
-deformed operators ,  and  are related to  
 and  as follows:
 
with  defined by Eq. () for variables
(, ).
From Eqs. ()-() it follows that ,
 and  satisfy Eq. ().
 and Eq. ()  is equivalent to Eq. ().

Now we first consider the non-perturbation probability
current of the -deformed dynamics.

The -deformed phase space (, ) governed by the
-algebra () is a -deformation of the phase
space (, ) of the ordinary quantum mechanics, thus
all the machinery of the ordinary quantum mechanics can be applied
to the -deformed quantum mechanics. It means that dynamical
equations of a quantum system are the same for the undeformed
operators and for the -deformed operators (, ). That is,
the time-dependent Schrodinger equation with the -deformed
Hamiltonian   is 
 Using Eqs. ()
and (), we rewrite  as
 
where  then it follows that the
-deformed continuity equation of the  probability conservation
reads

where the position probability density 
 the q-deformed probability current
density is
 
Because of Eq. () the second term in Eq. ()
is written as 


 not as 


 In the
above  is the q-deformed
partial derivative with the bracket.

(From Eq. () of the q-derivative it follows
that
*) 
where the q-deformed partial derivative 
 with the bracket
 is defined as
* 
The q-deformed partial derivative for function  which has well
defined Tailor expansion, reads
* 
Notice that in the first term the variable of the function  is  
where the  q-deformed partial derivative 
 with the bracket is  defined as
* 
When  the  q-deformed partial derivative with the
bracket reduces to undeformed one, 
 and 
 The q-deformed Leibniz rule  for  is
* 
Notice again that in the second term the variable of the function  is
 
This leads to a involved structure of the q-deformed current. 

When , the scaling operator  reduces to the unit
operator, thus the q-deformed current term  reduces to the
ordinary probability current density 



In the above  is the q-deformed source term,
 
Similar to Eq. ()

the second term in Eq. () is written as




 not as 


 The local conservation of the
probability requires that the source term  should vanish.
This inference can be drawn from the following considerations. It
is noticed that when  in Eq. () the first
term 

reduces to a real quantity 
 The same conclusion holds
for the second term in Eq. (). The  dependent
operator  is introduced in the definition of the hermitian
momentum  For any value of the parameter  the momentum 
should maintain the same physical property. This requires that for
any value of the parameter  the operator  should be
singularity free and maintain the same analytical property.
Therefore a continuous variation of the parameter  does not
change the real properties of the two terms in Eq. (),
the two terms exactly cancel each other which leads to 

Now we  discuss the  perturbation -deformed probability
currents.

If the -deformed quantum mechanics is a realistic physical theory
at  short distances much smaller than  cm,
its correction to the ordinary quantum mechanics must be extremely small
 in the energy range of nowadays experiments.
This means that the parameter  must be extremely close to one,
the  perturbation investigation of the -deformed dynamics is
meaningful. So we can let  with  and it
is accurate enough in the perturbation expansion to the order


In the  (, ) system from Eq. () it follows
that
  is represented as a  non-linear function of (, ):
 
Using Eq. (), to the order  the
perturbation expansion of  reads
 
For regular potentials  which are singularity free, to the
order  in the perturbation expansion, such potentials can be
expressed by the undeformed variables (, ) as
 
where the perturbation Hamiltonian is
 

In the  (, ) system using Eq. ()
the perturbation expansions of the momentum  and the kinetic energy
 to the order  read
 
 
where the  perturbation Hamiltonian is
 
From Eqs. (),  (), ()
and
(),
it follows that the perturbation expansion of the -deformed Hamiltonian
  can be written down
in the   system
or the  system.
In  the   system we have
 
in the   system we have
 
In the above
 
is the corresponding undeformed Hamiltonian in the  system,
where  represents
 or .

Eqs. () and () show that the above two
perturbation Hamiltonians 
and
 originate,  separately, from
the perturbation expansions  of the potential and the kinetic energy.
At the level of operator they are different.

In the (, ) system, to the order  from
the -deformed Schrodinger equation with
the Hamiltonians  (), () and
 ()
we obtain
 
 The terms with 
lead to the undeformed  current



in the  system. The terms with 
 lead to the perturbation
contribution of the -deformed current. The perturbation
structure of the -deformed current is involved.
 As an example, we show the perturbation structure
 contributed by the term  
in Eq. ()  in detail.
 
where
 

 

 

 
In the above  is the
-deformed probability source from the terms 
  Summing the total contributions
of  we find that the
contributions to  from the terms 
 and 
 in Eq. ()
 exactly cancel each other.
Thus the -deformed continuity equation of the probability conservation is



where the perturbation -deformed current
 is
 
The perturbation -deformed current  possesses
different components  A current is called the basic
current if it is not a space derivative of another current. The
currents 
 are the basic current. A current is called the
composed current with 's sub-currents if it is space
derivatives of  order of a basic current. The currents 
is a composed current with one sub-current  The
composed current  includes two sub-currents: the current
 and the effective sub-current

 Thus  can be
written as  or
 The currents
  and  are at
different levels: the basic current  is at the
deepest level because it has not a substructure;  is at
the highest level because it has two substructures. The index 
in  is called "rank" , i.e. the "rank" refers to the
number of the sub-currents included in 

In the  system  from Eqs. (),
 () and  (),
to the order  the corresponding perturbation -deformed
current   is
 

Locally the structures of   and
 are different.
The current  is explicitly potential dependent.
But the  potential is not explicitly included in the current

Because the wave function  is  potential dependent,
the current  is implicitly  potential dependent.

A question arises:  whether the two  currents
  and 
globally lead to the same result in physics?
The question is answered by the following theorem.

Perturbation Equivalence Theorem of -Deformed Currents 
The total contributions of the two
currents  and 
 to the whole space are the same.

First we notice that for  the eigenstate  of the
undeformed Hamiltonian 
 
it is natural to assume that the structure of the undeformed wave function

in the configuration space  and
the structure of the undeformed wave function

in the configuration space  are the same.

Now the demonstration of the equivalence theorem is simple.
Integrating  and
, respectively, in configuration
spaces  and  we obtain their total
contributions  to the whole space (for our purpose common
numerical factor is not important)
 
and
 
In the undeformed stationary state  we have
 
Using Eq. () and considering the cases of ( ),
( ),  and ( ), we have
 

 

 
Putting these three equations in Eq. (), shows
that the integral of Eq. () is just the integral
of Eq. ().

Furthermore, it is clarified that the time evolution of the
-deformed dynamics  and the perturbation shifts of the energy
spectrum  are the same in the  system and the
 system. We conclude that the
 system and  the  system are
equivalent in describing the -deformed dynamics.

In the ordinary quantum theory, there is only a trivial
transformation of canonical variables  which remains
commutation relations. But unlike the ordinary quantum theory, in
the -deformed quantum theory there is a  non-trivial
transformation  among two pairs of the undeformed variables which
remains the commutation relations. The operator  
defined by Eq. ()
 is non-unitary.
It is a variable transformation between  two undeformed variables
 and ;
it should be distinguished from a unitary transformation in a
Hilbert space.
Thus it is not clear whether two perturbation formulations in
the  system and the  system
are equivalent.
It is interesting to clarify that though locally the structures
of two -deformed  perturbation probability currents
are different,
but their total contributions  to the whole space are the same.

The structures of the perturbation -deformed currents  show
that the essential deviation of the -deformed quantum mechanics
from the ordinary quantum mechanics is in their local 
structure. Further exploration of novel local properties in the
-deformed quantum mechanics is promising.


  This work has been supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(Germany).
 The author would like to thank  W. Ruhl for helpful discussions.
 His work has also been supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under the grant number 10074014 and by the Shanghai
Education Development Foundation.



 99 

J. Schwenk and J. Wess,

Phys. Lett. B291  (1992) 273.


A. Hebecker, S. Schreckenberg, J. Schwenk, W. Weich and J. Wess,

Z. Phys. C64  (1994) 355.


A. Lorek and J. Wess,

Z. Phys. C67  (1995) 671
[q-alg/9502007].


M. Fichtmuller, A. Lorek and J. Wess,

Z. Phys. C71  (1996) 533
[hep-th/9511106].


A. Lorek, A. Ruffing and J. Wess,

Z. Phys. C74  (1997) 369
[hep-th/9605161].


B. L. Cerchiai, R. Hinterding, J. Madore and J. Wess,

Eur. Phys. J. C8  (1999) 547
[math.qa/9809160].



A. J. Macfarlane,

SU(2)-Q,"
J. Phys. A22  (1989) 4581.


L. C. Biedenharn,

J. Phys. A22  (1989) L873.


C.-P. Sun and H. Fu,

Representation,"
J. Phys. A22  (1989) L983;



M. Chaichian and P. Kulish,

Phys. Lett. B234  (1990) 72;


P.P. Kulish and E.V. Damashinsky, J. Phys. A23 (1990) L415;


M. Arik and D. D. Coon,

J. Math. Phys. 17  (1976) 524.


S. Codriansky, Phys. Lett. A184 (1993) 381.

A. Kempf,

symmetry,"
J. Math. Phys. 35  (1994) 4483
[hep-th/9311147].


R.J. McDermott and A.I. Solomon, J. Phys. A 27 (1994) L15.

C.A. Nelson and M.H. Fields, Phys. Rev. A51 (1995) 2410.

Jian-zu Zhang, Phys. Lett. B440 (1998) 66.

Jian-zu Zhang, Phys. Lett. A262 (1999) 125;

Jian-zu Zhang, Phys. Lett. B477  (2000) 361;


Chin. Phys. Lett. 17  (2000) 91.


P. Osland and Jian-zu Zhang,

Ann.Phys. (N. Y.) C290  (2001) 45
[hep-th/0010176].

Jian-zu Zhang and P. Osland,

Euro. Phys. J. C20  (2001) 393
[hep-th/0102014].

Jian-zu Zhang,
Phys. Lett. B517  (2001) 210

 [hep-th/0108111].

Jian-zu Zhang,
Phys. Lett. B539  (2001) 162

 [hep-th/0205125].

Jian-zu Zhang,

Euro. Phys. J. (in press) [hep-th/0211051].

J. Wess and B. Zumino,

Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 18B  (1991) 302.



C. Zachos, Contem. Math. 134 (1992) 351.

C. A. Nelson and M. G. Gartley,

J. Phys. A27  (1994) 3857.


A. I. Solomon and J. Katriel, J. Phys. A26 (1993) 5443.


