










































11  
 
  KUL-TF-2002/13

ITP-UU-03/01

SPIN-03/01


[] supergravity models with stable de Sitter vacua 

Pietro Fre  , Mario Trigiante  and Antoine Van Proeyen 
(Work supported in part by the European Community Marie Curie
Fellowship under contract  HPMF-CT-2001-01276.)   


 Dipartimento di Fisica Teorica, Universita  di Torino,  INFN - Sezione di Torino

via P. Giuria 1, I-10125 Torino, Italy 

 Spinoza Institute, Leuvenlaan 4, NL-3508 Utrecht, The
Netherlands 

 Instituut voor theoretische fysica, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
 B-3001 Leuven, Belgium 

 
In the present talk I shall review the construction
of  supergravity models exhibiting stable de Sitter vacua.
These solutions represent the first instance of stable backgrounds with positive cosmological constant in the framework of extended supergravities (). After briefly reviewing the role of de Sitter space-times in inflationary cosmology, I shall describe the main ingredients which were necessary for the construction of gauged  supergravity models admitting stable solutions of this kind.








Introduction 
De Sitter space-time  can be characterized as the maximally
symmetric solution of Einstein's equations with positive cosmological
constant . -dimensional de Sitter space can be represented as
the hyperboloid in  defined by the following equation:
 
The above geometry in  is a solution of Einstein's equation
in the vacuum with a cosmological constant  (
) or alternatively can be interpreted as the geometry
generated by the interaction with gravity of a system with uniform
energy density  and pressure .One of the
interesting properties of de Sitter space-time is to admit
locally a description in terms of a
FRW metric which in  has the following form:
 
Since the scale factor  fulfils the equation

, the above metric describes  the evolution of a spatially closed
, flat  or open  universe which undergoes an
accelerated expansion.The recent interest attracted by de Sitter space-time
 in the field of cosmology stems from the present
experimental evidence that our universe is expanding at
an accelerated rate and thus can be consistently described as either
being in a  de Sitter regime with  or
evolving towards one. The recent experimental
observations moreover seem to indicate that our universe is spatially
flat  and that the dominating fraction () of its energy
has the form of a dark energy  whose equation of state is close to
. These results corroborate inflationary scenarios (see
 for a review) according to which our universe underwent
stages of accelerated expansion triggered by the slow evolution of a
uniform scalar field  whose energy is dominated by a positive
potential ,  and should account for
the predicted dark energy. These models may have de Sitter critical
points  in which  and the value of
the potential is non vanishing  so as to provide the
effective cosmological constant for the corresponding space-time.Recently, considerable effort has been devoted towards deriving
inflationary models from fundamental theories as string/M-theory. A
field theory framework which is most closely related to string/M-theory
is provided by extended supergravities () and therefore
it is natural as a first step to consider the possible cosmological
models which can be constructed from these latter theories. The high
degree of supersymmetry, which characterizes extended supergravities,
implies that the only way of deforming the action in order to allow for a
non trivial scalar potential is to promote some of the global symmetries
to local symmetries of the theory (gauging ). There are several
instances in the literature of  models
admitting de Sitter solutions,and most of them are constructed by means of a non-compact
gauging.(See for an interpretation of these
non-compact local symmetries in the  theory as the
isometry group of a class of non-compact internal manifolds on which
string/M-theory is dimensionally reduced to four dimensions.)  These
examples have some common features:
 
the Casimir  of the de Sitter isometry group , which measures the scalar mass spectrum in units of  , has an integer spectrum on the scalar excitations:
 
 
there was always a tachyon with  and therefore all these solutions were unstable. 
As shown in in the context of  supergravity the latter is not a general property since a class of models exists which admit stable de Sitter vacua.
 supergravity and gauging 

The general  supergravity ofdescribes a gravitational multiplet coupled to  vector multiplets and
 hyper-multiplets as illustrated in figure .
 
 
=10cm

N2mattern.eps 

 


 
The vector multiplets contain  complex scalar fields  which
span a Special Ka hler manifold  of complex dimension
 while the  real scalars  contained in the hyper-multiplets
are coordinates of a Quaternionic-Ka hler manifold  of
quaternionic dimension . The model describes  vector fields. The
scalar manifold of the theory is
. Its
isometry group   is promoted
to global symmetry group of the field equations and Bianchi identities
once its action is defined as a simultaneous transformation on the scalar
fields  and on the vector of electric  and magnetic
 field strengths. This latter is a generalized
electro-magnetic duality defined by the embedding of  inside
:   
The geometry of  is locally described by the choice of the coordinates  and of a -dimensional section 
of a holomorphic symplectic bundle on , which fixes the coupling between the scalars and the vector field strengths in the action. In terms of   the Ka hler potential has the following  form:
  
In the ungauged version of the theory,
namely when no field is charged with respect to local transformations gauged
by vector fields, no scalar potential is allowed by supersymmetry.
The only way to produce a non trivial scalar potential and therefore non
trivial vacua is to promote a suitable subgroup  of 
which is also global symmetry of the action, to local symmetry. This gauging
procedure roughly consists of the following steps:
 
There have to exist vector fields transforming under  in the co-adjoint representation. They will become gauge vectors associated with the generators of  Minimal couplings are introduced by substituting ordinary derivatives with covariant ones. A different coupling constant

 is associated with each simple factor in . 
Supersymmetry invariance of the theory requires the addition to the action of fermion mass terms and of a scalar potential  while the fermion supersymmetry transformations have to be modified by adding suitable shifts (fermion shifts). 
 Duality invariance is broken by the gauging procedure since
the minimal couplings involve only the elementary vector fields and not their duals.  The action of the gauge group  on  is described in terms of Killing vectors
 fulfilling the following commutation
relation: 
,  being the  structure constants of
. Each vector  can be expressed in terms of
tri-holomorphic  moment maps , where
 run over the adjoint representation of the SU-holonomy
group of . The   following condition must hold:
 
where  is the curvature of the SU bundle over
. In absence of hyper-multiplets (), 
is trivially zero and we can have a solution of eq. ()
with :
 
Constant moment maps fulfilling the above relation appear in the action
as coefficients of Fayet-Iliopoulos terms. Non trivial solutions of eq.
()
 exist only in correspondence to the following simple factors inside :
 
The scalar potential is bilinear in the fermion shifts and the only
negative contribution is related to the gravitino:
 
 models with stable dS vacua 

Let us discuss now the minimal ingredients which were found into be necessary for the construction of an  model with a
stable dS vacuum, restricting for simplicity to the case  in which
no hyper-multiplets are present.
 
Choice of a Special Ka hler manifold of the form:
 
to parametrize using the Calabi-Vesentini coordinates
 () in terms of which the upper
and lower components of the symplectic section have the form:
  
The presence in the gauge group  of two simple factors   of which , with coupling constant , has to be non-compact  and non-abelian  and , with coupling constant , has to admit a Fayet-Iliopoulos term. The only choice for  is  while  can be either  or . The F. I. term corresponding to  has then to be added to the Lagrangian 
Generalize the choice of the symplectic section by rotating the symplectic embedding of  with respect to . This is done
by means of a rotation  which acts on the symplectic section  and has the  following properties:
 
Since by construction  is not in , its
effect is to map theories that are equivalent at the ungauged 
level. A similar rotation was introduced by de Roo and Wagemans in the
context of  supergravity to
generalize the construction of models with (unstable) de Sitter and
anti-de Sitter vacua. 
In the sequel we shall analyse three models in which the above
prescriptions are adopted and comment on the structure of their vacua.
Model n.1: three vector multiplets 
To start with, we shall consider the simplest model, which describes
supergravity coupled to  vector multiplets and no hyper-multiplet.
There are four vector fields , three of them from the
vector multiplets plus the graviphoton in the gravity multiplet. The
Calabi-Vesentini coordinates are denoted by . The
global symmetry group , which is the isometry group of the
scalar manifold, is . The embedding of
 in , which defines its action as an
electro-magnetic duality, is fixed by the choice of the
Calabi-Vesentini symplectic frame. In particular, only the 
 factor in  is a symmetry of the action, since as a
duality transformation group it does not change
 electric charges into magnetic ones.
The gauge group therefore has to be chosen within  and
according to the prescriptions given above, the only possibility is
. The vector fields transform
in the  of  which decompose with respect to
 into the direct sum of the adjoint of  and
the adjoint of . Accordingly, the  invariant
metric  splits into the Cartan-Killing forms of
, , and of , 
. Next, we rotate the symplectic embedding of  with
respect to  by acting on the symplectic section 
with the following transformation:
 
The above matrix commutes with the gauge group and acts non trivially
only on the entry corresponding to the  generator. We then
introduce the F.I. term for the   factor:
.The
resulting scalar potential turns out to be positive and  to be a
flat direction. We also observe that  and
the expression of the potential at  is:
 
It is positive since  is the positivity domain of the Lagrangian. It has an extremum at:

The second term in () contains  the F. I. term. We may now
appreciate the importance of the F. I. term and of the symplectic
rotation  in order for the potential to have a critical
point at finite . The extremal value of  is:
 
We have therefore found a plane of de Sitter critical points parametrized
by . In figure , the potential is plotted
against .
 
 
=10cm

potential2.eps 

 


 
In these critical points there is a BEH mechanism at work according to
which the  excitations are "eaten" by the vectors  and
 gauging the  non-compact generators, which then
acquire a mass . There are thus no massless scalar excitations
in the effective theory at any of these critical points and the scalar
mass spectrum corresponds to the eigenvalues  of the de Sitter
Casimir . Therefore this model admits a plane of stable  de
Sitter vacua with  residual symmetry.
Models n.2 and 3: five vector multiplets without and with coupling to hyper-multiplets 
We have also considered a model with  and  in which the six
vector fields gauge the group 
. According to our prescription the symplectic embedding of the
 factor is rotated with respect to  and an
 F.I. term is introduced. The resulting potential has
similar features as in model n.1, namely there is a plane parametrized by
 of stable de Sitter vacua, this time with residual
symmetry , in which the  excitations
are Goldstone bosons for the non-compact gauge transformations. The
scalar mass spectrum is described by the same positive 
eigenvalues.In a third model we have introduced two
hyper-multiplets:  and . The quaternionic manifold is
 and the
gauge group is 
, that is we
choose  to have a diagonal action on the scalars in the
vector multiplets and in the hyper-multiplets. The same symplectic
rotation is performed as in model n.2. In this case we observe that on
the hypersurface    and 
has the same form as in model n.2. Moreover the moment maps at 
provide effective  F. I. terms which in model n.2 had to be
introduced by hand. As in model n.2 we find de Sitter vacua with residual
symmetry  in which a BEH mechanism involving a
combination of the excitations along  and along a direction in the
quaternionic manifold is at work. Nevertheless there are still zero modes
in the quaternionic sector and the scalar mass spectrum corresponds to
the values . Therefore, a definite statement about stability
of these vacua would require the computation of quantum corrections.In all the three models considered above, supersymmetry is completely
broken on the de Sitter solution. This is a general feature of de Sitter
solutions in supergravity.
Conclusions 
The models constructed above are the only instance of extended supergravities
with stable de Sitter vacua and which therefore can provide from the point of view of cosmology a description of the present stage of evolution of our
universe as driven towards a stable de Sitter regime.
It is a challenging problem to lift these models to higher supersymmetry theories like  which have a closer relation to string/M-theory.
 In these latter theories, with respect to the  case, there is
an even more severe restriction on the possible gaugings imposed by supersymmetry. In
 particular although in the  theory new interesting gaugings have been recently found, ,, it is an open question whether symplectic rotations of the kind  are allowed at all. A systematic analysis of this symplectic
freedom and of viable gaugings in maximal supergravities is given in
. Another interesting problem would be to
understand why in all the known examples of de Sitter solutions in
extended supergravities
 the scalar mass spectrum  appears to be quantized in units of the cosmological constant.
References 
 10 
 Riess A G et al.  1998 Astron. J.  116 1009, Perlmutter S et al.  1999 Astron. J.  517  565, Sievers J L  et al.  2002 Preprint  astro-ph/0205387
 Kallosh R, Linde A, Prokushkin S, Shmakova M 2002  Preprint  hep-th/0208156
 Linde A D 1990 Particle Physics and Inflationary Cosmology  (Switzerland: Harwood Academic)
 de Wit B, Lauwers P G, Philippe R and Van Proeyen A 1984 Phys. Lett.  B 135  295, Castellani L, Ceresole A, Ferrara S, D'Auria R, Fre  P and Maina E 1986 Nucl. Phys.  B 268  317,  Gates S J and Zwiebach B 1983 Phys. Lett  B 123  200, Hull C M and Warner N P  1985 Nucl. Phys.   B 253  675
 de Roo M and Wagemans P 1985
  Nucl. Phys.  B262  644
 Hull C M and Warner N P 1988 Class. Quantum Grav. 
5  1517,  Gibbons G W and Hull C M 2001 Preprint  hep-th/0111072
 Kallosh R 2002 Preprint  hep-th/0205315
 Kallosh R, Linde A, Prokushkin S, Shmakova M 2002 Phys. Rev. D  65  105016
 Fre  P, Trigiante M and Van Proeyen A 2002 Class. Quantum Grav.  19  4167
 de Wit B, Lauwers P G and Van Proeyen A 1985
Nucl. Phys. B255  569
Andrianopoli L, Bertolini M, Ceresole A, D'Auria R, Ferrara S,
Fre P and Magri T 1997 J. Geom. Phys.  23  111
 Andrianopoli L, D'Auria R, Ferrara F and Lledo M A 2002 JHEP  0207  010
 Hull C M 2002 Preprint  hep-th/0204156
 de Wit B, Samtleben H and Trigiante M 2002 Preprint  hep-th/0212239 

