


6.1in

8.70in
.03 in
.03in

.03in
Anomaly puzzle in  supersymmetric electrodynamics as
artifact of dimensional reduction. 

K.V.Stepanyantz E-mail:  


 

Moscow State University, physical faculty,

department of theoretical physics.
, Moscow, Russia 



 
Calculations of the two-loop -function for  supersymmetric
electrodynamics are compared for regularizations by higher derivatives
and by the dimensional reduction. The renormalized effective action are
found to be the same for both regularizations. However, unlike the
dimensional reduction, the higher derivative regularization does not
lead to anomaly puzzle, because it allows to perform correct calculation
of diagrams with insertions of counterterms. In particular, using this
method a contribution of diagrams with insertions of counterterms is
calculated exactly to all orders. This contribution appears to be 0 if
the theory is regularized by the dimensional reduction. We argue, that
this result follows from mathematical inconsistency of the dimensional
reduction and is responsible for the anomaly puzzle.





Introduction. 


It is well known, that in
supersymmetric theories the axial and the trace of the energy-momentum
tensor anomalies are components of a chiral scalar supermultiplet.
Adler-Bardeen theorem asserts that there
are no radiative corrections to the axial anomaly beyond the one-loop
approximation, while the trace anomaly is proportional to the
-function to all orders. Therefore this
seems to imply, that the -function in supersymmetric theories
should be exhausted by the first loop. It really takes
place in models with  supersymmetry. However explicit
perturbative calculations find higher order corrections to the
-functions of  supersymmetric theories, regularized by
dimensional reduction. This contradiction
is usually called "anomaly puzzle".

Many papers are devoted to attempts of solving the anomaly puzzle in
supersymmetric theories. For example, in the anomaly puzzle
is argued to be a consequence of the difference between usual and
Wilsonian effective actions. In particular, the authors noted, that the
nontrivial contribution to the -function come from the so-called
Konishi anomaly. Investigation of this
contribution in and investigation of instanton contributions
in lead to construction of the so called exact
Novikov, Shifman, Vainshtein and Zakharov (NSVZ) -function.
For  supersymmetric electrodynamics considered in this paper
the NSVZ -function has the following form:

 

where  is the anomalous dimension of the matter superfield.
Explicit perturbative calculations using regularization by the dimensional
reduction (DRED) verify the NVSZ -function up to two-loop order.
Nevertheless, three loop results obtained in
 do not agree with the NSVZ
-function. However this disagreement can be eliminated
by a special choice of renormalization scheme, a possibility of such
choice being highly nontrivial. In principle it is
possible to relate  scheme and NSVZ scheme order
by order in the perturbation theory.

A very simple and beautiful solution of anomaly puzzle, different from the
solution of, was presented in. The main idea of
this paper is that the higher order corrections in NSVZ -function
are due to anomalous Jacobian under the rescaling of the fields done in
passing from holomorphic to canonical normalization. In the case of
supersymmetric electrodynamics holomorphic normalization means, that the
renormalized action is written as

 

while in the canonical normalization

 

In the former case the -function is supposed to be exhausted at
the one loop, while in the latter case it coincides with the NVSZ result.
In principle this solution is different from the one, given by Shifman
and Vainshtein. Moreover, it contradicts to the results of explicit
two-loop calculations, made by dimensional reduction. The authors of
 supposed, that in the holomorphic normalization the
-function is exhausted at the one loop if one uses higher
covariant derivative regularization, supplemented
by the Pauli-Villars. It is known, that this regularization
always yields the same result for one-loop logarithmic divergences as the
dimensional regularization (reduction). Explicit two-loop calculations
for theories, regularized by higher derivatives (HD), were made first in
 for  supersymmetric electrodynamics and gave zero
two-loop contribution to the -function. This result implies absence
of anomaly puzzle in view of the solution proposed in.
However it is not quite clear why different regularizations give different
results for the scheme independent two-loop -function.
In principle, in we noted, that using of the higher derivative
regularization leads to a nontrivial contribution of diagrams with
insertions of one-loop counterterms, which is absent for dimensional
reduction. However the detailed analysis of this result was not yet made.

In this paper calculation of diagrams with insertions of counterterms
is analyzed for the DRED and HD regularization. DRED technique proposed
by Siegel consists of continuing in the number of space-time
dimensions from 4 to , where  is less than 4, but keeping the
numbers of components of all other tensors fixed. It is important to note,
that such regularization is mathematically inconsistent.
As a consequence, a straightforward application of DRED to the calculation
of axial anomaly gives incorrect zero result, because DRED does not break
chiral symmetry. It is necessary to stress an essential difference between
the DRED and the dimensional regularization (DREG), which is mathematically
consistent and allows to calculate anomalies. In principle,
it is possible to calculate axial anomaly even within the DRED technique.
However, for this purpose it is necessary to impose some mathematically
inconsistent conditions, for example 
. Another possibility is an attempt to go to  in the
DRED scheme, that also leads to some contradictions.

In the present paper we argue, that the above mentioned contradictions
of DRED lead to the incorrect result for the sum of diagrams with
insertions of counterterms and, therefore, for the -function. These
arguments are confirmed by comparison between calculations of the two-loop
-function for the  supersymmetric electrodynamics by DRED and
HD regularization.

The paper is organized as follows:

In section  we consider  supersymmetric
electrodynamics and different ways of its regularization. In particular,
in this section we remind main contradictions of DRED, pointed out by
Siegel. Calculation of the two-loop contribution to the
-function and relationship between this contribution and Konishi
anomaly are analyzed in section  using different
regularizations. In section  the sum of diagrams with
insertions of counterterms on the matter lines regularized by HD is
calculated exactly to all orders. Section contains some concluding remarks. Finally, appendix contains a derivation
of the exact result for a sum of diagrams with insertions of counterterms.



Supersymmetric electrodynamics and its regularization. 

 supersymmetric electrodynamics. 


 supersymmetric electrodynamics in the superspace is described
by the following action:

 

Here  and  are chiral superfields

 

where .
Two Majorana spinors  and  form one Dirac spinor

 

 in () is a real superfield

 

where, in particular,  is an Abelian gauge field. The superfield
 in the Abelian case is defined by

 

where  is the supersymmetric covariant derivative

 



Higher derivative regularization. 


In order to regularize model () by HD its action should
be modified as follows:

 

Note, that in the Abelian case the superfield  is gauge invariant,
so that the higher derivative term contains usual derivatives.

Quantization of () can be made using
standard technique described in and is not considered here.
It is necessary to mention only that the gauge invariance was fixed by
adding of

 

where

 

After adding of such terms the free part of the action for the
superfield  is written in the most simple form

 

In the Abelian case diagrams containing ghost loops are certainly absent.

The superficial degree of divergence for the model
() is equal to (see e.f.)

 

where  is a number of loops and  is a number of external
-lines. According to () divergences
remain in one-loop diagrams even for . In order to regularize
these divergences it is necessary to insert in the generating functional
Pauli-Villars determinants:

 

where

 

and the coefficients  satisfy equations

 

Below we will assume, that , where  are some
constants. Insertion of Pauli-Villars determinants allows to cancel
remaining divergences in all one-loop diagrams, including diagrams
with insertions of counterterms.

In our notations the generating functional  is defined by

 

and an effective action is obtained by making a Legendre transformation:

 

where ,  and  is to be eliminated in terms of
,  and , through solving equations

 

Due to the supersymmetric gauge invariance

 

where  is an arbitrary chiral scalar superfield, the renormalized
action can be written as

 

Here  is a renormalized coupling constant, while
the bare coupling constant  is given by

 

and does not depend on .

Having obtained , it is possible to find the -function
and the anomalous dimension, which in our notations are defined by

 



Dimensional reduction and dimensional regularization. 


Although HD regularization can be easily applied to calculations of
quantum corrections in the supersymmetric electrodynamics
, use of this regularization encounters considerable
technical difficulties in non-Abelian gauge theories due to complicated
structure of vertexes. That is why the HD regularization was not applied
to calculations so often as the DREG or DRED.

In the DREG method calculations of quantum corrections are formally
performed in the space-time with dimension . However this method
is not well-suited for supersymmetric theories, because DREG does not
preserve invariance of the action with respect to the supersymmetry
transformations. The reason is that a necessary condition for
supersymmetry is equality of Bose and Fermi degrees of freedom, which
can take place only for integer .

A modification of DREG so as to render it compatible with supersymmetry
was made by Siegel. According to Siegel's method the 
Lagrangian is dimensionally reduced to  dimensions. Then a vector
 is split into an  component vector  and
 "-scalars" , but the total number
of bosons remains  independent. It is important, that the dimension 
should be less than 4, so that

 

where  is 4-dimensional Kronecker symbol and
 is -dimensional Kronecker symbol.

However as pointed out in there remain ambiguities with
dimensional reduction associated with treatment of the Levi-Civita symbol.
For example, the product

 

depends on a way of calculation and can be equal either to  or to

 

Therefore the dimension reduction is mathematically consistent only for
integer . Moreover, if  the -matrix should be
chosen so that

 

As a consequence it is possible obtain (see for details),
that

 

Due to () both gauge and chiral symmetries are
unbroken. In DREG this problem can be solved by use of  with the
following properties:

 

which allow to derive the axial anomaly unambiguously.
Nevertheless (see review and references therein)
DRED is usually believed to be a satisfactory regularization for
supersymmetric theories. From the practical point of view in order
to perform calculations by DRED it is necessary to use 4-dimensional
algebra of -matrices and calculate the remaining integrals
in the dimension .



Calculation of the two-loop -function. 

Two-loop Feynman diagrams. 


Feynman diagrams giving nontrivial contributions to the two-loop
-function for  supersymmetric electrodynamics are presented
at Figure . These diagrams can be naturally
divided into three parts:

1. one-loop diagrams (1) and (2);

2. two-loop diagrams (without subtraction diagrams) (3) - (8);

3. subtraction diagrams (9) - (12), containing insertions of one-loop
counterterms.



Higher derivatives regularization. 


Divergent part of the two-loop effective action for  supersymmetric
electrodynamics was obtained in(In contributions of diagrams (1) - (8) was
found correctly, but the contribution of diagrams (9) - (12) was
omitted.) . The result is

 

where

 

is a one-loop result,

 

is a sum of diagrams (3) - (8) without contributions of Pauli-Villars
fields,

 

is a contribution of diagrams (3) - (8) with internal loop of
Pauli-Villars fields and

 

is a sum of diagrams (9) - (12), which have insertions of the one-loop
counterterms.

According to the calculations performed in contribution
() is finite and does not affect divergent part of the effective
action. It is important, because some diagrams with Pauli-Villars loop
in principle can contain divergencies. However, Pauli-Villars
regularization always implies existence of divergent graphs, but these
divergences should be cancelled in the sum of all diagrams, that
actually takes place in the considered case.

The other contributions in () are
given by

 

The corresponding two-loop contribution to the effective action is
()

 

so that it is not necessary to add any new counterterms for cancellation
of the two-loop divergencies:

 

so that

 

According to equation () this expression
corresponds to the following two-loop -function:

 



Dimensional reduction. 


A result corresponding to (),
obtained by DRED, is given by

 

where

 

Using notations of
 

the two-loop contribution to the effective action, calculated by DRED,
can be written as

 

where a constant  is present because the dimension of the
coupling constant depends on the space-time dimension .

Having calculated the integrals we obtain, that

 

First two terms here correspond to the one-loop integral ,
and the third term corresponds to the two-loop integral .

In order to cancel divergences in  it is necessary
to add counterterms

 

Therefore the DRED -function defined by
() is equal to

 

while the renormalized effective action coincides with the one, obtained
by HD regularization. Unlike () expression ()
agrees with the NSVZ -function ().



Comparison between HD and DRED regularizations. 


Comparing the calculations, described above, we see that the difference
of the -functions comes from the different results for the sum of
diagrams with insertions of one-loop counterterms. In order to understand
why these results are different it is necessary to note, that the sum of
diagrams with insertions of counterterms in the considered approximation
is equal to Konishi anomaly. The existence
of Konishi anomaly can be explained by following arguments:

Let us consider the following expression:

 

Using equation () and (), it is
easy to see, that in components it will contain (among other terms)

 

where the Dirac spinor  is defined by ().
It is well known, that the conservation of the axial
current is broken by quantum corrections and in particular

 

Hence due to the supersymmetry
(Note, that our arguments can not be considered as a derivation
of Konishi anomaly, because () does not contain
all terms of (), proportional to .
A strict derivation of the Konishi anomaly can be found in
. Our goal is only to remind relation between
axial anomaly and Konishi anomaly.) 

 

Performing supersymmetry transformations it is easy to see, that if
imaginary part of a chiral superfield is equal to 0, then this superfield
is a real constant. Therefore, from () we obtain, that

 

Applying

 

to () and taking a real part of the result, we obtain,
that

 

It is important to note, that if the axial anomaly is found to be equal
to 0 due to some reason and the supersymmetry is unbroken, instead of
() we will automatically obtain

 

This takes place if the calculations are made by DRED. Really, if
we calculate supergraphs, then it is impossible to impose requirements
similar to . Therefore, it is necessary
to use original variant of DRED, proposed in with 
and , satisfying (). It means, that the chiral
symmetry is not broken in the regularized theory and anomaly is equal to
0 due to the mathematical inconsistency of DRED. As a consequence Konishi
anomaly is also equal to 0, that, in turn, leads to zero result for the
sum of diagrams with insertions of counterterms. Taking into account that
in the two-loop approximation these diagrams should cancel the other
contributions, DRED leads to a nontrivial two-loop correction and to the
anomaly puzzle.
































Exact result for diagrams with insertions of counterterms. 


In the previous section we found, that the difference between HD and
DRED -functions originated from different results for the sum
of diagrams with insertions of counterterms. In DRED this sum is equal
to zero, because this regularization does not allow to calculate
Konishi anomaly, which can be found correctly by HD regularization.
In order to confirm such arguments in this section a sum of diagrams with
insertion of counterterms is calculated exactly to all orders using
HD regularization.

The result obtained in appendix can be written in the following form:

 

where ,  and  should be eliminated in terms of ,
 and  and

 

(The difference between this definition and ()
is the absence of  in definition of .)

Equation () can be formally
written in the more simple form:

 

Therefore, althought expression
() is rather complicated,
its essence is quite simple: rescaling of  and 
produces a factor

 

From () we conclude, that
the sum of diagrams with insertions of counterterms gives the following
contribution to the -function:

 

Therefore, if the -function obtained by HD regularizarion
is defined by the one-loop approximation, the sum of all diagrams
without insertions of counterterms on the matter lines will give
NSVZ -function (). Such result can be obtain
after rescaling of matter superfields , which
convert renormalized action () to

 

Then the diagrams with insertions of counterterms will be evidently absent.
Such possibility was investigated in by other methods.

Another possibility to obtain () is using of DRED.
In this case the sum of diagrams with insertions of counterterms
is calculated incorrectly and is equal to 0. As a consequence we
obtain anomaly puzzle, which appears as an artifact of mathematical
inconsistency of DRED. However, the renormalized effective action is
the same for both regularizations and the only difference between
these regularizations is a value of the -function.

Note, that if HD regularization leads to the one-loop -function
, the result obtained in DRED will give the NSVZ -function
after redefinition of the coupling constant, that is in agreement with
the results of.

Finally it is necessary to mention, that equations similar to
() were also obtained
in and. However anomalous contribution in
() was not identified with
the sum of diagrams with insertions of counterterms. Nevertheless,
the derivation of this equation presented in is in a certain
degree similar to the derivation, given in this paper.



Conclusion. 


In this paper calculation of the two-loop -function for 
supersymmetric electrodynamics was analyzed for regularizations by DRED
and HD. Now let us summarize the results.

1. Konishi anomaly really gives a nontrivial contribution to the
-function, as it was pointed out in. This anomaly
can be identified with the sum of Feynman diagrams with insertions
of counterterms. Nevertheless, contribution of these diagrams does
not change form of the renormalized effective action.

2. Existence of rescaling anomaly, investigated in, can be
easily explained by the diagram technique: Diagrams with insertions
of counterterms (on lines of matter superfields) are present only if
the renormalized action contains

 

that corresponds to the holomorphic normalization of matter superfields.
After rescaling  such diagrams disappear. Therefore,
due to the Konishi anomaly these transformations will be anomalous.

3. If the -function is calculated by a mathematically consistent
regularization, which does not break supersymmetry, then the anomaly puzzle
is absent (at least at the two-loop level). This means, that the
-function is completely defined by the one-loop approximation.
An example of such regularization is regularization by HD, considered in
this paper. It is important, that HD regularization allows to obtain
an exact expression for the sum of subtraction diagrams, which agrees
with the results found in and from other arguments.
Possibly the NSVZ -function can be obtained if one uses HD
regularization and subtractions at some scale , as it was proposed
in. However, this can be checked only at the three loops,
because starting from the three-loop approximation coefficients of the
-function depend on the renormalization scheme. This work has been
already finished and the corresponding paper is in preparation.

4. Ambiguities of DRED lead to the incorrect result for the axial anomaly
and, as a consequence, for the Konishi anomaly. This, in turn, produces
incorrect -function and the anomaly puzzle. At the present moment
I do not know how to impose requirements like
, allowing to find anomalies by DRED,
within the explicitly supersymmetric technique of calculations.







It is necessary to note, that so far we considered only the Abelian case.
For the supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory using of higher covariant
derivative regularization leads to very involved
calculations, because in this case Feynman rules become much more
complicated. In this case using of usual derivatives can considerably
simplify the calculations. However, such regularization breaks the gauge
invariance. Nevertheless, even in case of noninvariant regularization it
is possible to obtain gauge invariant renormalized effective action by
a special choice of subtraction scheme.
For Abelian supersymmetric theories such scheme was proposed in
. Construction of invariant renormalization
procedure for supersymmetric non-Abelian models is in progress.

Also I would like to mention, that NSVZ -function was obtained
not only in DRED, but also in the differential renormalization (DiffR)
. The calculations were made in for 
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. At present I can not trace the
origin of the multiloop corrections in this case and believe, that it
would be interesting to compare the calculation of this paper with the
corresponding results, obtained in DiffR.





Acknowledgments  

I would like to thank V.A.Novikov, P.I.Pronin, A.A.Slavnov and
A.A.Soloshenko for valuable discussions.





Appendix. 





Exact sum of diagrams with insersions of counterterms. 


In order to prove () it is
necessary to consider 1PI diagrams with insertions of counterterms on
lines of the matter superfield. A sum of diagrams, containing internal
-lines, is finite due to the HD regularization. Hence, nontrivial
contributions can be given only by diagrams with a single loop of matter
superfields without internal -lines. A sum of such contributions can
be calculated exactly. Really, it is easy to see, that the effective line

 

where crosses denote contributions from counterterms, corresponds
to the following propagators:

 

( for  and  lines and  for lines of
Pauli-Villars fields.) The first string of this matrix corresponds
to the propagators , , ,
, the second string corresponds to the propagators
, , , 
e t.c.

These expressions should be substituted to the diagrams

 

where circles denotes the effective vertexes

 

and

 

which are proportional to

 

respectively. Then it is quite evident, that the expression for
diagrams () will differ
from the corresponding expression for usual one-loop diagrams

 

by the substitution  and is equal to

 

Subtracting the result for the one-loop diagrams from this expression
we obtain the following result for the diagrams with insertions of
counterterms:

 

Performing Wick rotation and taking into account that

 

the sum of the considered 1PI diagrams with insertions of counterterms
appears to be

 

It is easy to see, that in terms of the generating functional this
equation can be written as ().



 100 

S.Ferrara, B.Zumino , Nucl.Phys. B 87 , (1975), 207.

T.E.Clark, O.Piquet, K.Sibold , Nucl.Phys. B 143 , 445, (1978).

O.Piquet, K.Sibold , Nucl.Phys. B 196 , 428, (1982).

O.Piquet, K.Sibold , Nucl.Phys.  B 196 , 447, (1982).

S.L.Adler, W.A.Bardeen , Phys.Rev. 182 , 1517, (1969).

L.D.Faddeev, A.A.Slavnov , Gauge fields, introduction to quantum
theory, second edition, Benjamin, Reading, 1990.

S.L.Adler, J.C.Collins, A.Duncan , Phys.Rev. D 15 , 1712, (1977).

V.A.Novikov, M.A.Shifman, A.I.Vainstein, V.I.Zakharov , Phys.Lett.
157B , (1985), 169.

P.S.Howe, K.S.Stelle, P.S.West , Phys.Lett. 124B , (1983), 55.

O.V.Tarasov, V.A.Vladimirov , Phys.Lett. 96 B , 94, (1980).

M.T.Grisaru, M.Rocek, W.Siegel , Phys.Rev.Lett. 45 , 1063,
(1980).

W.Caswell, D.Zanon , Phys.Lett. 100 B , 152, (1980).

M.A.Shifman, A.I.Vainstein , Nucl.Phys. B277 , (1986), 456.

K.Konishi , Phys.Lett. 135B , (1984), 439.

T.E.Clark, O.Piquet, K.Sibold , Nucl.Phys. B159 , (1979), 1.

V.A.Novikov, M.A.Shifman, A.I.Vainstein, V.I.Zakharov , Phys.Lett.
166B , (1985), 329.

L.V.Avdeev, O.V.Tarasov , Phys.Lett. 112 B , (1982), 356.

I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones, C.G.North , Nucl.Phys. B 473 , (1996), 308

I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones, C.G.North , Phys.Lett. 386 B , (1996), 138

I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones, C.G.North , N=1 supersymmetry and the three loop
anomalous dimension for the chiral superfield, hep-ph/9603386.

I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones , Regularization of supersymmetric theories,
hep-ph/ 9707278.

I.Jack, D.R.T.Jones, C.G.North , Nucl.Phys. B 486 , (1997), 479.

N.Arkani-Hamed, H.Mirayama , JHEP 0006 , (2000), 030,
(hep-th/9707133).

A.A.Slavnov , Theor.Math.Phys. 23 , (1975), 3.

T.Bakeyev, A.A.Slavnov , Mod.Phys.Lett. A11 , (1996), 1539.

P.I.Pronin, K.V.Stepanyantz , Phys.Lett. B414 , (1997), 117.

A.A.Soloshenko, K.V.Stepanyantz ,
Two-loop renormalization of  super-symmetric electrodynamics,
regularized by higher derivatives, hep-th/0203118.

A.A.Soloshenko, K.V.Stepanyantz , Teor.Mat.Fiz. 134 ,
(2003), 429.

W.Siegel , Phys.Lett. 84 B , (1979), 193.

W.Siegel , Phys.Lett. 94B , (1980), 37.

G.t'Hooft, M.Veltman , Nucl.Phys. B44 , (1972), 189.

H.Nicolai, P.K.Townsend , Phys.Lett. 93B , (1980), 111.

D.R.T.Jones, J.P.Leveille , Nucl.Phys. B206 , (1982), 473.

P.West , Introduction to supersymmetry and supergravity, World
Scientific, 1986.

G.t'Hooft , Nucl.Phys. B 61 , (1973), 455.

A.A.Soloshenko, K.V.Stepanyantz , Theor.Math.Phys., 131 ,
(2002), 631.

R.Bertlmann , Anomalies in quantum field theory, Clarendon press,
Oxford, 1996.

P.West , Nucl.Phys. B 268 , (1986), 113.

A.A.Slavnov , Phys.Lett. B 518 , (2001), 195.

A.A.Slavnov , Theor.Math.Phys. 130 , (2002), 1.

A.A.Slavnov, K.V.Stepanyantz ,
Universal invariant renormalization for super-symmetric theories,
hep-th/0208006.

D.Z.Freedman, K.Johnson, J.I.Latorre , Nucl.Phys. B371 ,
(1992), 353.

J.Mas, M.Perez-Victoria, C.Seijas , JHEP, 0203 , (2002), 049,
(hep-th/0202082).




12.0truecmd_beta.eps 
Feynman diagrams giving nontrivial contributions to the
two-loop -function. 
 


