





theorem Theorem [subsection]
lemma Lemma [subsection]
coro Corollary [subsection]

 
AEI-2003-002 

hep-th/0301017 

 
Low Level Representations for  and (Contribution to the Proceedings of the Ramanujan International Symposium on Kac-Moody Algebras and Applications, ISKMAA-2002, Jan. 28-31, Chennai, India)  

H. Nicolai, T. Fischbacher 

Max-Planck-Institut fu r Gravitationsphysik,

  Albert-Einstein-Institut

  Muhlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam, Germany
 
nicolai@aei.mpg.de, tf@aei.mpg.de 


 
We work out the decomposition of the indefinite Kac Moody algebras
 and  w.r.t. their respective subalgebras  and 
at low levels. Tables of the irreducible representations with their 
outer multiplicities are presented for  up to level  
and for  up to level . On the way we confirm and extend 
existing results for  root multiplicities, and for the first time 
compute non-trivial root multiplicities of .


Introduction 

In this contribution, we will be mainly concerned with the indefinite
Kac Moody algebras  and  (see for the basic 
theory of Kac Moody algebras). Of these  is hyperbolic (all 
its proper regular subalgebras are either finite or affine), while 
 is not (its regular subalgebra  is neither finite 
nor affine). Consideration of these two algebras is chiefly motivated 
by recent attempts to find out more about the still unknown symmetries 
underlying M-Theory. Following the discovery of a Kac-Moody billiard
and arithmetical chaos in superstring cosmology in, a novel 
one-dimensional -model based on the formal coset  
was proposed in, with  the maximal compact subgroup 
of , and a precise identification was made in a BKL-type 
expansion between the bosonic supergravity fields at a given space 
point and their first spatial gradients on the one hand, and the 
first three levels of  on the other (the emergence of  
in the dimensional reduction of  supergravity 
to one dimension had been conjectured already long ago). 
An alternative proposal was made in, where 
the rank-11 algebra  is conjectured to be the fundamental 
symmetry of M-Theory. It is likewise based on a non-linear realization 
of the relevant "Kac-Moody group", but differs from in 
that it puts more emphasis on spacetime covariance. 

As in (as well as in) our 
investigation is based on a decomposition of these algebras 
w.r.t. to their maximal  subalgebras, namely the two 
algebras  and ,
both of which can be enlarged to the Lie algebras of the full general 
linear groups   and  within  and 
, respectively, by inclusion of the "exceptional" Cartan 
subalgebra generator. This decomposition is organized by means of 
the level , which is the number of times a certain distinguished 
"exceptional" root  appears in the decomposition of a 
given root . The level-0 sectors then consist
of the  and  subalgebras themselves. For the first 
three levels, the representations which appear are of the same type for 
all  with . Namely, the relevant Lie algebra generators are 
 and 
(with the constraint ). The associated 
Dynkin labels are 
 
corresponding to the antisymmetric tensors with three and six indices
for , respectively, and a mixed Young tableau for ;
in the physical interpretation, the first two are associated with the
electric and magnetic excitations of the 3-form field of maximal
 supergravity, while the third can be viewed as dual 
to the graviton. For the finite dimensional
Lie algebras  with , there are no higher level 
representations beyond ; in particular, for , the 
level-3 representation collapses to the  of , and for 
 and  it is absent altogether. For , there are
representations at all levels. While these are easy to classify for ,
a veritable explosion in the number of representations takes place
for , and this will be our main focus here. For the 
hyperbolic algebra , we will obtain the complete list of 
 representations up to level 18; for , we give them up 
to level 10. In principle, these lists can be extended considerably 
further(Actually, the tables are now available up to 
level  for , where we have already 3276 inequivalent
irreducible representations of  with maximum outer
multiplicity equal to 46450629 for the representation . 
Evident lack of space prevents us from presenting the complete 
results here.) .

There is by now a substantial body of work on root multiplicities
of low rank hyperbolic KM algebras, and the corresponding decompositions
of these algebras w.r.t. to certain distinguished affine subalgebras,
starting with the rank 3 hyperbolic algebra studied where 
closed formulas were derived for multiplicities of roots of affine 
level . This work was extended up to affine level 5 
and to other low rank algebras in- and 
-,. A closed formula for the 
 root multiplicities at affine level two was derived 
in (affine levels zero and one being trivial).
The decomposition w.r.t. an affine subalgebra has the advantage of
classifying an infinite number of Lie algebra elements, but only 
"close to the lightcone", and appears rather hopeless beyond the
very first levels. By contrast, the decomposition w.r.t. to a finite 
dimensional algebra yields only a finite amount of information at 
each step, but can be carried to rather high levels. 
Besides, it is of special interest for possible applications 
in string and M-Theory because it yields a concrete realization of 
the algebra in terms of irreducible representations of subgroups 
that have a direct physical interpretation. To penetrate the structure 
of  even further one can try to "intertwine" the representation 
theory of  and , or to exploit the decomposition under its 
principal  subalgebra. As for , and apart
from the  results of (which do not require
knowledge of non-trivial  root multiplicities), our results are
completely new; in particular, this is the first time that
non-trivial  root multiplicities have been calculated.

While our methods are thus by no means sufficient to arrive at a completely 
explicit and manageable realization of these indefinite KM algebras, the 
results of this paper can nevertheless serve as useful "raw data" for 
future investigations. At the very least, they give a very concrete flavor 
of the stunning complexity of these mathematical structures: readers 
should keep in mind that the tables presented here represent only 
the very first steps into a structure, whose complexity will 
forever continue to grow with increasing level as one moves deeper 
and deeper into the lightcone. Even restricting attention to the 
low level representations exhibited here, the task of working out, 
say, the Lie algebra structure constants beyond the very first levels
seems too daunting even to contemplate. From the physics perspective,
the possible link noticed in between the three infinite 
towers of representations () and the spatial gradients
of the bosonic fields of  supergravity is a tantalizing 
hint, but the task of finding a physical interpretation for all the 
other representations remains a major challenge. Realizing the full 
(or ) symmetry probably requires a theory beyond   
supergravity, as it seems very unlikely that these other representations 
simply correspond to auxiliary or Stuckelberg-type degrees of freedom. 
For the time being, however, we must refer readers to the still unknown 
chapter in THE BOOK for the answer to these and other questions!


Roots and Dynkin labels 
The indefinite Kac Moody algebras  and  are 
characterized by the Dynkin diagrams displayed in figs.and  . The simple roots of the respective  
subalgebras will be labeled  (counting from 
left to right); the "exceptional" root connected to  will 
be designated by . Because both algebras are simply laced, 
the associated Cartan matrices are .


 
 

 
 


As in we will decompose both algebras into irreducible
representations of their finite dimensional subalgebras  and 
, respectively. This corresponds to a slicing of the 
forward lightcone in the respective root lattices of  and 
by spacelike hyperplanes; hence the sections will be ellipsoidal
with finitely many roots in each slice . By contrast, slicing
the lightcone by lightlike or timelike hyperplanes would result
in a decomposition w.r.t. an affine or an indefinite subalgebra, 
in both of which cases each slice contains infinitely many roots . 
As already mentioned the corresponding  groups 
are enlarged to , respectively, by inclusion of the
Cartan generator  associated with the exceptional root.

For both algebras any positive root can be expressed as
 
with non-negative integers  and , and  or 
for  and , respectively. The number  is the "level"
and counts the number of occurrences of the exceptional root  
in . It must not be confused with the "affine level" () 
used in the decomposition of  w.r.t. its affine subalgebra 
. There appears to be no useful analog of this
notion for . 

The irreducible representations (or "modules" in more
mathematical language) of  and  are completely 
characterized their Dynkin labels, which are 9-tuples 
 and 10-tuples 
of non-negative integers, respectively, such that the 
corresponding highest weights  are given by
 
for . Here  are the fundamental weights of   
obeying  
with  for , respectively. At the same time, 
 is equal to the number of columns with  vertical boxes 
in the associated Young tableau. The fundamental weights of  
are explicitly given by , where 
 is the inverse Cartan matrix of  (see below). We use small 
Greek letters for the weights of  to distinguish them from the weights 
of , whose fundamental weights  (for )
must in addition satisfy 
and  differ by a vector orthogonal to the simple roots of , 
see below. The explicit relation between the coefficients  
and the Dynkin labels will be derived below.

Each root  comes with a certain root multiplicity 
counting the number of independent Lie algebra elements associated
with . These Lie algebra elements will be split up according
to which representation of  or  they belong to. Any root 
 will therefore also appear as a weight in certain representations 
, with corresponding weight multiplicities . 
Furthermore, any such representation can appear several times, and 
the number of times a representation occurs within a given level 
will be called the outer multiplicity ; the outer multiplicity 
of an admissible representation (i.e. a representation satisfying 
the two conditions () and () below) may be zero. 
We thus have the following picture: the finitely many roots at a given 
level  are superpositions of certain  weight diagrams, each 
one of which may appear several times with a certain outer multiplicity. 

While the relevant representations that can appear are not hard to 
find, the determination of the outer multiplicities is a difficult and 
as yet unsolved problem. Knowing them in closed form would be equivalent
to a complete knowledge of the root multiplicities for indefinite and 
hyperbolic Kac Moody algebras (there is so far not a single example of 
such an algebra for which the root multiplicities are known in closed form)
and would take us a considerable way towards the ultimate goal of
finding an explicit and manageable realization of the full algebra.
All we know is that typically the root multiplicities increase 
exponentially as a function of their length , 
implying similar growth properties for the outer multiplicities.

In fact, the formulas restricting the possible representations
that can appear at level  are easy to deduce and also 
easy to solve, especially with the help of a computer. To begin with, 
the representations which appear at level  must be contained 
in the set of representations obtained by taking the product of the 
level one representation  with all the representations
occurring at level . This is because the level-
generators are generally obtained by commuting the level- 
generators with a level one generator, and this is also how one
quickly derives the representations given in formula ().
However, many of the representations obtained in this way will drop
out, and the method becomes more and more impractical with higher levels. 

A better and much quicker way to derive the admissible representations
is by judicious analysis of the corresponding highest weights.
Indeed, the formula linking the  coefficients  and the Dynkin 
labels of the relevant  or  is quite straightforward 
to deduce. First of all, we notice that the Chevalley generator  
is a highest weight state w.r.t.  or , with Dynkin label 
 because
 
for . The associated highest weight is .
Other highest weight states associated with roots 
 are built from 
multiple commutators 
 
by permuting the Chevalley generators  in all possible ways
and taking suitable linear combinations
 
which are annihilated by the adjoint action of all  for
, i.e.
 
The level of  is the number of  with .
The  module is then built by acting on this state with the Chevalley
generators , where again . The weight of  
follows from
 
An explicit basis of the module  is given in: all
states can be represented in the form
 
with weight labels
 
where the  are ordered according to the prescription given 
in (which is somewhat cumbersome to disentangle for
larger rank).

Setting 

and writing out the relation  we get 
(for )
  
Because this is a highest weight state by assumption, the corresponding
weight  is dominant, hence . Inverting this 
formula, we obtain 
where  are the inverse Cartan matrices of  and ,
respectively. This formula also allows us to express the highest
weight  in terms of the  weights: multiplying by
 and summing over , we get
 
where we have also used the definition of the fundamental  weights.
Hence,
 
Observe that  for  because 
the first term has vanishing scalar product with these simple roots.

The inverse Cartan matrices are, respectively, given by
 
for  and
 
for . Because the entries of  are all positive, and 
because  and  must all be non-negative integers, the formula
() strongly constrains the possible representations for each .

A further constraint derives from the fact that the highest weight
 must be a root; this means that its norm must obey 
 (This is only a necessary but not a sufficient 
criterion for  to be a root, see our discussion of the 
roots in the next section.) .This requirement effectively implements 
the Serre relations. For  it implies
 
For , we have the bound
 
As we will see this constraint again eliminates many further
representations which would still be compatible with ().

An important infinite series of  Lie algebra elements was identified 
in by searching for "affine representations", namely 
those highest weights  for which  in ().
There are three infinite towers of  Lie algebra elements at levels 
 and  (for ) with Dynkin labels 
 
In our tables, these representations are always listed at the very top.
Inserting the Dynkin labels into the above formula we see that
the associated highest weights obey  for all ; since 
 for , the outer multiplicities
are always one. Explicitly, the Lie algebra elements are
 
and were tentatively associated in to the spatial gradients
of the bosonic fields of  supergravity and their duals. There exist
three similar infinite towers  of conjugate (or "transposed") Lie 
algebra elements obtained by acting with the Chevalley involution 
on the above elements. These affine representations are 
distinguished because they contain the affine subalgebra . 
To see this more explicitly, we note that the elements of the latter 
must commute with the central charge of . This requirement is 
equivalent to imposing a "dimensional reduction" on the elements
() by setting  and taking the 
remaining indices . Using the decomposition 
 
of the adjoint of  under its  subgroup, the relevant 
Lie algebra elements are then obtained from this truncated set and 
the generators of the subgroup ; the 
central charge generator  is the remaining diagonal generator 
of .

A second infinite series of admissible affine  representations 
at levels  is characterized by the Dynkin labels
 
It is easy to see that these representations must have 
outer multiplicity zero. The associated roots are
 
where the root  associated with the values 
 is the affine null vector of .
However, there can be no such generator in , because all the  
elements are already contained in the three infinite towers ()
and their transposed towers as we have just shown. 

At low levels the "disappearance" of certain representations can 
be understood as a consequence of the Jacobi identity, which implies 
that any commutator of the form
 
must vanish for arbitrary Lie algebra elements . For instance,
it is easy to see that the representation  drops
out by virtue of (). At higher levels, unfortunately, the 
situation is rather less transparent, and it does not appear that
() is of much use in eliminating representations, except
when it corresponds to a highest weight state for .

For , there are three similar infinite towers with labels
 
and again  with outer multiplicity one for all these
representations. Now, the Lie algebra elements are given by
 
with antisymmetric index pairs , etc. Obviously the 
representations () can again be obtained from those of 
() by dimensional reduction (i.e. setting 
and taking ). However, a physical 
interpretation of these  elements analogous to the one suggested 
in for the representations () appears no longer possible.

Determination of low level  representations 

We next explain how to work out the higher level representations 
that appear in the decompositions of  and  w.r.t. their respective 
 subalgebras. Our results for the representations up to level 
for  and up to level  for  are displayed in the tables 
following this section. The first step in determining 
the representations is to exploit the two conditions () 
and (), which are already quite restrictive by themselves, 
because the -tuples  and  must both 
consist of non-negative integers. Hence () and () 
admit only a finite number of solutions for given , both for 
 and . Furthermore, with the help of a computer these solutions 
are easy to find up to very high levels.

For given , each highest weight  generates a representation
with a corresponding finite weight diagram 
 of , which belongs to an elliptic 
slice of the forward lightcone in the root lattice of .
The weights  come with certain weight multiplicities 
which we designate by  for the representation
. Hence the roots  at a given level make up 
a "stack" of weight diagrams, such that the root multiplicity 
 of  as a root of  is the sum of the multiplicities 
of  as a weight occurring in the various weight diagrams . 
Thus the following formula linking the  root multiplicities 
with the  weight multiplicities is self-evident
 
where  is the -th representation at level , and 
the index  counts the level- representations.
The numbers  are the outer multiplicities 
at level : they count how many times the representation 
 occurs in the decomposition at level .
As far as we know, there does not exist an analog of the Peterson 
recursion formula for the outer multiplicities, which is why we have to 
take the detour via () for their determination.

The only quantities entering formula () which are known 
in full generality, although somewhat cumbersome to work out for
more complicated representations, are the weight multiplicities  
 for the  representations . Given
an  module  with highest weight  
and any weight  (which implies 
) the weight multiplicity 
follows from the Freudenthal recursion formula (see for 
instance)

 
where the first sum on the r.h.s. ranges over all positive roots of .
For the calculation we employ a COMMON LISP implementation of an 
improved version of this formula, using the algorithm described in
. To determine the outer multiplicities of the 
relevant  modules from the  root  multiplicities (as 
far as they are known), we proceed by the method of exhaustion, 
starting with the highest weights obeying  whose 
associated representations always come with outer multiplicity 
one if  is a real root (this is always true for ,
but there may be "spurious real roots" for , see below).
Next, we descend the weight system until we hit a weight 
 whose multiplicity as a root of  
exceeds its multiplicity as a weight in . This root, then,
is a highest weight in a new representation. Consequently, any highest 
weight  for which  may appear as a weight in 
the highest weight module of . However, highest weights  
and  of the same length associated with different labels 
 and   can never appear 
as weights in each other's weight diagram, as this would require 
 with strict inequality for at least one , 
in contradiction with the assumed equality of the norms, implying 
. 

The  root multiplicities can be calculated in principle
from the Peterson recursion formula (see, Exercise 11.12). 
Unfortunately, this formula becomes more and more impractical 
with increasing height due to the large number
of root decompositions one has to take into account, see below.
For , closed formulas exist up to affine level 2(following earlier results for the rank 3 case in).
An implicit formula for the  root multiplicities at affine 
level three was derived in, but we have not been able 
to extract any numbers from it. All  root multiplicities 
up to affine level 6 and height 231 have been tabulated 
in. For , on the other hand, tables of root 
multiplicities have been lacking in the literature so far.

Because the  root multiplicities listed in are a 
crucial ingredient in our calculation, we have performed an 
independent check based on a "brute force" evaluation of the 
Peterson recursion formula rather than the Weyl-orbit 
method employed there (whose description in the appendix 
of seems somewhat obscure in retrospect), confirming
and extending the tables of(Which are now
available up to height 320.) . The Peterson formula reads
 
where
 
and thus requires the decomposition of a given root  
as a sum of two terms, both of which are linear combinations of 
the simple roots with non-negative coefficients (but not necessarily 
roots themselves). For  this procedure boils down to separating 
the possible 's into two classes. The first consists 
of the positive real roots  or their integer multiples up 
to a given height, which is half the height of the root  
whose multiplicity we wish to compute. A complete list of these 
can be generated from the simple roots by applying height increasing 
Weyl reflections (every positive real root can be reached by such 
reflections, cf. Proposition 5.1.e of), and then 
taking all their integer multiples. The second set consists of 
the positive imaginary roots up to the given height. For , this
calculation is greatly simplified by noting that the minimal height
elements in any Weyl orbit belong to the fundamental Weyl chamber. 
So we start from the positive linear combinations of the fundamental 
weights (see) below the given height, and again apply 
height increasing Weyl reflections until we reach the given height.
It is then easy (for the computer, at least) to enumerate all the
possible combinations and to evaluate their contribution to the
r.h.s. of (). We note that the determination of 
the outer multiplicities via the method described above provides
a consistency check on the root multiplicities obtained in this way.
Namely, one can check "experimentally" that in general one gets 
negative outer multiplicities if the wrong root multiplicities
are used in ().

For  matters are more involved, first of all because so far 
no tables of  root multiplicities have been available, and 
secondly because of some additional subtleties which have no
counterpart in  (Properties of these doubly overextended
indefinite Kac-Moody algebras are discussed in, where they
are called "very extended".) . The latter are mainly due to the fact that
the fundamental weight dual to the doubly overextended root 
is spacelike and is no longer a root because it has positive and  
negative fractional coefficients when expressed in terms of the 
simple roots, as well as a disconnected support on the Dynkin 
diagram; explicitly,
 
The remaining fundamental weights are timelike, except for 
which is lightlike (and in fact the same as for ), and also have
fractional coefficients which are, however, all positive with connected
support on the Dynkin diagram. A new phenomenon is the appearance of 
spurious "real roots": for instance, by acting on  with 
suitable Weyl reflections we can easily produce combinations which 
look like real roots (having positive integer coefficients and connected 
support on the Dynkin diagram), but in fact are not! In listing the 
solutions to () and () we must watch out for such 
spurious "real roots": the corresponding solutions in the
table appear with vanishing  root multiplicity (and therefore 
also vanishing outer multiplicity). To be on the safe side we have 
applied brute force once more in evaluating ()
by making lists of decompositions up to the full height of the root 
(and not just half the height as for ), whose multiplicity 
we are interested in. The relevant  root multiplicities 
are listed in the penultimate column of section 5. 
Of course, the  root multiplicities for the "hyperbolic roots" 
(obeying ) coincide with their multiplicities as  roots. 
In contradistinction to , the root multiplicities start 
depending on the direction of  already for , 
where we have two Weyl orbits, with multiplicities 44 and 46, 
respectively (for higher rank algebras with more than 
one lightlike fundamental weight, this may already happen for 
null roots). Another noteworthy feature is that the 
root multiplicities tend to be less than the number of transversal 
polarizations, in contrast to  where they are equal or greater. 
For instance, the null roots of , all of which belong to a 
single Weyl orbit (and its integer multiples) have multiplicity 
equal to 8 instead of the number of transversal polarizations of 
a photon in eleven dimensions (=9), that one would expect on the basis 
of a vertex operator construction of such algebras.

For the outer multiplicities, we also note some general features. First of 
all, the outer multiplicities of the  representations in  at 
level  usually will be strictly less than the outer multiplicities 
appearing in the product of the representations at level  
with the level one representation . Secondly, there 
are very few representations that have vanishing outer multiplicities; 
e.g. for , there are none at all at levels  
and 17. Thirdly, up to the maximum level we have checked, all the  
representations in  with vanishing outer multiplicity have 
highest weights  obeying . Apart from the spurious
"real roots" this is also true for . In other words, 
if a representation can appear, it will appear, usually 
with an outer multiplicity that increases with the level .

In the first set of tables we list the  representations appearing
in the decomposition of  up to and including level 
in lexicographic order  (starting from the back).
The level is indicated in the first column, and in the second and 
third columns we give the Dynkin labels and the coefficients 
 appearing in (). The norms   of the associated 
highest weights are given in the fourth column. In the fifth 
column we list the dimension of the  representation 
, which are 
computed by means of the Weyl dimension formula 
 
where  is the  Weyl vector such that the product
 is just the height  of  as a
root of . The next column gives the multiplicity  of 
the highest weight  as a root of , taken 
from and (and checked again by our independent
calculation). The last column contains our main result, namely 
the outer multiplicities of the associated  representations 
in . The  tables are organized similarly.

Acknowledgments 

H.N. would like to thank the organizers of the conference and
N. Sthanumoorthy in particular, as well as T. Govindarajan for
hospitality during his stay in Chennai.

 
 

 
 

 99 

M. Aigner and G. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK ,
Springer Verlag (1998)

O. Barwald, R. W. Gebert and H. Nicolai,
Nucl. Phys. B510 , 721 - 738 (1998)


M. Bauer and D. Bernard,
arXiv:hep-th/9612210

 G. M. Benkart, S.-J. Kang, K. C. Misra,
Graded Lie algebras of Kac-Moody type , 
Adv. Math. 97 (1993), 154-190.

 G. M. Benkart, S.-J. Kang, K. C. Misra,
Indefinite Kac-Moody algebras of special linear type ,
Pacific J. Math.   

 G. M. Benkart, S.-J. Kang, K. C. Misra,
Indefinite Kac-Moody algebras of classical type ,
Adv. Math. 105 (1994), 76-110.

 E. Cremmer, B. Julia, H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
arXiv:hep-th/9909099.

 E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk,
Phys. Lett. B 76 , 409 (1978)

 T. Damour and M. Henneaux,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 , 4749 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012172]

T. Damour, M. Henneaux and H. Nicolai,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89  (2002), 221601
[arXiv:hep-th/0207267].


 A.J. Feingold and I.B. Frenkel, Math. Ann. 263 , 87 (1983)

 R.W. Gebert and H. Nicolai,
Commun. Math. Phys. 172 , 571-622 (1995)

M. Gaberdiel, D.I. Olive and P.C. West,
Nucl. Phys. B645 , 403-437 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205068]

 J.W.B. Hughes, 
in Infinite dimensional Lie algebras and their applications ,
ed. S. Kass, World Scientific (1988), 84.

 C. Hull, Nucl. Phys. B583 , 237 (2000) 

 J. E. Humphreys, "Introduction to Lie Algebras
and Representation Theory", Graduate Texts in Mathematics 9,
Springer Verlag, 1980

 B. Julia, in Lectures in Applied
Mathematics , AMS-SIAM, vol 21 (1985), p.355.

V.G. Kac, Infinite dimensional L ie algebras ,
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, third edn. (1990)

V.G. Kac, R.V. Moody and M. Wakimoto, in: Differential Geometric Methods
in Theoretical Physics, NATO Advanced Research Workshop,
eds. K. Bleuler and M. Werner, (Kluwer, 1988).

 Seok-Jin Kang,
Gradations and structure of Kac-Moody Lie algebras , 
dissertation, Yale Univeristy, 1990.

 Seok-Jin Kang,
Kac-Moody Lie algebras, spectral sequences, and the Witt formula , 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 339 (1993), 463-495.

 Seok-Jin Kang,
On the hyperbolic Kac-Moody Lie algebra  , 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 341 (1994), 623-638.

 Seok-Jin Kang,
Root multiplicities of the hyperbolic Kac-Moody Lie algebra  ,
J. Algebra 160 (1993), 492-523.

 Seok-Jin Kang,
Root multiplicities of Kac-Moody algebras ,
Duke Math. J. 74 (1994), 645-666.

 Seok-Jin Kang, D. J. Melville,
Root multiplicities of the Kac-Moody algebras  ,
J. Algebra 170 (1994), 277-299.

 Seok-Jin Kang, D. J. Melville,
Rank 2 symmetric hyperbolic Kac-Moody algebras ,
Nagoya Math. J. 140 (1995), 41-75.

K. Koepsell, H. Nicolai, and H. Samtleben,
Class. Quant. Grav. 17 ,  3689 (2000).

Sai-Ping Li, R.V. Moody, M. Nicolescu, and J. Patera,
 Verma bases for representations of classical simple Lie algebras ,
 J. Math. Phys. 27  (3), 668-677, 1986

 R. V. Moody and J. Patera, Fast recursion formula 
for weight multiplicities ,
 Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 7  (1982), 237-242.

 R.V. Moody and A. Pianzola, Lie Algebras with Triangular Decomposition,
 Wiley, New York, 1995

H. Nicolai and D.I. Olive,
Lett. Math. Phys. 58 , 141-152 (2001)

N. A. Obers, B. Pioline and E. Rabinovici,
Nucl. Phys. B 525 , 163 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9712084].

 J. Stembridge, Computational aspects of 
root systems, Coxeter groups, and Weyl
 characters , in "Interactions of Combinatorics and Representation
 Theory", MSJ Memoirs 11, Math. Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 2001, pp. 1-38.
 (http://www.math.lsa.umich.edu/ jrs/papers/carswc.ps.gz )

P. C. West,
Class. Quant. Grav.  18 , 4443 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0104081].

P. C. West,
[arXiv:hep-th/0212291]



