







#1  
A COVARIANT FORMALISM FOR

CHERN-SIMONS GRAVITY 
Andrzej BOROWIEC 


Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Wroclaw 

pl. Maksa Borna 9, 50-204 WROCLAW (POLAND)  

Marco FERRARIS and Mauro FRANCAVIGLIA 


Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita  di Torino  

Via C. Alberto 10, 10123 TORINO (ITALY)  

 
Chern-Simons type Lagrangians in  dimensions are analyzed
from the point of view of their covariance and globality. We use
the transgression formula to find out a new fully covariant and global
Lagrangian for Chern-Simons gravity: the price for establishing
globality is hidden in a bimetric (or biconnection) structure.
Such a formulation  allows to calculate from a global and
simpler viewpoint the energy-momentum
complex and the superpotential both for Yang-Mills and
gravitational examples.

Introduction and Preliminaries 

It is well known that Einstein's gravity is trivial in dimension
, since the curvature tensor reduces essentially to a scalar.
Also in dimension  Einstein theory of gravitation is somehow
trivial, since the Riemann tensor reduces essentially to the
Einstein tensor. Because of this a generalization of the standard
Hilbert Lagrangian was suggested in , by introducing, in full
analogy with gauge theories, additional terms of the Chern-Simons
type. In a previous paper of ours we have
thence tackled with the specific problem of conservation laws for
Chern-Simons type Lagrangians, both in the Yang-Mills and in the
gravitational case. In particular, we have calculated the relevant
energy-momentum complex and the superpotential for Chern-Simons
gravity in dimension  (see also in this context).
Another technique to compute superpotentials for Chern-Simons gauge
theory which is based on
the so-called cascade equation formalism  has been
recently proposed in.

Let us recall that Chern-Simons Lagrangians for gravity are
non-covariant (and non-global in general) due to the presence of
cubic terms in the connection and to a non-covariant coupling of
curvature and connection, although field equations turn out to be
global and covariant. Because of this and for the sake of
simplicity, our result of were obtained in a
non-covariant framework as well as by assuming explicitly that
spacetime had a trivial topology, i.e. assuming it to be globally
diffeomorphic to an open subset of . The aim of the
present note is thence to provide a "covariantised" version of
our previous calculations, by relying on the "background
connection method", a covariantisation procedure which has
revealed itself to be rather useful in the case of first order
gravity. In fact, the present paper is based on
and should be considered as a direct continuation of.
In particular, we shall use the methods for computing currents and
superpotentials as presented therein.

It is known that natural , i.e. generally covariant,
Lagrangians lead to covariant Euler-Lagrange equations of motion.
The inverse statement is, in general, not true. For example, as it
was mentioned before, this holds for the following non-global (in
general) and non-invariant metric Lagrangian in dimension :
 
where  and 
 are the Christoffel symbols and the Riemann curvature
tensor of a metric , respectively; here 
. The Lagrangian () leads, when
varied with respect to the metric, to the following global and
covariant tensorial Euler-Lagrange equations
 
where  is called the York-Cotton tensor
density  and semicolon denotes metric covariant derivative. This
symmetric and traceless tensor density vanishes if and only if
 is the Ricci curvature tensor of a locally
conformally flat metric  (see). Here and above
 denotes the relevant
skew-symmetric Levi-Civita tensor density. It has been shown in
 that the Lagrangian () is the only
obstruction to the equivariant inverse problem in . This
Lagrangian is the gravitational counterpart of Chern-Simons
Lagrangians of gauge theories.

A similar situation occurs in fact for the case of Chern-Simons
gauge Lagrangian
 
where  is a matrix-valued gauge potential, its
curvature 2-form 

being the gauge field strength and  denoting the trace
operation for matrices (in any suitable matrix group). The
Lagrangian () is not gauge-covariant although the
corresponding field equations  are. For this reason
such type of Lagrangians are sometimes called quasi (or
almost) invariant .

Transgression Formula and Covariant Chern-Simons Lagrangians 

Let  be any Lie group and let us denote by  the
corresponding Lie algebra. For simplicity we shall think of  as
a matrix group and  as a matrix algebra with the
commutator  as a Lie bracket. Consider a principal
-bundle  over a manifold  (which, for the moment is
arbitrary) with a principal connection  on . Its
curvature 2-form is defined by 
 and fulfills the Bianchi identities 
. Recall (see e.g.)
that  is a -valued and -equivariant
1-form that lives on the total space  and which is not defined
on the base manifold . Choosing a (local) section 
 of  we get via pull-back a (local)
matrix-valued 1-form  which
lives on an open domain . This is the familiar gauge
potential (or Yang-Mills gauge field). In local coordinates
 on  it reads as 
. A change of the local section 
, with , implies a
non-tensorial transformation law for the corresponding (local) gauge
potentials 
;  is also called a gauge transformation.
The (local) Yang-Mills field strength 2-form 
, however,  undergoes a tensorial transformation rule

. Because of this  is called a tensorial 
2-form (see e.g. example 5.2, p. 76 in, for the
correspondence between tensorial forms on  and vector-valued
forms on the base ). In local coordinates we shall write 

. On the contrary,  is a non-tensorial 
(but vertical) 1-form. By an abuse of notation from now on we
shall drop all upper indication to the section .

For any two principal connection 1-forms  and
 on , Chern and Simons have
established the famous transgression formula 
 
expressing the difference between two tensorial 4-forms. Here
 
denotes the so-called transgression 3-form  (see e.g.
 p. 348), with  and
.
Notice that  is a tensorial
scalar-valued 4-form on . Therefore, it uniquely determines
the corresponding 4-form on the base manifold , since


 does not depend on . The
transgression form () is an interesting and
intriguing object by its own. It can be easily re-expressed as
 
where  denotes
the covariant derivative of  with respect to the
connection . Since  is tensorial, being the
difference of two connections, the form 
 is also a tensorial scalar-valued 3-form on 
which uniquely determines the corresponding 3-form on the base
manifold .

The formula () expresses a well known fact:
although the Chern 4-form 
itself depends on the connection its cohomology class
 in the de
Rahm cohomology of  is connection-independent since the
difference 
 is exact. In more physical terms we can
also say that the Chern form, when considered as a Lagrangian,
whenever , is variationally trivial since its
variation
 
is a total divergence.

From now on we shall assume that the base manifold  is a
3-manifold. In this case  is also
closed since, of course, any 4-form on a 3-manifold vanishes
identically. Because of this it determines a cohomology class
 which, in
general, does not need to be trivial since 
 needs not to be exact.

In particular, by replacing  into ()
one immediately recognizes the well known Chern-Simons 3-form:
 
The Chern-Simons form () is also a closed,
scalar-valued, but non-tensorial 3-form, which lives on the
principal bundle  and not on the base manifold. Therefore it
determines a cohomology class 
 in the de Rahm cohomology of , which, in general, may
depend on the connection. To see this one can use a type of
arguments similar to these presented in (Lemma 3.10).
For this purpose we calculate with a bit of algebra the following:
 
Now it is clear that the element 
 measures, in a certain sense, the difference
between the cohomology classes  and
. These classes are called secondary
characteristic classes  for a manifold with connection.

The local Lagrangians () can be obtained from
() by pull-back along local sections  of . If
any global section exists, i.e. if  is a trivializable bundle
(If the group  is simply connected then any principal
-bundle over a 3-manifold is trivializable.)  one
can use it to construct a global Lagrangian. In this case the
corresponding action integral
 
is multivalued since its value depends on the section chosen
. In fact, Chern and Simons found that this
dependence is up to a homology class of the section , therefore
it must have a non-dynamical character. After introducing an
appropriate normalization constant  it turns out that the
actions corresponding to homologically non-equivalent sections
differ by integer values (the so-called winding number ).
Alternatively, one can say that the action depends on the
connection and takes its values in the quotient 
. In other words it produces a (secondary) characteristic
number for a 3-manifold with connection (see for an
exhaustive discussion).

To resume, fixing any (global) section, the Chern-Simons form
() pulls down to  and gives the
Lagrangian (). 
This non-invariant Lagrangian produces, however, invariant and
geometrically simple equations of motion. Indeed, the variation of
() gives rise to the following expression (see
)
 
which of course yields  as equation of motion. Since
 is tensorial, the Euler-Lagrange part is
tensorial too and one realizes that the whole non-invariance has
passed into the boundary term 
. This implies that the corresponding canonical
No ther currents and superpotentials are not tensorial (compare
formulae (26), (27), (30) and (31) in). It means that
they are gauge (i.e., section) dependent or in other words they
live on the total space of the bundle .

Our main idea in the present note is to use
 
as a Lagrangian 3-form on . We stress again that  is a
global and covariant object which lives on the base manifold .
This fact is independent of the topologies of ,  and .
However, the price one has to pay for this is the bi-connection
character of the Lagrangian (). We shall analyze two
cases: (i)  both connections are dynamical; (ii)  only
 is dynamical while  is a fixed background
(non-dynamical) connection.

In terms of physically more relevant (but local) quantities
, 

 and 
,  according to
() and () one has
  where 

 has been used and 
 denotes the directional
covariant derivative with respect to the connection
. Now the Lagrangian  is represented by a
scalar density of weight one rather then a 3-form (see
).

The variation of () is easily  calculated from
() and (); we get:
 
Accordingly, () reads now as
 
An infinitesimal pure gauge transformation is given by means of a
matrix-valued function (0-form) . One has
 
i.e.  is a gauge scalar. With this in mind we are able to
calculate the canonical No ther current associated with a gauge
symmetry as
 
(compare with the calculations given in). This
quantity is weakly conserved. Due to the second No ther
theorem, it decomposes into the so called reduced current 
(which vanishes on shell) and the superpotential 
. The superpotential is known to represent
that part of a current which is identically conserved, does not
vanish on shell and which is enough for the computation of
conserved quantities (like charges, masses and so on). In this
case one gets explicitly (see)
 
where the superpotential  takes
the very simple form
 
The above decomposition can be easily justified by using the
identity 
and by the following formula 
 
which holds true since the trace vanishes on commutators.

A similar analysis can be performed for the diffeomorphism
invariance of . Any vectorfield 
 on  is just an infinitesimal diffeomorphism. Under
diffeomorphisms the gauge potentials  and 
 behave (at least locally; see the discussion
below) as 1-forms and  as a scalar density of weight one.
An infinitesimal diffeomorphism transformation acts on any
(natural) geometric object over  by means of the Lie derivative
. In particular 
  and similarly for 
. This
leads to the following expression for the Nother current
 
and
 
for the corresponding superpotential (compare with formulae (31)
and (32) in). Here for a simplicity we introduced the
shortcut .

Notice that the expressions () and () are
not gauge-covariant since they do contain gauge non-covariant
terms such as  and  as well
as terms involving the partial derivatives. A similar situation is
also known in Yang-Mills theory, since the formal Lie derivative
() does not fill the matrix degrees of freedom.
Strictly speaking, the group  of all
diffeomorphisms of  is not valid as a global invariance group
for the theory. The most general symmetry group is the group 
 which consists of all -invariant bundle
authomorphisms , i.e. the so-called
principal -authomorphisms of . The group 
of all pure gauge transformations is in a natural way a subgroup
of , while  is not. One has
instead a surjective group homomorphism from 
onto . The kernel of this homomorphism is of course
.  It is clear that an infinitesimal authomorphism
 of the principal bundle  is generated by the
corresponding -invariant projectable vectorfield on  and it
can be
represented (at least locally) as a pair 
 with a vectorfield  uniquely defined
 (see also discussion in).
Fixing some background principal connection 
 on  and choosing 
 we may use the formula
 
in order to lift the vectorfield  on  into the
corresponding -invariant projectable vectorfield on . Such
a lifting is not canonical, being background dependent, but it is
global. Moreover,  is flat if and only if the
corresponding lift is a Lie algebra map. This remark generalizes a
so called improved diffeomorphism  technique presented in
.

We can conclude this part by saying that the diffeomorphism
invariance of a Yang-Mills type Lagrangian is encoded into the
invariance with respect to the lifted diffeomorphisms, i.e. the
corresponding principal authomorphisms of . In our case, the
total superpotential related to the diffeomorphism invariance of
the Lagrangian () has the form
 
which is covariant but depends on the background. Finally,
choosing  we find
 
which is fully covariant and background independent, provided
 is a dynamical connection.
Notice, that for a diagonal solution  all
expressions for the superpotential automatically vanish, while the
limit  reproduces the results
previously given in.

Alternatively, let us now assume that the connection
 is a fixed background (non-dynamical) connection.
Thus  in (). The theory in
this case has only one dynamical field but the class of symmetries
is more restrictive: the gauge transformations have to keep the
background unchanged, i.e. 
. This implies 
 and
 
This last expression vanishes identically in the case of an
Abelian gauge group.

Recently, the so called mixed Chern-Simons term  based on two
independent -gauge fields, one of electromagnetic origin
and the other statistical, has been successfully applied in
2-dimensional superconductivity (see and references
quoted therein)(This comment is due to Ashoke Das.) .

Bi-metric Chern-Simons gravity 

A particularly interesting situation appears when  is the
bundle of linear frames , so that the group  is the general
linear group . Linear connections on  are
principal connections in .

In this case  is a -valued
1-form on the bundle  representing a linear connection on 
and  is its Riemann curvature 2-form. We can use a
coordinate section (gauge)  to write down
 and 
, where 
 and
 are the
standard local expressions for the connection coefficients and its
Riemann curvature tensor represented now as  matrices.
Alternatively, we can also use a local (but not necessarily
coordinate) section , the
so-called dreibein . In this case, the matrix indices 
 and 
, so called "world indices", are
inherited from the dreibein .

The Chern-Simons 3-form () lives then on the
bundle of linear frames  and the (local) Lagrangian
() can be obtained from () by
pull-back along a coordinate section  of
. Having chosen a coordinate atlas on the base manifold, with
any coordinate neighborhood one can associate such a local
Lagrangian. On the intersection of two neighborhoods both
Lagrangians differ by a total derivative. This defines a
0-cochain of local Lagrangians in the sense of C ech
cohomology. Conservation laws for this type of non-global
Lagrangians will be investigated in detail in. If the
manifold  is parallelizable (i.e.  is a trivial bundle,
what is always the case for a compact, oriented 3-manifold), one
can also use a global (but probably no longer coordinate) dreibein
to obtain a global but not invariant Lagrangian.

Assuming that the linear connection  is the
Levi-Civita connection of some metric  on :
 
i.e. considering  instead of  as the dynamical
variable, we thus obtain Chern-Simons gravity theory. The
corresponding action () is metric dependent and it
produces the secondary invariant of a Riemannian manifold 
(see).

The transgression form () gives then a new global
and bimetric Lagrangian density for a Chern-Simons gravity. The
Lagrangian () takes now the form
 
where 
 and 

 denotes the Levi-Civita covariant derivative
with respect to the metric . Again, since the difference
of two connections is a tensorial 1-form 
one plays exclusively with tensorial objects. Therefore, there is
no need to distinguish between the world and the local indices.
Accordingly, the Lagrangian density () is a global and
dreibein independent 3-form on . It is even fully covariant
(i.e. natural) if one considers both metrics  as
dynamical fields. Now, it is well justified to use the local
expression
 
for the corresponding global 3-form on . Variation of
() with respect to the connections 
 yields (compare with ()):
 

In fact, the Lagrangian () and its variation
() can be alternatively analyzed from a first-order
(a  la Palatini) point of view, i.e. having just two linear
connections  as dynamical
variables (Of course, the  bi-metric and bi-connection
approaches are not equivalent since they lead to non-equivalent
equations of motion.) . As a symmetry transformation consider then
a 1-parameter group of diffeomorphisms generated by the
vectorfield . The Lie
derivative of an arbitrary (non-symmetric) linear connection 
 reads (see e.g.)
 
where 
 (remember that

). It defines a canonical
natural lift from any vectorfield on  to the corresponding
invariant projectable vectorfield on an appropriate bundle of
geometric objects over . In other words, the difference between
this case and the general one discussed in the previous section is
that the Lie transport provides now a canonical (i.e. background
independent) embedding of  into the group of
principal authomorphisms of  with a gauge part represented by
. Applying formula () to the present
case one might be tempted to write
 
for the corresponding superpotential. This is wrong since
variation () is a second order differential operator in
 (see).

It is now convenient to assume that both connections are symmetric
(i.e. torsion free) linear connections on . Thus following the
same steps as for computations of formula (60) in but
this time in a covariant manner, i.e. having replaced 
 by  and the
partial derivatives  by the covariant ones
 or  respectively one gets
 

Coming back to the purely metric formalism we wish to perform the
variation of () with respect to the metrics
. For this reason one has to replace 
 in the first term of () by means of
the "Palatini formula" 
 
and the same for .
Accordingly, after some computation (see also) the
bimetric first variational formula reads now as
 
where the York-Cotton tensor density  (resp.
) is given by (). The
Euler-Lagrange field equations are 
. We recall that the York-Cotton
tensor density is symmetric, traceless, divergence-free and it
vanishes if and only if the corresponding metric is conformally
flat.

Again, as a symmetry transformation let us consider  a flow of
diffeomorphisms generated by the vectorfield 
. In this case the Lie derivative operators
 
and
 
represent the infinitesimal variations.

Consequently, the formulae (), () and
() allow us to calculate the canonical
energy-momentum complex and superpotential in both covariant
(bi-metric) and background connection (
) formalisms. To this end we make use of the computations
already performed in. Only terms under the divergence
in () will contribute into the superpotential. We see
that the first two terms correspond to the formula (56) in
. Therefore, combining with () we arrive
to the following expression:
 

As a concrete example one can consider a solution 
consisting of a flat metric  while
 being conformal to
 with a conformal factor . Having chosen
 one calculates
 
as a 1-form, where
. In
particular, for
 we
obtain , i.e.
 

Conclusions 

We have considered the Chern-Simons type models in three
dimensions. Exploiting the Chern-Simons transgression -form
enables us to find a new global Lagrangian density which unlike,
the local Chern-Simons Lagrangian is generally covariant. However,
in this approach the covariant Lagrangian has bi-connection
character and the corresponding theory is getting lost some of its
topological properties. Particulary, the action functional becomes
insensitive for topology of underlaying -manifolds. The
formalism has been used for calculation of conserved Nother
currents and their identically conserved parts - superpotentials.
Two special cases are of particular interest: the case of two
connection being dynamical and the case when one of the
connections is given as a fixed background while the only the
other one is dynamical. Finally, the Chern-Simons gravity has been
treated in a similar way. In this sense the present paper
generalizes the results of our previous paper obtained
for non-covariant Chern-Simons Lagrangians (see also).
Recently, this covariant formalism has been successfully applied
to explicit numerical calculations of conserved quantities for BTZ
black hole solutions in  Chern-Simons  
gravity of the Witten type.


Acknowledgments 

One of the authors (A.B.) would like to thank the INdAM-GNFM for
providing financial support and the Department of Mathematics of
Torino University for the hospitality during his stay in Italy.
The authors are grateful to Marco Godina and Marcella Palese for
fruitful discussions. Some comments by a referee are also acknowledged.

 99 

  S. Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, Ann. of
Physics  140  (1982), 372

  A. Borowiec, M. Ferraris and M. Francaviglia, J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen.  31  (1998), 8823 (hep-th/9801126)

 G. Sardanashvili, Energy-momentum conservation laws in gauge theory
with broken symmetry , hep-th/0203275 

  B. Julia and S. Silva, Class. Quantum Grav. 
15  (1998), 2173

  S. Silva, Nucl. Phys. B  558  (1999), 391

  M. Ferraris and M. Francaviglia, Gen. Rel. Grav. 
 22 (9) (1990), 965

  M. Ferraris and M. Francaviglia,
Class. Quantum Grav. Suppl.  9  (1992), S79

  L. Fatibene, M. Ferraris, M. Francaviglia
and M. Raiteri, J. Math. Phys.  42 (3) (2001), 1173 

  S. S. Chern and J. Simons, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA  68 (4) (1971), 791

  S. S. Chern and J. Simons, Ann. Math 
99  (1974), 48

  I. Anderson, Ann. of Math.  120  (1984), 329

  S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu, Foundations of
Differential Geometry , John Wiley  Sons (New York, 1963)

  T. Eguchi, P. B. Gilkey and A. J. Hanson,
Phys. Rep.  66  (1980), 213

  D. S. Freed, Adv. Math.  113  (1995), 237

 Z. Oziewicz, Rep. Math. Phys.  31 
(1992), 85 

  A. H. Chamseddine and J. Fro hlich, Commun. Math.
Phys.  147  (1992), 549


  D. Bak, D. Cangemi and R. Jackiw, Phys. Rev. 
D 49  (1994), 5173

 G. Sardanashvili, Class. Quantum Grav. 
14  (1997), 1371

 P.G. Bergmann and E. J. Flaherty, Jr.,
J. Math. Phys.  19  (1978), 212 

  R. Jackiw, Phys.
Rev. Lett.  41  (1978), 1635

  M. Ban ados, L. J. Garay and M. Henneaux, Phys.
Rev. D  53 (2) (1996), R593

  M. Ban ados, M. Henneaux, C. Iannuzzo and C.
M. Viallet, Class. Quantum Grav.  14  (1997), 2455

 I.J.R. Aitchison and C.D. Fosco, Phys. Rev. D 57  (1998), 1171 

  A. Borowiec, M. Ferraris, M. Francaviglia and M. Palese,
Conservation law for non-global Lagrangians , Quaderni Dip.
Mat. Univ. Torino  (2000) (submitted for publication)

 K. Yano, The Theory of Lie Derivatives
and Its Applications , North-Holland Publishing CO. (Amsterdam,
1957)

 J.A. Schouten, Ricci-Calculus , (Second Ed.)
Springer-Verlag (Berlin 1954)

 G. Allemandi, M. Francaviglia and M. Raiteri,
Covariant Charges in Chern-Simons  Gravity , gr-qc/0211098 ,
in press in Class. Quantum Grav. 




Title: A covariant formalism for Chern-Simons gravity
Authors: A. Borowiec, M. Ferraris and M. Francaviglia 
Comments: 12 pages,LaTeX, to appear in Journal of Physics A
Subj-class: High Energy Physics-Theory;Classical and
Quantum Gravity;Mathematical Physics;


Chern-Simons type Lagrangians in  dimensions are analyzed
from the point of view of their covariance and globality. We use
the transgression formula to find out a new fully covariant and
global Lagrangian for Chern-Simons gravity: the price for
establishing globality is hidden in a bimetric (or biconnection)
structure. Such a formulation  allows to calculate from a global
and simpler viewpoint the energy-momentum complex and the
superpotential both for Yang-Mills and gravitational examples.






