

6.5in
0in
0in
8.6in
-0.5in


   
   
  
  
#1#2   
  
      
      
#1   
 
 
m_1 
m_0 
#1#2   



 
McGILL-03-01

CERN-TH/2003-004

 
Real-time D-brane condensation  
 James M. Cline and Hassan Firouzjahi 
 Theory Division, CERN, CH-1211, Geneva 23, Switzerland 

 Physics Department, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2T8 

 
Unstable D-branes or brane-antibrane systems can decay to lower-dimensional branes.  In
the effective field theory description, the final state branes are defects in the tachyon
field which describes the initial instability.  We study the dynamical formation of
codimension one defects (kinks) using Sen's ansatz for the tachyon Lagrangian.   It is
shown that the slope of the kink diverges within a finite amount of time after the
tachyon starts to roll.  We discuss the relevance for reheating after brane-antibrane
inflation.



1. Introduction.  In the last few years, significant progress has been made in
understanding the nature of transitions in unstable systems of D-branes.  Most
of the work has been motivated by formal considerations, but there is also an important
application, namely inflation from brane-antibrane collisions
.  This is an appealing application of genuine string
theoretic constructions to cosmology, but it may have problems with reheating
.  It seems likely that the energy density liberated from the
brane collisions is efficiently converted into closed string states (ultimately
gravitons), and not necessarily into visible
radiation.  To quantitatively address this potential problem, one should consider how the
evolving tachyon condensate couples to photons, which being an open string excitation
should reside on some stable brane remaining in the final state.

One way in which branes could be created in the collision is through the Kibble mechanism
; the tachyon field forms topological defects, which are known to be a
consistent description of branes whose dimension is lower than that of the original
branes.  For example, a brane-antibrane system has a complex tachyon
field, leading to vortices which represent codimension-two branes.  On the other hand an
unstable brane has a  real tachyon field, which can form kinks in some direction,
representing codimension one branes.  For simplicity we are going to study the latter
situation in this letter.  It should be noted however that this process could also
originate from a brane-antibrane collision, in which one component of the complex tachyon
first undergoes condensation to form unstable codimension-one kinks, followed by the
second, orthogonal component; the intersection of these two kinks is the vortex.  Our
simplified situation describes the second step in this process.

The static properties of tachyon defects have been well-studied in the literature; the
fact that their tensions match the known ones of D-branes is part of the evidence that
they are  D-branes.  In addition, excitations around these defects have been shown
to reproduce the excited states of strings in the case of -adic strings, where such
calculations are tractable.  However, not much is known about the dynamics of defect
formation; precisely how do they form in space and time, starting from an unstable
configuration?  These details will be important for making a quantitative calculation
of reheating on the branes which form (one of which is presumed to contain the standard
model).  We may then hope to settle the question of whether such a brane universe will be
completely dominated by gravitational radiation at the end of inflation.

In the present work, we do not attempt to improve on the reheating computation,
contenting ourselves with determining the tachyon profile  as a function of time
and the extra dimension which is transverse to the kink.  We will show that Sen's version
of  the effective action for the tachyon leads to a somewhat surprising result: the slope of
the kink diverges in a finite time after the brane collision.  We show that this is
related to the observation that caustics can also form in this situation.  We conclude by
speculating that both this problem and that of the caustics is an artifact of ignoring
higher derivative corrections to the tachyon action.

2. Action and equations of motion.   
Sen has proposed a simple form for the tachyon action which captures the essential
qualitative features of exact computations from boundary string field theory (BSFT),
and which quantitatively agrees with the exact result in certain limits
. It has the
form

  L  = -T  V(T)
  -(g_  - _T_T ) 
where  is the tension of the original nonBPS brane, and 
the potential is  for the superstring.   has
dimensions of length and  is of order the string length scale.
Evaluating the determinant, and assuming  varies in only one spatial
dimension , which we shall refer to as the bulk, the action becomes

  L  = -T  V(T)
  1-T^2 + T'^2  
Let us compare this with the exact result from BSFT:
  L  = -T  e^-T^2/a^2  F[-(_T)^2]
  
where 
	F(x) = 4^x x (x)^22(2x) ,
Although this looks very different from (), it has some essential
similarities. For example both  and  approach  in
the limit of large , appropriate for describing the static kink solution,
which has the property that . Moreover, both functions have first
derivatives which diverge as , which puts a limit on how fast the
field can roll for homogeneous configurations: .  (It turns out
that the zeroes of  and  do not have special significance,
so it is not important that they do not coincide.)  We will work with Sen's
form of the action since it captures the distinctive behavior of the exact one,
but is much simpler to work with.  We checked certain of the following
numerical results also using the BSFT action to be sure that no significant
differences arose.

The equation of motion which follows from () is
T = 
2a^-2 T(1-T^2 + T'^2)+(1-T^2)T" +2T T' T' 
( 1+T'^2  )   
In the homogeneous case, this simplifies to ,
which shows the limiting velocity .  The asymptotic form of the
solution is 
TT_i + t - 2  a8 erf (2 ta )
at large times.  

3. Dynamical solutions.    For nonhomogeneous tachyon configurations in
which  has reached large values , analytic approximations to the
solution have been developed in reference.  However in the present
study we are interested in formation of kinks, near which  remains zero.
Before looking for analytic approximations, let us consider numerical evolution of
the equation of motion ().  We assume the extra dimension is
compactified on a circle of circumference , and approximate it by 
discretize points. We  put periodicd boundary conditions on , and replace
spatial derivatives in eq. () by finite
differences. This results in a set of   coupled ordinary differential
equations which can be solved numerically.

The initial condition is taken to be  where
.  This is an idealization of random initial conditions where
 happened to cross zero at two locations in the compact bulk. Fig. 1
shows the how the spatial profiles evolve in time.
kink2.eps  
Figure 1. Sequence of spatial tachyon profiles  for a series of
increasing times, showing formation of a kink-antikink pair.
 

A few features of the above solutions are noteworthy.  At any position 
apart from the kink locations,  approaches the behavior
(), where .  This is demonstrated in Fig. 2,
which plots  for a sequence of increasing times.  It is clear
that  at any , though the approach to the asymptotic value
takes longer for points closer to the kink locations.  Secondly, the slope
of the kink becomes quite steep on a short time scale.  In fact, the code
crashes at a certain finite time because the slope becomes singular.

tdot2.eps  
Figure 2. Sequence of spatial tachyon velocity profiles  for a series of
increasing times, showing that  in the bulk.
 
One might wonder if numerical error is the reason that the evolution cannot
be followed past a certain time.  However this seems not to be the case.
Using finer lattices and time steps did not help the problem.  Neither did
higher order differencing schemes for discretizing the spatial derivatives. It
is interesting to see in detail why the numerical evolution fails beyond the
critical time.  To show this, consider  at the lattice sites  
which are in the vicinity of one of the kinks.  The behavior of the quantity
 which appears in the tachyon action is shown in Fig. 3. 
The curious feature is that at the lattice sites neighboring the position of
the kink (on either side),  starts plunging toward negative values after a
certain time.  Such values are unphysical since the square root of
  appears in the action, and this is what causes the numerical
evolution to crash.  Again, one might suspect some sort of numerical
problem, but this behavior proved to be completely insensitive to all manner of
modifications to the program which were tried.  We will give some analytical
arguments for why this pathological end to the evolution is in fact inherent
in the equations of motion, rather than a fluke of the numerics.
tpdtest.eps  
Figure 3. The quantity  as a function of time in units
of , for
several lattice sites in the vicinity of a kink.  The rapid descent of
the curve for the nearest neighbor to the kink center signals a pathology
in the time evolution. 
4. Analytic approach.  To analytically study the dynamics of  close
to the kink, we can use the fact that it is odd in  and write the ansatz
	T(t,x)q(t) x + p(t) x^3 + r(t) x^5 + Substituting this into the equation of motion and ignoring the terms which
are subleading in  gives
	q = 2a^2  q + 2 q q^2 + 6p1+q^2 
This cannot be solved for  since it depends on , whose solution depends
on , etc. , but let us suppose that  is initially zero and can
thus be ignored at least for early times.
The solution has two regimes.  At early times, before  has become large,
the second term is negligible and therefore
	q(t) q_+ e^2 t/a  + q_- e^-2 t/a 
However  quickly grows, so for  it will no longer be consistent
to ignore the second term in ().  One can show that the solution in
the regime where the second term dominates has the behavior
	 q ct-t_0  
This behavior is borne out by the numerical solutions, as shown in Fig. 4,
which plots  versus  for the lattice points
closest to the kink.  At early times the kink formation starts very slowly
(both terms in () are important), while the
 intermediate straight-line behavior confirms
() when the positive exponential dominates.  After a time
interval of approximately  from the start of the linear region,
the curves start to diverge from each other, showing that  is no longer just
linear in  over the range of  given.  But the topmost curve is given
by the site  which is the nearest neighbor to the kink, so this gives
the best approximation to the linear term in (), and we see that
it begins to rise faster than exponentially with time, in qualitative 
agreement with ().

kinktest.eps  
Figure 4. , which should approximate , 
as a function of time (in units of ), for
several lattice sites in the vicinity of a kink.  Inset: close-up of the
large  region.
 
5. Hamilton-Jacobi method.    The preceding argument is not conclusive
because we have ignored the undetermined function , which could
conceivably soften the behavior of .  Therefore we give an additional
argument which bolsters the conclusion that the slope of the kink diverges in
a finite time.  We use the formalism of, in which Hamilton-Jacobi
equations were used to demonstrate the formation of caustics in the tachyon
profile when the initial conditions were inhomogeneous.  At first sight their
formalism appears to be inapplicable to the study of kinks because it is the
leading term in an asymptotic expansion in powers of , which is
not small very near the kink. 

However, we have seen that no matter how close a given position  may be
to the kink, if we simply wait long enough, the value of  will
become sufficiently large that we can  expand in .  Suppose
we carry out this procedure for two points  and  which bracket a
kink at ; we can then deduce the behavior at the kink by interpolation. 
An interesting aspect of the Hamilton-Jacobi method is that rather than
determining  for later times, it instead yields 
where  is a characteristic curve that depends on which initial
value  was chosen.  We will show that  actually crosses 
from the right for positive , with a nonzero value for  at this
event.  Therefore the tachyon becomes multivalued, since  at the origin by
construction.  Its slope must diverge at this moment.

To see this, let us consider some  close to the kink, but starting at a
late enough time  that .  The characteristic
curve associated with this event is 
	x_c[t,x_i] = x_i - T_i' t1+T_i'^2   
where , and the solution for  along this curve is
	T(t,x_c[t,x_i]) = T_i + t1+T_i'^2   
Clearly, as long as  which will be true sufficiently close to the
kink,  will cross  in a finite time, ,
and  will be nonzero.  The procedure is illustrated in Fig. 5

HJ.eps  
Figure 5. Schematic representation of the temporal evolution of tachyon spatial
profiles in the Hamilton-Jacobi method; the point on the curve at  evolves
toward the  axis as shown. 
6. Discussion.   In this letter we have quantified the time-dependence of tachyon
defect formation, hence formation of a D-brane, in the decay of an unstable nonBPS
brane to a stable one.  Numerical and analytic methods indicate that the profile of
the kink becomes infinitely steep in a finite amount of time of order the string
scale, bringing an end to our ability to follow the evolution.  Notice that  should
continue to roll toward  in the bulk at large times.  This situation is 
reminiscent of the problem of caustic formation, where the appearance of cusps also
creates an obstacle to evolving the fields further in time.  

In the case of caustics, the second derivative  ceases to exist at some point.  It
is tempting to  speculate that this problem is an artifact of the approximations which
led to the action ().  The BSFT result is only exact for tachyon
configurations with vanishing spatial derivatives higher than first order.  There are
corrections of order  which must exist, but are difficult to compute in BSFT.  The
worldsheet partition function which must be evaluated to find the effective action is no
longer Gaussian when , so such corrections would have to be computed
perturbatively.  So far such calculations have not been done, so we are not able to test
the conjecture that the new terms cure the caustic problem.  If they do, it also seems
likely that they would ameliorate the problems of kink formation.  A fully  string
theoretic calculation might be needed to settle the issue.

For the problem of reheating, the divergence of the slope of the kink is not necessarily
a serious obstacle to doing computations; if most of the production of gauge bosons on
the final brane takes place before the singularity occurs, then it is not so important. 
Intuitively we might guess that the rapid increase of the kink slope will decrease the
efficiency of reheating however.  The reason is that the bulk motion of the tachyon fluid
should not be influenced much by the presence of the defect if the latter is highly
localized.  Therefore we might expect that most of the energy in the tachyon condensate
will be released into gravitons, just as if the final state branes were not present. 
This could be an argument for alternative scenarios of brane-antibrane inflation, such
as branes at angles, where the final state brane has the same dimensionality as the
colliding ones.


We thank D. Chung, L. Kofman, S. Minwalla, A. Sen and G. Shiu for helpful discussions.


 99 

A. Sen,
"Tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system,"
JHEP 9808 , 012 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9805170].


A. Sen,
"Universality of the tachyon potential,"
JHEP 9912 , 027 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9911116].


A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Tachyon condensation in string field theory,"
JHEP 0003 , 002 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9912249].



G. R. Dvali and S. H. Tye,
"Brane inflation,"
Phys. Lett. B 450 , 72 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-ph/9812483].

S. H. Alexander,
"Inflation from D - anti-D brane annihilation,"
Phys. Rev. D 65 , 023507 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0105032].


C. P. Burgess, M. Majumdar, D. Nolte, F. Quevedo, G. Rajesh and R. J. Zhang,
"The inflationary brane-antibrane universe,"
JHEP 0107 , 047 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0105204].


G. R. Dvali, Q. Shafi and S. Solganik,
"D-brane inflation,"
arXiv:hep-th/0105203.

  
C. P. Burgess, P. Martineau, F. Quevedo, G. Rajesh and R. J. Zhang,
"Brane-antibrane inflation in orbifold and orientifold models,"
JHEP 0203 , 052 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0111025].



C. Herdeiro, S. Hirano and R. Kallosh,
"String theory and hybrid inflation / acceleration,"
JHEP 0112 , 027 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0110271].


J. Garcia-Bellido, R. Rabadan and F. Zamora,
"Inflationary scenarios from branes at angles,"
JHEP 0201 , 036 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0112147].


R. Blumenhagen, B. Kors, D. Lust and T. Ott,
"Hybrid inflation in intersecting brane worlds,"
arXiv:hep-th/0202124.


K. Dasgupta, C. Herdeiro, S. Hirano and R. Kallosh,
"D3/D7 inflationary model and M-theory,"
Phys. Rev. D 65 , 126002 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203019].


N. Jones, H. Stoica and S. H. Tye,
"Brane interaction as the origin of inflation,"
arXiv:hep-th/0203163.


L. Kofman and A. Linde,
"Problems with tachyon inflation,"
JHEP 0207 , 004 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205121].


G. Shiu, S.-H. H. Tye, I. Wasserman,
"Rolling Tachyon in Brane World Cosmology from Superstring Field Theory"
hep-th/0207119 

J. M. Cline, H. Firouzjahi and P. Martineau,
"Reheating from tachyon condensation,"
JHEP 0211 , 041 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207156].


A. Strominger,
"Open string creation by S-branes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0209090.


G. Dvali and A. Vilenkin,
"Solitonic D-branes and brane annihilation,"
arXiv:hep-th/0209217.


S. Sarangi and S. H. Tye,
"Cosmic string production towards the end of brane inflation,"
Phys. Lett. B 536 , 185 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0204074].


M. Majumdar and A.-C. Davis, 
"Cosmological Creation of D-branes and anti-D-branes."
JHEP 0203 , 056 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0202148].


A. Sen,
"SO(32) spinors of type and other solitons on brane-antibrane pair,"
JHEP 9809 , 023 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9808141].


A. Sen,
"Descent relations among bosonic D-branes,"
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 14 , 4061 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9902105].


D. Ghoshal and A. Sen,
"Tachyon condensation and brane descent relations in p-adic string  theory,"
Nucl. Phys. B 584 , 300 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0003278].


D. Kutasov, M. Marino and G. W. Moore,
"Some exact results on tachyon condensation in string field theory,"
JHEP 0010 , 045 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0009148].


D. Kutasov, M. Marino and G. W. Moore,
"Remarks on tachyon condensation in superstring field theory,"
arXiv:hep-th/0010108.


P. Kraus and F. Larsen,
"Boundary string field theory of the DD-bar system,"
Phys. Rev. D 63 , 106004 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012198].


T. Takayanagi, S. Terashima and T. Uesugi,
"Brane-antibrane action from boundary string field theory,"
JHEP 0103 , 019 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012210].


 
J. A. Minahan and B. Zwiebach,
"Field theory models for tachyon and gauge field string dynamics,"
JHEP 0009 , 029 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0008231].


J. A. Minahan and B. Zwiebach,
"Effective tachyon dynamics in superstring theory,"
JHEP 0103 , 038 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0009246].


J. A. Minahan and B. Zwiebach,
"Gauge fields and fermions in tachyon effective field theories,"
JHEP 0102 , 034 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0011226].


M. R. Garousi,
"Tachyon couplings on non-BPS D-branes and Dirac-Born-Infeld action,"
Nucl. Phys. B 584 , 284 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0003122].


E. A. Bergshoeff, M. de Roo, T. C. de Wit, E. Eyras and S. Panda,
"T-duality and actions for non-BPS D-branes,"
JHEP 0005 , 009 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0003221].

J. Kluson,
"Proposal for non-BPS D-brane action,"
Phys. Rev. D 62 , 126003 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0004106].


G. W. Gibbons, K. Hori and P. Yi,
"String fluid from unstable D-branes,"
Nucl. Phys. B 596 , 136 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0009061].

A. Sen,
"Field theory of tachyon matter,"
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17 , 1797 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0204143].


 
G. N. Felder, L. Kofman and A. Starobinsky,
"Caustics in tachyon matter and other Born-Infeld scalars,"
JHEP 0209 , 026 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0208019].


A. Sen, private discussion



