



















                         
                         
Mod. Phys. Lett.                 
Nucl. Phys.                       
Phys. Lett.                       
Phys. Rev.                        
^                        










Effective Actions Near Singularities:
The STU-Model (Contribution 
to the proceedings of the 35th Symposium Ahrenshoop, August 2002.
Based on.)  
                                    


 









Marco.Zagermann@cern.ch             



  




















Marco Zagermann


 












                             
CERN, Theory Division
            
CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
            







 






We derive the low energy effective action of the -model in
four and five dimensions near the line , where  gauge
symmetry enhancement occurs. By 'integrating in' the light 
bosons together with their superpartners, the quantum corrected
effective action becomes non-singular at  and manifestly
 invariant. The  four-dimensional theory  is found to be
consistent with modular invariance and the five-dimensional
decompactification limit.


                


 






Introduction 
One of the, at first sight,    somewhat irritating  
features of string theories (or M-theory) is
that their mathematical consistency requires the existence
of more than four  space-time dimensions. This apparent discrepancy
with observation is conventionally accomodated by demanding the
additional dimensions to be compact. Assuming the compact part of space-time
and the string length
to be sufficiently small, the resulting spectrum allows a
clear separation between very heavy modes and modes that are very
light, or massless.
 If one is only interested in low energy processes, the heavy
modes can be integrated out, and one is left with an effective,
lower-dimensional field theory that describes all low-energy
phenomena.

The set of light fields  of such a string compactification
typically includes a number of scalar fields whose vacuum
expectation values (vevs) are  not fixed by a perturbative scalar
potential. The vevs of some of these moduli fields have a simple
geometrical interpretation in that they parameterize deformations
of the compactification manifold that cost no energy.

For certain values of these deformation parameters, one sometimes
encounters the phenomenon that some of the generically heavy
modes suddenly become light. As a classical example, consider  a  string
compactification  that involves an  factor. The radius,
, of the circle is in general not fixed by perturbative string
physics and thus gives rise to a modulus, , whose vev is
proportional to the radius:
 . At 
,
the circle is at its self-dual radius, and certain otherwise
massive Kaluza-Klein and winding modes become massless (and lead
to an  gauge symmetry enhancement).

As another,  non-perturbative,
  example (which can, however, sometimes be
dual to the previous one  (see below)), consider a
compactification manifold with a non-trivial -cycle. If the
string (or M-)theory in question has appropriate solitonic objects
(-branes), 
these may wrap around the cycle and give rise
to pointlike particles in the uncompactified dimensions
. The mass of such  particles is 
proportional to the
volume of the -cycle. When the size of the cycle corresponds to
a modulus in the low energy effective theory, a vanishing vev for
this modulus field corresponds to the cycle being collapsed to
zero size. The wrapped brane then gives rise to additional
massless states in the lower-dimensional theory at that particular
point in the moduli space.

Clearly, away from these special points, such extra states are
heavy and should be integrated out of the effective action. Near
the points in moduli space where they become light, however, it is
inaccurate, or rather  inconsistent, to neglect them in the low
energy theory. This inconsistency is typically
 reflected in couplings becoming singular or discontinuous when
the modulus reaches the special value at which additional fields
become massless. In order to obtain a consistent and non-singular
action, one would have to avoid integrating out the extra light
modes, at least in the region of the moduli space where they are
light.






This can, in principle, be achieved in two different ways:

(i) Either one uses a microscopic string  calculation in order to
determine all the low energy couplings of the extra modes, or

(ii) one hopes that the generic low energy effective action
without the extra states is sufficiently well-known and that there
are sufficiently many symmetries involved so that one can
"integrate the extra modes back in" by simply exploiting all
these symmetries.

The second ("bottom-up") method might not always be applicable,
but if it is, it can be much simpler than the first, especially,
when the microscopic formulation is not so well understood (such
as, e.g., in the case of M-theory). In this talk I summarize two
non-trivial examples in which the second method has
been carried out in full detail. For applications in the context
of geometric phase transitions, I refer to T. Mohaupt's talk
.






The -model in  five dimensions 
The model we are going to study first is the 
heterotic string on  with instanton numbers
. This model is believed to be dual
 to M-theory compactified on the Calabi-Yau
threefold , which is an
elliptic fibration over the second Hirzebruch surface
. The generic low energy effective action of
this compactification describes the coupling of two Abelian vector
multiplets and 244 neutral hypermultiplets to five-dimensional
(5D),  (i.e., minimal) supergravity. The
hypermultiplets play no ro le in the following and will be
consistently truncated out. The bosonic part of the Lagrangian is
of the form
 
where   are two real scalars, and the index
 collectively labels the graviphoton and the vector
fields from the two vector multiplets.
 The completely symmetric tensor  in the  term
of () is independent of the scalar fields and
completely determines the entire theory  via a cubic polynomial
(or "prepotential") 
in three real variables  (). 
endows the auxiliary space  spanned by the 
with a metric,
 
The  two-dimensional    target space, , of the scalar
fields  can then be represented as the hypersurface
 
with  being the pull-back of () to .
The quantity  appearing in
(), finally, is given by the restriction of
 to : 
. Due to
these relations, the physical requirement that
  and  be positive definite
 imposes  constraints
on the possible prepotentials .

For our particular string compactification, these constraints are,
of course, satisfied, and the corresponding prepotential reads
 V (S,T,U)=STU+1 3 U^3, where, as is common in
the literature, the letters  are used instead of the
variables . This prepotential is valid in the region
. For , it has to be replaced by STU2 
V (S,T,U)=STU+1 3 U^3 +1 3 (T-U)^3.Obviously, () and () combine
to form a continuous function   at
. The couplings in the Lagrangian (), however,
depend on derivatives of , and these are not all
continuous at . The physical reason for these discontinuities is
exactly as  described in the Introduction: At 
, the circle of the heterotic compactification manifold
 is at its self-dual radius, and two additional
vector multiplets (containing two  bosons) become light
and restore an  gauge symmetry. In the dual M-theory
picture, this very same situation corresponds to a collapsed
2-cycle in the Calabi-Yau threefold, and the two additional vector
multiplets are supplied by the zero modes of wrapped M2 branes
. Thus, near , a complete low energy effective
theory should also contain these two additional vector multiplets.
Let us use  do denote the Lagrangian of this
more complete theory ("in", because the two extra vector
multiplets have been "integrated back in"). 
 has to
have the following properties:

 (i) Just as  in eq.
(), it is based on a cubic polynomial, but now this
is a polynomial in  variables. We call this polynomial
.

(ii) Whereas  is Abelian, 
exhibits  as a Yang-Mills-type gauge symmetry. This implies
that three of the five variables entering 
transform in the adjoint of ; the other two are 
singlets. We use   to denote the  
triplet and 
and  for the two singlets. The polynomial
 has to be 
invariant. 

(iii) The metrics  and  that
follow from  have to be positive definite.

(iv) Integrating out the two extra multiplets from
 should reproduce  and the
underlying prepotential  (eqs. (),
()).

In, it was shown that, modulo reparameterizations,
 (and with it  
) is completely fixed by (i)-(iv). The approach was to view
the integrating out process 
  as a two-step procedure, in which, in
 the language of Feynman diagrams, the two extra multiplets
 represented by, say,   and   are first removed as external
 lines by setting them equal to zero in .
 This yields an intermediate (unphysical) prepotential
V _in ^truncated  :=V _in _C^1=C^2=0 .In a second step, one then has to take into
account that the two extra multiplets can also occur as internal
lines and run in loops. Integrating them out will thus also
produce additional effective interactions among the remaining
fields. These induced interactions are subsumed in an additional
contribution , so that V =V _in ^truncated +V .
In order to determine , one simply has
to go backwards. As explained in,  
 is simply given by a one-loop correction to the 
term in , which in our case turns out to be 
, implying V _in ^truncated = STU +1 3 U^3 +1 6 (T-U)^3.This
truncated prepotential now has to be "untruncated", i.e., the
variables  have to be transformed to , and
 and  have to be appropriately re-inserted. Using the
list of admissible polynomials given in, one can show
that, modulo obvious linear transformations, there is essentially 
only one way to do that: The two  singlets are given
by  and , whereas . In
terms of these variables, 
becomes quadratic in , and re-introducing  and 
is simply done by  covariantization: 
.













The  -model in four dimensions   
In the previous section, we have reconstructed the low energy
effective theory of a five-dimensional string (or M-theory)
compactification near an  enhancement line in the moduli
space. The one-loop threshold effects allowed by 
supersymmetry added a certain degree of non-triviality to this
exercise. Nevertheless, one might wonder how much this
construction relied on the purely cubic form of the prepotential
in five dimensions. Let us therefore, in this section, consider
the same theory compactified to four dimensions. In other words,
we are now considering the heterotic string on  with
instanton numbers (14,10) or, equivalently, type IIA string theory
on the Calabi-Yau manifold 
. The generic low energy effective  theory
describes 4D,  supergravity coupled to three
Abelian vector multiplets and 244 neutral hypermultiplets. Again,
the hypermultiplets can be ignored, and the vector multiplet
couplings are  summarized in terms of a prepotential,
. Just as in five dimensions, this
prepotential depends on three variables . This time,
however, the fields  are complex, rather than real, and
they do not have to satisfy a hypersurface constraint of the form
(). Furthermore, the prepotential  no
longer has to be cubic. Instead,  can now be a rather
arbitrary holomorphic function of the moduli (with possible
logarithmic branch cuts and singularities). For 
,  turns out to be
 neueVersion  F  = STU + 1 3  U^3
+ 2 (2)^3  Li_3 ( e^-2 (T-U)  ) +
2 (2)^3  _k,l=0 ^  c_1(kl) Li_3 ( e^-2
(kT + lU)  ) +F ^(NP)  , where 
denotes the third polylog (see, e.g.,), and the
coefficients  can be found in. The term
 summarizes  non-perturbative corrections.

 The prepotential () has   a logarithmic 
singularity along the
 surface
, where two additional vector multiplets become massless and
enhance the gauge group to . At  and
, the gauge group is further enhanced to,
respectively,  and . In
contrast to the 5D case,  these symmetry enhancements do not
survive non-perturbative quantum corrections, and we
therefore have to restrict our considerations to the perturbative
heterotic string, dropping from now on the term
.

We will now try to derive an effective action, 
, that includes the two additional light vector multiplets
near  and describes the  gauge symmetry enhancement
. Except at the discrete points where further gauge
symmetry enhancement occurs, we expect this effective theory to be
non-singular. The underlying prepotential will be called
. Just as its  five-dimensional analogue,
 is a function of 3+2=5 variables: one
 triplet   and two singlets,  and
. Again, we expect  and 
to be related by a relation of the form F =F _in ^truncated +F , 
where 
, and 
 subsumes the threshold effects.

Let us introduce . Obviously, 
represents the order parameter of the symmetry breaking 
, and when we identify  with the
scalar superpartners of the -bosons (as we implicitly did
above), we have to identify . The mass of the 
bosons  is then proportional to the vev of . Integrating
them out induces a one-loop threshold correction to the gauge
coupling of the vector field , i.e.,  the
superpartner of the scalar field . This correction is of
the form 
. The quantity  is essentially the second
derivative of the prepotential, and if one inserts all prefactors
correctly, one deduces that  F  = -2  T_- ^2T_-  +A_2 T_- ^2 +
A_1 (T_+ )T_- +A_0 (T_+ ). Here,  is an arbitrary
constant related to the cut-off scale, and 
 and  are a priori undermined functions.

Using () and (), one can now
solve for . Expanding the
first polylogarithmic term in (), one then finds
that the  logarithmic singularity in  is precisely
cancelled by  as given in ()
. Thus,  is
regular at , as it should.

It remains to "untruncate" 
 to obtain the desired function .
Just as in five dimensions, this is done by first going over from
the variables  (or ) to the 
covariant variables  and then replacing everywhere
 by . Modulo obvious linear
combinations, the right change of variables turns out to be the
same as in five dimensions: 
, , .
Modulo theta angles, one then finds that, in terms of
the variables ,  only appears with even 
powers, provided that the as yet undetermined function
 vanishes identically: . The
substitution  can
then be readily performed.

It remains to determine the remaining unknown function
  that appeared in  eq. (). As is shown in
, a diagonal  subgroup of the
perturbative quantum symmetry 
 remains unbroken on the line   in the
'in' theory and implies .
Hence,  can at most be a quartic polynomial in .
Taking the 5D decompactification limit of ,
one can then even show that  can  be at most quadratic
in .

To sum up, up to a polynomial of the form 
, the prepotential   can be
reconstructed using only symmetry arguments and some 4D quantum
field theory reasoning. In order to fix the remaining three
coefficients, a few more couplings have to be considered. In any
case, it shows that the method we used successfully in 5D, can
also be applied in 4D.








Acknowledgement  The results presented in this talk were
obtained in collaboration with Jan Louis and Thomas Mohaupt
. The work was  supported in part by the German
Science Foundation (DFG).

 77 
 A. Strominger, B451  (1995) 96
 T. Mohaupt and  M. Zagermann, JHEP 0112  (2001)
026  J. Louis, T. Mohaupt and M. Zagermann, hep-th/0301125
 T. Mohaupt, talk given at the 35th Symposium Ahrenshoop,
 hep-th/0212200
 I. Antoniadis, S. Ferrara and T.R. Taylor, B460  (1996) 489
 G. Papadopoulos and P.K. Townsend, B357 
(1995) 300
 A.C. Cadavid, A. Ceresole, R. D'Auria and S.
Ferrara, B357  (1995) 76
 A. Klemm, W. Lerche and P. Mayr, B 357 
(1995) 313
 S. Hosono, A. Klemm, S. Theisen and S.-T. Yau,
Commun. Math. Phys. 167  (1995) 3001
 S. Kachru and C. Vafa, B450  (1995) 69
 M. Gu naydin, G. Sierra and P.K. Townsend, B242  (1984) 244
 E. Witten, B471  (1996) 195
 D.R. Morrison and N. Seiberg, B483 
(1997) 229; K.A. Intrilligator, D.R. Morrison and N.Seiberg, B497  (1997) 56
 J. Ellis,   M. Gu naydin    and M. Zagermann,
JHEP 0111  (2001) 024
 B. de Wit, V. Kaplunovsky, J. Louis and D.
Lu st, B451  (1995) 53
 I. Antoniadis, S. Ferrara, E. Gava, K.S. Narain
and T.R. Taylor, B447  (1995) 35
 J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, B463 
(1996) 315
 B. de Wit and A. Van Proeyen, B245 
(1984) 89
 N. Seiberg and E. Witten, B426  (1994)
19 [Erratum-ibid. B430  (1994) 485]
 V. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, B422  (1994)
57
 S. Weinberg, B91  (1980) 51



