
unsrt 

C  
G  
O  
H  
R  
C  
N  
ZZ  
IN  
IR  


Stability of six-dimensional hyperstring braneworlds 

Patrick Peter 
peter@iap.fr 
Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris, , FRE
2435-CNRS, 98bis boulevard Arago, 75014 Paris, France 

Christophe Ringeval 
christophe.ringeval@physics.unige.ch 
Departement de Physique Theorique, Universite de
Geneve, 24 quai Ernest Ansermet, 1211 Geneve 4, Switzerland,

Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris, , FRE
2435-CNRS, 98bis boulevard Arago, 75014 Paris, France 

Jean-Philippe Uzan 
uzan@iap.fr 
Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris, , FRE
2435-CNRS, 98bis boulevard Arago, 75014 Paris, France 
 Laboratoire
de Physique Theorique, CNRS-UMR 8627, Universite Paris Sud,
Batiment 210, F-91405 Orsay Cedex, France. 

January 22, 2003 

 
We study a six dimensional braneworld model in the case where the four
dimensional brane is described by a topologically stable vortex of a
U(1) symmetry-breaking Abelian Higgs model. We revisit the range of
the microscopic parameters that leads to gravity confinement on the
brane. In particular, we find that the necessary fine-tuning is much
tighter than previously though, and qualitatively different from that
of a five dimensional braneworld with a brane described by a domain
wall. The investigation of gauge invariant perturbations around this
background solution reveals that, contrary to the five dimensional
case, there exist perturbation modes which can only satisfy the
boundary condition of being bounded far from the brane provided they
are tachyonic inside the brane. The warped space-time structure that
is obtained this way is thus unstable. The genericness of our
conclusions is discussed; this will shed some light on the possibility
of describing our spacetime as a general six dimensional braneworld.
04.50.+h, 11.10.Kk, 98.80.Cq 
Introduction 
Following the advent of string theory  and its
implication that space may have more than the three dimensions (in
the Kaluza-Klein way) came the suggestion that the extra
dimensions could be much larger than previously expected, would it
be because of a smaller value of the Planck energy in the (finite
size) bulk , or because of a large curvature in the
(infinite) extra-dimensions . A novel idea came into play
with the assumption that we live on a hyper-surface, a
three-spatial dimensional 'brane', embedded in a larger
dimensional warped space-time bulk .

For any higher dimensional Universe model, it is essential to
confine gravity since gravitation is experimentally tested to be
three dimensional on many different scales, ranging from the
millimeter  to some Mega-parsec .
For a five dimensional anti-de Sitter bulk, gravity was shown to
be localized on the brane  and to lead to a viable
cosmological framework  provided the brane and bulk
cosmological constants are adjusted by hand. The situation is not
yet settled concerning the cosmological perturbations induced in
the brane . In the case the brane is modeled as a
domain wall-like topological defect, this fine-tuning transforms
into a tuning of the underlying parameters (masses, coupling
constant and bulk cosmological constant) .

Many mechanisms have been proposed to confine the other known
interactions and their associated particles: scalar  and
gauge  bosons, and fermions . In the latter
case the mechanism relies on a generalization of the cosmic string
case . The fermions are trapped in the brane in
the form of massless zero modes and some can even become massive,
although their mass spectrum is not compatible  with the
observed one . It was also suggested  that the
electroweak Higgs field, and thus the origin of electroweak symmetry
breaking, could be understood from the existence of an extra-dimension
in the form of a transverse gauge field component. Most of these works
were based on the simplifying assumption of a reflection symmetry with
respect to the brane, although a more refined treatment, not assuming
such a symmetry, appears possible .

Most of the relevant discussions on braneworld models have been
restricted to the case of one spatial extra-dimension, as
advocated in the framework of the eleven dimensional
realization of theory proposed by Hor ava and
Witten . Moreover, the underlying brane model of the
Universe is often assumed to be infinitely thin in the transverse
direction, so that (i) the induced gravity stems essentially from
Darmois - Israel junction conditions  and (ii) is
mostly independent of the microstructure of the brane, if any. No
such general condition is available in the less restrictive
situation of more than one extra-dimension that is the subject of
the present work.

To study braneworlds with more than one extra-dimension, it is
necessary to specify the microstructure of the brane to fix a model,
taking into account in particular the possibly finite thickness of the
brane . In particular, one needs to regularize long
range self interaction forces (including gravity). In the case the
force derives from a potential (in linearized gravity), the
self-interaction potential is well behaved outside the brane but will
be singular on the brane in the thin brane limit. One needs to
introduce a UV cutoff associated with the underlying
microstructure . The only case where such a procedure can
be avoided is that of hyper-membranes that can be satisfactorily
treated without recourse to regularization.

Much work has been devoted to warped geometries in six
dimensions . When considering explicit realizations in terms
of an underlying topological defect forming field
model , it seems that the six dimension case
represents a limiting situation: for more than two extra-dimensions,
it is not possible to confine gravity on the brane . At least
two questions arise: are the properties of gravity dependent on the
microscopic structure of the brane and is the chosen microscopic model
consistent with theory? The second question has started to be
addressed in Ref. , and it turns out that, for many
purposes, it is possible to consider defect-like realizations of
branes, as in the present article.

Before considering the possibility of trapping  particle
fields in a hyper-string embedded in an anti-de Sitter six-dimensional
bulk space-time (adS), it is necessary to determine the
background structure itself within a given field content, and decide
whether it is possible to localize gravity in the Universe thus
obtained, thereby generalizing the five dimensional case. This article
is devoted to this task and accordingly models the brane by a vortex
of a U(1) Abelian gauge Higgs model. Despite the fact that we agree on
the existence of a solution exhibiting a gravity localized on the
vortex, we find that it requires a more restrictive set of parameters
than found in previous analysis . In fact, it differs also
qualitatively from the five dimensional case. We then go on to analyze
the stability of this solution by studying the scalar modes of the
gauge invariant perturbations, as originally suggested in
Ref. . Restricting our attention to bounded
perturbations, perturbations satisfying the asymptotic condition
of not being divergent away from the brane (a condition necessary in
order to ensure that the bulk is close to anti-de Sitter space), we
find that the physically relevant modes must be tachyonic inside the
vortex-brane, hence initiating instabilities.

The article is organized as follows: after setting the field
theoretic framework both for the particles and gravity in
Sec. , we construct the Nielsen-Olesen ansatz for a
three-dimensional vortex configuration, set and discuss the
corresponding Euler-Lagrange field equations in
Sec. . We then show how to handle the boundary
conditions in Sec.  and solve numerically the field
equations in Sec. , insisting in particular on the
numerous technical difficulties, usually not enough emphasized in
previous works. This permits us to obtain the parameter range over
which gravity is localized. We then discuss some arguments leading
to the suggestion that such a defect realization of a brane in six
dimensions may be unstable in Sec. , and explicitly
exhibit the instabilities in Sec.  before ending by
some concluding remarks.

Vortex configuration in adS 
We consider the action for a complex scalar field  coupled to
gravity in a six dimensional spacetime
 
where  is the six dimensional metric with signature
,  its Ricci scalar,  the six dimensional
cosmological constant and ,
 being the six dimensional gravity constant(In 
dimensions, we relate  to the -dimensional
gravitational constant  by
, where
 is the surface of the
-sphere.) . The matter Lagrangian reads
 
in which capital Latin indices  run from 0 to 5,
 is the electromagnetic-like tensor defined by
 
where  is the connection 1-form. The U(1) covariant
derivative  is defined by
 
where  is the charge. The potential of the scalar field  is
chosen to break the underlying U(1) symmetry and thereby allow for
topological vortex (cosmic string like) configurations,
 
where  is a coupling constant and 
 is the magnitude of the scalar field vacuum expectation
values (VEV)(Note, that, because of the unusual number of
spacetime dimensions, the fields have dimensions given by ,
, , , ,
, ,  and
 ( being a unit of mass). This can be further
generalized in the dimensional case by: ,
, , ,
,  and ,
 and  being unchanged.) .

Motivated by the brane picture, we choose the metric of the bulk
spacetime to be of the warped static form
 
where  is the four dimensional Minkowski metric of
signature (), and  the polar coordinates in
the extra-dimensions. Greek indices  run from 0 to 3
and describe the brane worldsheet and we set 
. The action ()
with the ansatz () will admit static solutions
depending only on  so that the general covariance along the
four dimensional (physical) spacetime is left unbroken.

The Nielsen-Olesen like  ansatz for a generalized vortex
configuration is taken to be of the form  
where  is an integer, so that the only non-vanishing component of
the electromagnetic tensor is . With such an
ansatz, we shall now derive the relevant field equations and discuss
their solutions.

Equations of motion 
With the metric given by Eq. (), the non-vanishing
Einstein tensor components reduce to
 
where a prime denotes differentiation with respect to
. Similarly, the matter stress-energy tensor,
 
has non-vanishing components provided by the Nielsen-Olesen
ansatz () that are given by
 
It follows that the six dimensional Einstein equations, with our
conventions,
 
can be cast in the form
 

 

 
where we have introduced the dimensionless radial coordinate
 
as well as the dimensionless parameters
 
In Eqs. ( - ), we have introduced
the convention that a dot refers to a differentiation with respect to
the dimensionless radial coordinate .

The scalar field dynamics is given by the Klein-Gordon equation
 
which takes the reduced form
 
while the Maxwell equations
 
provide the single reduced equation for the only non-vanishing
component of the gauge vector field
 

The set of equations ( - ,
, ) is a set of five differential
equations for 4 unknown functions (, , , ).
Indeed, we have a redundant equation due the Bianchi identities. For
numerical practicality, we decide to pick up the following six
first-order independent equations (one can verify that the Higgs field
equation can be recovered from the following ones for )
 
where we have set the new independent functions
 
as well as
 
and
 

After discussing the behavior of these fields far from the vortex, far in the bulk, and on the brane itself in the following section, we
shall solve numerically Eqs. (-) in order to
determine the structure of the spacetime and defect system.

Boundary conditions 
Before solving any set of differential equations, one must discuss its
boundary conditions. By definition of the topological defect like
configuration, we require that the Higgs field vanishes on the
membrane itself,  for , while it recovers its
VEV, , in the bulk. These requirements translate into the
following boundary conditions for the function :
 
The corresponding boundary conditions for the 1-form connection are
given by
 
Note that only two out of these three conditions are actually
necessary to fully solve the system.

In order to avoid any curvature singularity on the string, the Ricci
scalar stemming from Eq. (), namely
 
has to be finite at  as the vortex is assumed to represent
our physical four-dimensional space. As a result, the warp functions
 and  have to vanish in the string core,
 
and the warp function  therefore scales near the string like
 
A coordinate transformation allows to choose , while
 and , defined by
 
can only be determined by the boundary conditions at infinity. At
this point, we remark that, contrary to what is assumed in
Ref. ,  is not a freely adjustable parameter,
and its value is completely determined as soon as the other
boundary conditions are imposed. Demanding , for
quantum stability reasons for instance, as we shall discuss later,
thus leads to an extra, physically motivated, constraint.

Near the string  
The field behaviors near the string, to leading order in , can
be extracted from the equations of motion () to
(). Assuming the truncated Taylor expansions
 
for the gauge fields, and
 
for the Higgs field, with  in order to satisfy the
boundary conditions (), and  in
order for  to be well defined at the origin,
Eqs. (), () and () yield
. Similarly, the warp factor  can be expanded around
 as
 
with  in order for the Ricci scalar to be well defined
[see Eq. ()]. By means of Eqs. (),
() and (), one gets
 
The next order in the Higgs field behavior is given by
Eq. () which, making use of
Eqs. ( - ), reads
 
With  given by the expression (), this implies
 
As a result, the behavior of the Higgs field around the string core is
only determined by the asymptotic solutions at infinity through
, as announced above, and the requirement 
only provides the constraint
 

 From a purely classical point of view, only  has to be
well defined at . However, in the general situation,
there always exists an integer  such that 
, in which case all derivatives of the Higgs field,
, with  are divergent in the core since the
 derivative already is. This is so unless the
bound is saturated, the equality  is strictly
satisfied so that  and then all derivatives of order
larger than  will strictly vanish. It is interesting to note
that in Eqs. () to (), the warp function 
(and thus ) appears only through the ratio  and .
As a result, the solution for a given winding number  and
, is also solution of a winding number  and
. This scaling permits to solve the
equations for a reduced set of parameters and yet obtain the
complete spectrum of solutions.

Far from the string 

Asymptotically, the anti-de Sitter spacetime is recovered provided
 
Denoting by an index 'F ' (standing for "fixed") the value
of the fields at infinity, it follows from Eqs. (),
() and () that the adS solution
is a fixed point for the set of Eqs. ( - ) with
,  for the Higgs and gauge fields, and with the
equations
 
for the warp factors. Eq. () can only be satisfied for
, since  would lead to  through
Eq. (). We can also check that the existence of such a
fixed point requires that the functions  and 
vanish. In this case, the asymptotic warp factors reduce to
 
The anti-de Sitter solution is obtained for  so that
 and we can now verify that  and
 effectively vanish. Indeed, from Eq. (),  scales
at infinity as
 
while Eqs. () and () lead asymptotically to
 
with
 
 From Eq. (), the gauge functions  and 
vanish at infinity provided
 
This is the first restriction on the available parameter space.

Numerical approach and problems 
Numerically, it is more convenient to solve the first order
differential system ( - ) where the explicit
dependencies in  have been absorbed into the warp function
. Indeed, would we not have defined the variables 
and  through Eq. () and considered instead the
original system in terms of the functions  and ,
we would have had to face the following technical difficulty. The
effect of the  term in the right hand side is to add flow
turning points where the signs of , , and 
change. As a result, growing exponential behaviors appear from these
turning points whatever the initial conditions and the direction of
integration. On the other hand, since there is no such flow inversion
in Eqs. ( - ), the exponential growth can be
simply suppressed by integrating from the fixed point, at a given
cutoff , toward the string core.

A backward Runge-Kutta numerical method of integration has been
used with the gauge field values starting at a large enough
distance  such that the fields are given by their
asymptotic expansion [see Eq. ()] with sufficient
accuracy,
 
while the Higgs field and warp factors are given by their values
at the fixed point, namely,
 
In order to recover the expected fields behaviors near the string
core, we demand that the numerical solution verifies
 
the other conditions being automatically satisfied (see
Sec. ). In general, the fine tuning of  and
 is not sufficient to obtain the previous constraints, the
integration stopping at a finite distance from the core at which the
square of the Higgs derivative vanishes and would become negative [see
Eq. ()]. As it was the case in five dimensions and previously discussed also in six dimensions , a fine
tuning between the parameters ,  and  is
required in order to reach . The matching with the expected
solution near the string is thus performed in three steps.

First, at fixed  and , and for arbitrary values
of  and , the parameter  is adjusted to push
the point where the Higgs field vanishes toward  in order to
satisfy the constraint (). Once this is performed, the
parameter  is fine tuned in order to satisfy
Eq. (), while for each value of ,  is
also recomputed to satisfy Eq. ().  Finally, once
Eqs. () and () are verified, the parameter
 allows to normalize the fields according to
Eq. (). Once all the constraints
( - ) are satisfied, one can check that
the warp factors are well defined in the core, and extract the values
of . The previous method is then reproduced for other values
of  and  in order to compute the parameter
surface in the three dimensional space 
leading to physical solutions.  However, keep in mind that there are
also additional constraints given by Eqs. () and
() which limit the surface.

* 
 
Parameter surface leading to anti-de Sitter spacetime in the
 space. The green region refers to
parameters leading to  where the second derivative of
the Higgs field is well defined at , while the red region
corresponds to , where only the first derivative is
finite in the string core. The thick curve gives the points leading to
 along which all the derivatives of the Higgs field are
well defined. We have also represented in purple the parameter area
giving . The shaded region is associated with
 and is thus not physical. 

Once a warped solution is reached, one still has to demand that the
first derivative of the Higgs field on the brane be well-behaved in
order for the brane energy, hence the cosmological constant, be
finite. This not-so-obvious requirement restricts again the available
parameter space. Moreover, one can also assume, as was done in
Ref. , that the Higgs field expansion around the vortex
core starts as , an assumption that may be justifiable
on the ground that the Higgs field is expected to be an analytic
function of space . In terms of our model, this
translates into . This provides an orthogonal constraint
which restricts even more the parameter space to a line, a one
dimensional subspace of a three dimensional space.

On Fig. , we have depicted the domains of
parameters leading to , , and
. In particular,  can only be obtained
for the parameters ,  and , living on the
curve whose least square power fit gives
 
the standard deviations being less than  all along the space we
studied. The typical field solutions in these three regions have also
been plotted on Fig. . As expected from the
analytical approach, the second derivative of the Higgs field is only
well defined in  for .

At this point, our results differ from those of Giovannini
  since we find only a curve in the parameters space
leading to . Indeed, in Ref.  it was assumed
that the relationship  was always verified, and the authors
have looked for parameters leading asymptotically to an anti-de Sitter
spacetime at infinity without considering the modification of the
fields in the string core. As a result, their relevant parameter space
was artificially enlarged to include the more general solutions
leading to  in our approach, and in particular the
unphysical ones with  (see Fig. ).

* 
 




The field solutions leading to anti-de Sitter spacetime in
the regimes where ,  and 
, obtained for  equals to
,  and 
respectively. In each case, the Higgs and gauge fields are plotted on
the left picture, the warp factors are plotted in the middle one,
while the right plot represents the field  involved in the
constraint equation (), with the warp function
 and .  
Fine-tuning and stability 
The solution we have just obtained for the fields surrounding a
brane-like vortex requires a fine-tuning of the underlying microscopic
parameters. We would like to compare this fine-tuning to its
equivalent in five dimensions. We argue here that even though the
fine-tuning required in five dimensions appears to be of the same
nature as the one needed in six dimensions, there exists a qualitative
difference. Whereas the five dimensional brane configuration turns out
to be stable with respect to scalar perturbations in the
bulk , this will not be the case for the
six-dimensional vortex under scrutiny here. Let us first see
qualitatively why we expect such a conclusion. Our analysis is
analogous to the one developed in Ref.  in the case of global
vortex and leads to similar conclusions.

In the five dimensional case, there are only two parameters,
essentially equivalent to our  and  (see, Ref.  and references therein) which have to be adjusted so
that the warp function, denoted in what follows by  to
distinguish it from its six-dimensional counterpart , vanishes at
the brane location. The corresponding tuning, necessary for the
consistency of a reflection symmetry with respect to the brane,
translates into a relation between  and , hence a one
dimensional curve in a two dimensional parameter space.  Let us
recapitulate the essentials of the five dimensional brane. The metric
is chosen as
 
and we now have , with 
.

In the limit , the equivalent of Eq. (), the  component of the 5D Einstein equations,
reads  
whose general solution is
 
with  and  an arbitrary constant of
integration. It is clear than in the general situation for which
, the solution () satisfies, recalling that
 is not necessary positive in this case,
 
This means that the boundary condition leading to the requirement of
anti-de Sitter in the bulk is a repeller (one would need the sign to
be  in the previous solution to be an attractor). One would thus
expect instabilities to easily develop. However, in the same limit
, one should consider as well the  part of the
Einstein field equations. It actually reads  which, by
comparison with Eq. () and its solution (),
implies that one must set  (we discard here the unphysical
situation, also satisfying the constraint, having  and
corresponding to a de Sitter divergent exponential in the metric).
This relation is therefore the only possible solution for the complete
set of Einstein equations. It is not a choice that can be made, or
fine-tuned, arbitrarily. This stems from the fact that there are only
two independent Einstein equations, one [the  part] being
dynamical while the other one [the  part] is a constraint. As a
result, there is no arbitrary integration constant that can be chosen,
and the solution, as it turns out, is stable .

This situation is to be contrasted with the string-like brane solution
discussed here. In six dimensions, the asymptotic form of
Eq. () reads
 
for which one obtains the general solution in the form
 
where . As in the previous case,  is an
arbitrary constant, to be matched with the vortex interior
solution. Again, if , one has
 
leading to an exponentially divergent warp factor for the
metric (). Only the particular value  can
smoothly join the interior metric to a six-dimensional anti-de Sitter
asymptotic spacetime. But now, because of the extra degree of freedom
provided by the other function , this is an explicit choice
and not a mandatory consequence of the Einstein equations. In other
words, the solution satisfying 
is also a point from which all trajectories diverge. This is related
to the fact that in the limit where the field contribution in the
stress-energy tensor is negligible with respect to the bulk
cosmological constant, Eqs. () and
() are two dynamical equations for the warp
functions  and , with Eq. () being a
constraint. The two first order (in  and )
dynamical equations require two constants of integration, of which the
constraint fixes only one (together with the requirement of an anti-de
Sitter asymptotic spacetime). The solution with arbitrary
(non-vanishing)  is thus a valid solution, contrary to the
five dimensional case. However, any non-zero value of  does
not correspond to a solution with gravity localized on the vortex.
One is thus led to conclude that the fine-tuning required in the 6D
case is much worse than in 5D since the physically relevant solution
is a set of measure zero in the full set of solutions.  This drives us
to ask whether such a solution is stable with respect to perturbations
in the fields or the metric. Note that the situation is even worse in
higher dimensions for which it is known that there is no warped
solution  localizing gravity at all.

Gauge invariant perturbations 
Gauge invariant variables 

In order to conclude on the stability of the configuration we
obtained, it is necessary to perturb this background solution in a
gauge-invariant way. As vector and tensor perturbations have been
investigated elsewhere , we shall concentrate on the
scalar part  of the perturbations(Here and
in what follows, the Scalar-Vector-Tensor decomposition is
understood to be with respect to the four-dimensional vortex.) . We
thus expand the metric as
 
where the scalar functions , , , , ,  and
 depend on all the coordinates  and are
assumed to be small.

A gauge transformation 
, with 
(scalar transformations only) implies three gauge degrees of freedom,
so we are left with four unknown functions to determine. The scalar
functions transform under a gauge transformation as
 
 From these relations, we can derive the four gauge invariant
variables
 
As in the usual cosmological case , these variables are
identical to the original variables once the choice of longitudinal
gauge () is made. The transformation leading to this gauge,
starting from an arbitrary gauge transformation, reads
 
and is unique. This gauge choice, which we shall for now on adopt, is
thus complete for metric perturbations, but also for the matter
ones. Indeed, in our model (), the matter perturbations
concern only the hyperstring forming scalar field  and its
associated gauge field . Note that in our framework, the
location of the brane is given by the zeroes of the Higgs field and
thus directly taken into account in its perturbations. Since we are
only interested in scalar perturbations, the perturbed fields can be
expanded as
 
where we have decomposed the scalar field perturbations in Fourier
modes around the vortex. Note that, for consistency, all the other
perturbations have also to be invariant by a complete rotation around
the hyperstring, and thus can also be decomposed in this way. We shall
in what follows consider a single excitation mode  and thus drop
the sum in Eq. (). Under the gauge transformation
 these
perturbations transform to
 
and are therefore not invariant. Similarly to the metric tensor
decomposition, we then define the gauge invariant quantities through
the relations
 
which also match with the original variables in the longitudinal gauge
().

Note that since we are interested in perturbation theory, we have to
keep in mind that all the perturbed physical quantities involved at
some initial time have to be close to the background solution. This
implies in particular that we must impose on the physically meaningful
perturbations to be asymptotically bounded: of all the possible
solutions of the perturbation equations which we discuss below, we
shall retain only those for which no long-distance divergence
appear. This, as it turns out, is extremely restrictive, and will lead
to the existence of tachyonic, unstable, modes.

Perturbed Einstein equations 

The Einstein equations, perturbed at first order, stem from
Eq. (). The perturbed metric tensor 
 is explicitly written in Eq. () and
allows, by means of Eqs. () and
(), the determination of the scalar part of the
perturbed Einstein and stress-energy tensors. They are derived in the
appendix, and Eq. () leads, in terms of the gauge
invariant variables, to the following equation of motion
 
 
for the  part of Eq. (). The  and
 components lead to the following equations,
respectively,
 
and
 
The purely bulk components of the first order perturbation of
Eq. () read
 
for the  part,
 
for the  component, while the mixed one 
leads to the equation
 
where  stands for the flat four-dimensional d'Alembertian,
 

Perturbed Maxwell equations 

By means of Eqs. () and (), we can
also derive the perturbed Maxwell equations stemming from
Eq. (), at first order in the fields. Since the Einstein
equations impose to the stress-energy tensor to be conserved, the perturbed
Maxwell equations are certainly already included in
Eqs. () to
(). Nevertheless, they mainly involve the
matter fields and may help to decouple the whole system. The 
component of the perturbed Faraday tensor gives
 
 
while the  and  bulk parts lead to
 
and
 
where use has been made of Eq. () to simplify the term
otherwise proportional to .

Perturbed Klein-Gordon equation 

In the same way, the Klein-Gordon equation () can also be
perturbed in terms of metric and matter fields, and by means of
Eqs. () and (), one gets
 
This equation can obviously be split into three terms with respective
phase factors ,  and
. Since the first two terms are real functions [see
Eq. ()], their angular dependence is completely
determined by their phases, while it is not the case for the last term
since it also involves complex numbers. However, as previously pointed
out, all the perturbations have to be invariant by a complete rotation
around the hyperstring and thus must be decomposable as a Fourier
series. As a result, the complex function that factorizes in
front of the term  must have an additional phase of
the form  where  is an integer.

In order to solve Eq. (), one has to consider various
possibilities. The first is that for which all the phases are
different. This, in turns, implies that all three amplitudes must
vanish separately: direct inspection of Eq. () then
shows that this is the case provided , or, in other words,
that the perturbation one considers vanishes identically for 
. Another extreme possibility is that for which all the phases are
equal: whatever the value of , this also imposes
. Finally, there is the possibility that they are equal two by
two (the third amplitude vanishing).  From Eq. (), this
procedure yields that the only solution having non-vanishing 
and  is then obtained for
 
However, in the case where , Eq. () also
demands that
 
Asymptotically, and in terms of the dimensionless parameters
previously introduced, Eq. () reads
 
where we have defined the four-dimensional mass of the mode by
 
and we have made use of Eqs. () and ().

Eq. () can be solved through the change of variable
 and function 
, leading to
 
whose solution is known see, Eq. (8.491) in Ref. ,
and gives
 
in which  is a Bessel function of order  and of its
argument in brackets for , and a modified Bessel function
for .

As a result, for any positive mass squared, , the
solution given in Eq. () behaves, asymptotically far
from the vortex, as an oscillatory exponentially divergent quantity
whose amplitude scales as
 
As previously discussed, such solutions are clearly not physical in
the framework of perturbation theory since they cannot be bounded, far
from the string, close to the background solution, here the string
forming Higgs field. Even worse, they would also lead to an
exponentially divergent energy density contrast! This means that the
solutions which respect physical boundary conditions can only be
obtained for negative mass squared, . Indeed, in this
case, the Bessel function in Eq. () is of modified
kind and admits an asymptotically exponential of exponential decaying
behavior
 
As a result, the physical perturbative solution leads to the
development of a tachyonic mode instability inside the brane. We are
led to the conclusion that the modes  are always
unstable. Since those are modes of the Higgs field, one might however
argue that this does not imply that the vortex system itself is
unstable since some symmetry argument [some residual U(1) gauge]
could protect these modes to ever be excited. In the following, we
will accordingly be interested in the not yet excluded case .

A subset of metric and cylindrical gauge perturbations 

According to the result of the previous section, we shall concentrate
on the case . Then, the perturbation, , of the
Higgs field respects the cylindrical symmetry of the vortex. In the
following we will be interested in the metric and gauge field
perturbations which are also isotropic in the extra-dimensions, with not explicit dependence in . This case is of particular
interest since it separates the full system into two disjoint pieces
that can be studied separately.

Introducing the new dimensionless parameters
 
and
) 
the Einstein equations () and
(), together with the Maxwell system
(-), can be recast, as
announced above, into the closed set
 
where the four-dimensional dimensionless squared masses 
and  have been defined for the gauge and metric
fields  and , respectively, as in
Eq. ()
 
There are three variables ,  and 
for four equations, one of them being thus a constraint equation. By
means of Eq. (), the metric perturbation
 can be expressed in terms of  only
 
while by means of Eq. (), Eq. ()
gives the relation
 
with
 
Finally, plugging the previous expressions for  and
, given by Eq. () and
Eq. (), in Eq. (), one
gets a second order differential equation involving only the
function , namely
 
whose asymptotic form is
 
This equation is identical to the perturbed Higgs field one
() in the case where , and leads to the
same conclusion: the only physical gauge field perturbations are
obtained for negative squared mass, , and represent
tachyonic instabilities generated by the gauge vector field inside the
brane.

Now, we have to verify that the constraint equation
() is consistent with
Eq. (). By means of Eqs. ()
and (), Eq. () can be
expressed in terms of  only, whose asymptotic form reads
 
Eqs. () and () are
consistent only if
 
Since the physically acceptable solutions demand that
, this last relation implies that the metric
perturbations  also develop time instabilities on the
brane.

The other set of equations for the variables
 has not been studied in
details. But it has the same structure that the previous one and
we expect to reach the similar conclusions, specially once
 has been shown to be unstable on the brane.

Conclusions 

In the braneworld framework, one issue is to determine how to model
the brane, and in particular to investigate whether its internal
structure influences the properties of gravity and of the other fields
living on the brane. Among other solutions, more interests has been
focused on the possibility for the brane to be realized by a
topological defect .

In five dimensions, it has been found that there always exists a
domain wall solution that confines gravity, which moreover is
symmetric with respect to both sides of the brane provided the
usual relationship between the bulk and the brane cosmological
constants is satisfied. This relationship translates into a
fine-tuning of the underlying microphysics
parameters . As far as the gravitational sector is
concerned, the properties of the braneworld are mostly independent
of the internal structure of the brane. It is then possible to
find various confinement mechanisms that lead to the existence of
bosonic  as well as fermionic zero modes that can be made massive  (although
with a spectrum not yet compatible with accelerator data). In
short, a five dimensional topological model of our Universe is,
for the time being, an open possibility both from the cosmological
and particles physics points of view.

In more than six large dimensions, the situation is much simpler, as
it was shown  that there is no warped solution if a
topological defect like description is assumed.

In six dimensions, the general machinery used to study
five-dimensional reflection symmetric braneworld does not apply,
mainly because of the necessity to regularize the long range
gravitational self-interaction . A way round is to
specify a complete model determining the internal structure of the
brane in order to grasp some features of six dimensional
braneworld models. Indeed, one will then need to discuss the
genericness of the conclusions drawn on a particular microphysics.
For instance, there exists a vortex-like brane configuration on
which gravity was shown to be localizable . However,
and contrary to what has been obtained in Ref. , we
have shown in this article that the fine-tuning necessary to
obtain this solution is much stronger, a line in a
three-dimensional parameter space, than in five dimensions.

To study the stability of this solution, we have performed a full
gauge invariant perturbation theory around the six dimensional vortex
background solution. Focusing on the scalar perturbations, we showed
that both the Higgs scalar and associated gauge fields lead to
instabilities in the brane if they are constrained to be bounded
asymptotically in the bulk. We also showed that there exists gravity
modes with negative mass squared confined to the brane. Note that we
have exhibited unstable bending and torsion modes. By analogy to the
cosmic string case , these modes are expected to be
excited as soon as one couples fermions to the vortex.

A priori, these conclusions on the stability of this six dimensional
braneworld model are specific to the case at hand. In particular they
depend on the field content of the underlying theory. However, since
we have exhibited a tachyonic mode in the gravitational sector, it
could be conjectured that six dimensional braneworld with anti-de
Sitter bulk will also be unstable, even in the singular brane
case. This would imply that multi-dimensional braneworld models could
only have one (large) extra-dimension of the warped form.

*

Perturbed quantities 

In this appendix, we derive all the gauge-invariant parts of the
various tensors necessary for the stability analysis.

Metric tensor 
According to Eq. (), the scalar perturbed metric
tensor reads, in terms of gauge invariant variables,
 
By means of
 
one can get the inverse perturbed metric tensor
 
The perturbed Riemann tensor can also be expressed as a function of
the perturbed metric tensor through the perturbed Christoffel symbols
 
where the covariant derivatives with respect to the unperturbed metric
have been noted with a semicolon, and the perturbed connections are
given by
 

Einstein tensor 

 From the perturbed Riemann tensor, the perturbed Einstein tensor can
be expressed in terms of gauge invariant variables by means of
 
where the perturbed Ricci scalar is
 
After some (tedious) calculations one gets
 
 
for the purely brane part, while the mixed ones read
 
and the purely bulk components are
 
where  is the brane d'Alembertian defined above
[Eq. ()].

Stress-energy tensor 

In terms of the underlying fields, the stress-energy tensor stemming from
Eq. () reads
 
with  given by Eq. (); to zeroth
order, this is given by
 
and to first order in metric and field perturbations, using
Eqs. () and (), this perturbed
matter Lagrangian reads
 
The purely brane part of the perturbed stress-energy tensor is therefore
given by
 
 
while the mixed components are
 
and the bulk ones
 

Faraday tensor 

In order to directly derive the perturbed Maxwell equations from
Eq. (), we have used the following perturbed Faraday
tensor whose purely brane components vanish
 
and with the mixed parts
 
The only non-vanishing purely bulk components end up being
 
Owing to these formulas, one can calculate the perturbed Faraday
tensor divergence involved in Eq. () by means of
 
where we have used the antisymmetry property of 
. The perturbed left hand side of Eq. () can
be, in turn, expressed in terms of the perturbed matter fields by
means of Eqs. (), () and
() to give the perturbed Maxwell equations
() to ().

 99 

 J. Polchinsky, String Theory , (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997).

 N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali,
Phys. Lett. B 429 , 263 (1998); 59 , 086004 (1999);
I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali, Phys.
Lett. B 436 , 257 (1998).

 L. Randall, R. Sundrum, 83 , 4690 (1999) .

 V. A. Rubakov and M. E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. B
125 , 136 (1983); M. Visser, Phys. Lett. B 159 , 22 (1985).

 J. C. Long et al ., arXiv:hep-ph/0210004 .

J.-P. Uzan and F. Bernardeau, 64 , 083004 (2001);
S.W. Allen, S. Ettori, and A.C. Fabian, arXiv:astro-ph/0008517 .

 P. Bine truy, C. Deffayet, and D. Langlois,
Nucl. Phys. B 565 , 269 (2000); C. Csaki, M. Graesser,
C. Kolda, and J. Terning, Phys. Lett. B 462 , 34 (1999);
J. M. Cline, C. Grojean, and G. Servant, 83 , 4245 (1999);
P. Bine truy, C. Deffayet, U. Ellwanger, and D. Langlois, Phys.
Lett. B 477 , 285 (2000); P. Kraus, JHEP 9912 , 11 (1999);
T. Shiromizu, K. Maeda, and M. Sasaki, 62 , 024012 (2000);
E. Flanagan, S. Tye, and I. Wasserman, 62 , 044039 (2000);
R. Maartens, D. Wands, B. Bassett, and I. Heard, 62 , 041301
(2000). See also V. A. Rubakov, Phys. Usp. 44 , 871 (2001);
Usp. Fiz. Nauk 171 , 913 (2001) and references therein.

 M. Giovannini, 64 , 064023 (2001);
A. Riazuelo, F. Vernizzi, D. Steer, and R. Durrer, arXiv:hep-th/0205220 .

 C. Ringeval, P. Peter, and J.-P. Uzan, 65 ,
044016 (2002).

 B. Bjac and G. Gabadadze, Phys. Lett. B 474 
(2000) 282.

 G. Dvali and M. Shifman, Phys. Lett. B 396 , 64
(1997); ibid. 407 , 452 (1997); S. L. Dubovsky, V. A. Rubakov,
and P. G. Tinyakov, 62 , 105011 (2000); G. Dvali,
G. Gabadadze, and M. Shifman, Phys. Lett. B 497 , 271 (2001);
P. Dimopoulos, K. Farakos, A. Kehagias, and G. Koutsoumbas,
Nucl. Phys. B 617 , 237 (2001); M. J. Duff, J. T. Liu, and
W. A. Sabra, Nucl. Phys. B 605 , 234 (2001); I. Oda, arXiv:hep-th/0103052 ; K. Ghoroku and A. Nakamura, 65 ,
084017 (2002); E. Kh. Akhmedov, Phys. Lett. B 521 , 79 (2001).

 A. Neronov, 65 , 044004 (2002).

 R. Jackiw, C. Rebbi, 13 , 3398 (1976).

 C. Ringeval, 64 , 123505 (2001);
C. Ringeval, PhD thesis, University of Paris VI, arXiv:hep-ph/0211126 .

 Particle Data Group, Eur. Phys. J. C 15 , 1 (2000).

 G. Dvali, S. Randjbar-Daemi, and R. Tabbash, 65 , 064021 (2002)

 B. Carter, J.-P. Uzan, Nucl. Phys. B 606 , 45
(2001);   R. Battye, B. Carter, A. Mennim, J.-P. Uzan, 64 , 124007 (2001); B. Carter, J.-P. Uzan, R. Battye, A. Mennim,
Class. Quant. Grav. 18 , 4871 (2001).

 P. Hor ava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 475 ,
94 (1996).

 P. Tinyakov and K. Zuleta, 64 , 025022
(2001).

 B. Carter, R. Battye, and J.-P. Uzan,
Comm. Math. Phys. (to appear), arXiv:hep-th/0204042 .

 C. P. Burgess, J. M. Cline, H. Firouzjahi, and
N. R. Constable, JHEP 0201  (2002) 014; I. I. Kogan,
S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou, and G. G. Ross, 64 , 124014
(2001); M. Gogberashvili and P. Midodashvili, arXiv:hep-th/0111132 ; M. Gogberashvili, Phys. Lett. B 484 , 124
(2000); M. Gogberashvili and P.  Midodashvili, Phys. Lett. B 515 , 447 (2001); A.G. Cohen and D.B. Kaplan, Phys. Lett. B 470 ,
52 (1999).

 R. Gregory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 , 2564 (2000);
R. Gregory and C. Santos, arXiv:hep-th/02008037 .

 T. Nihei, 62 , 124017 (2000);
T. Gherghetta and M. Shaposhnikov, 85 , 240 (2000).

 T. Gherghetta, E. Roessl, and M. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett.
B 491 , 353 (2000).

 N. D. Antunes, E. J. Copeland, M. Hindmarsh, and
A. Lukas, arXiv:hep-th/0208219 .

 M. Giovannini, 65 , 124019 (2002);
66 , 044016 (2002).

 M. Giovannini, H. Meyer, and M. Shaposhnikov,
Nucl.Phys. B 619 , 615 (2001).

 M. Giovannini, J.-V. Le Be, and S. Riederer, Class.
Quant. Grav. 19 , 3357 (2002).

 N. K. Nielsen and P. Olesen, Nucl. Phys. B 291 , 829
(1987).

 P. Peter, 45 , 1091 (1992).

 L.-H. Chan, 54 , 1222 (1985); 55 , 6223 (1997).

 V. F. Mukhanov, H. A. Feldman, and R. H. Brandenberger,
Phys. Rep. 215 , 203 (1992).

 I. S. Gradshteyn, I. M. Ryshik, Table of
Integrals, Series and Products , (Academic Press, New-York, 1980).



