


  





 
 _b  



F_#5#6 [
 
] 


G_#5#6 [
 
] 




F ^s _#5 [
 
](z) 



F ^t _#5 [

 
](z) 



G ^s _#5 [
 
](z) 



 ^s _#5 [
 
](x) 




 ^s _#5 [
 
](x) 



 ^s _#5 [
 
](x) 




 ^t _#5 [
 
](x) 




 ^t _#5 [
 
](x) 


 ^t _#5 [
 
](x) 





F ^t _#5 [
 
](z) 



G ^s _#5 [
 
](z) 


N^s _#5 [
 ] 




N^t _#5 [
 ] 






S   


 



_b   

_b  

_x  
 
P _  
P __#1   
U _q(sl (2,R )) 
U _q  (sl (2,R )) 


 
Recent progresses in Liouville field theory(This article gathers results
 obtained in collaboration with J. Teschner between 1997 and 2001.)    

 Benedicte Ponsot   

 Service de Physique Theorique, Commissariat
a l'energie
atomique,

 CEA L'orme des merisiers,
 F-91191 Gif sur Yvette, France. 

 
An explicit construction for the monodromy  of the Liouville
conformal blocks in terms of Racah-Wigner coefficients of  is
proposed. As a direct consequence, the expression for the
correlator of three boundary operators is obtained.



Introduction 
Liouville field theory has permanently attracted attention in the
last two decades in the context of strings in non critical
space-time dimensions; it is also an
alternative approach to matrix models in the study of 2D gravity
. In the context of the /CFT correspondence
(see and references therein), it is very closely
related to the  and 
WZNW models that describe strings propagating on euclidean and
 lorentzian 
.
 Liouville
field theory is the simplest case of non compact conformal field
theories, i.e. with a continuous spectrum of primary fields, and
serves as a prototype to develop techniques that can also be
useful in the study of more complicated CFT that share similar
features such as non compactness.

Given knowledge of conformal symmetry, spectrum and three point
function, one has an unambiguous construction for any genus zero
correlation function by summing over intermediate states. But the
decomposition of an n-point function as a sum over three point
functions can be performed in different ways. Equivalence of such
decompositions (crossing symmetry) can be seen as the most
difficult sufficient condition to verify in showing consistency of
the CFT as characterized by the spectrum and the three point
function. In this article, we will review how the
crossing-symmetry condition can be proven analytically thanks to
the explicit construction of the monodromy (or fusion matrix) of
the conformal blocks(Another method obtained after
 the one presented here can be found in
.)  in terms of Racah-Wigner coefficients (or  symbol)
for an appropriate continuous series of representations of ,
with deformation parameter  ( real), related to
the central charge of Liouville field theory by
. Although the relation between CFT and quantum groups
 is still rather mysterious,
there is a long story of connections between Liouville field
theory and quantum groups and more
recently in. The approach developed in these
latter papers is somewhat related to ours. We would like to mention
that the representions of  we consider here are continuous,
autodual in the sense that they remain unchanged when  is replace by , and do not have any
classical counterpart. Once the monodromy of the conformal blocks
is constructed, it is not so difficult to deduce the explicit
expression for the boundary three point function: an ansatz for it
in terms of the fusion matrix leads to a solution of the
consistency condition that expresses the associativity of the
product of boundary operators. The last task is to fix the
remaining freedom by imposing certain normalization conditions.
This result is published in and explained in the
last section of this article.







Preliminaries 
We consider Liouville field theory defined in the bulk by the
following action:
 
where  is the scalar curvature associated with the background metric
 and  is called the background charge that determines the
central charge of the theory



We will consider in the following the so-called weak coupling
regime, where the central charge . Let us note that
the latter remains unchanged under the transformation ;
so we take here the opportunity to mention that at the quantum
level (only ), Liouville theory enjoys the property of autoduality , i.e. the observables of
the theory are invariant when  and  are exchanged.

In what follows, we will consider Liouville theory on the flat
plane with trivial background metric ; in this
case the action reads
 
with the curvature sent at spatial infinity, which means for the Liouville
field the following boundary condition
 
We note the conformal primary fields 
(classically one has ,
where  is the classical Liouville field). These fields
 are
primaries with respect to the energy momentum tensor
 
and have conformal weight
. Because
of the invariance , one identifies the operator
 with its reflected image . In this lecture we
will consider the following two important sets of values for
.
 
Space of states: 

Because of conformal invariance, the space of states 
decomposes as a direct sum over tensor products
 of highest
weight representations of the left/right Virasoro algebra.
Arguments based on canonical quantization suggest
the following spectrum:
 
where each  contains a primary state 
satisfying
 
Degenerate Virasoro representations:

The fields  are degenerate with
respect to the conformal symmetry algebra and satisfy linear
differential equations. For example, the first non trivial case
consists of , and the corresponding operator satisfies
 
as well as the complex conjugate equation.

For , the operator  satisfies two complex conjugate
differential equations of the third order
 
It follows from these equations that when one performs the
operator product expansion of one of these degenerate operators
with a generic operator, then the OPE is truncated.
For example:
 
So  is nothing but the usual spin  (multiplied by
); according to the fusion rules, its tensor product with a
generic representation of spin  gives a sum of
representations with spin .  The structure
constants  are special cases of the bulk three point
function, and can be computed perturbatively as Coulomb gas (or
screening) integrals. One can take , as in
this case there is no need of insertion of interaction, whereas
 requires one insertion of the Liouville interaction
, and
 
where ; in the first line, we
used the property of invariance under global transformations to
set , and in the second line
.

There exists also a dual series of degenerate operators
 which have truncated operator expansion. If 
is a degenerate Virasoro representation (), then
the fusion rules are such that 
. In this case, the structure constants can be
computed pertubatively with  insertions of the Liouville
interaction  and 
insertions of the dual  interaction 
 where the dual cosmological
constant   is related to the cosmological constant by
the formula
 
This means that from the point of view of the path integral,
everything occurs as if we had added a dual interaction term in
the action. This term is compatible with conformal invariance, as
 has conformal weights . Finally, if
, then the three point function
can be evaluated by computing the integral 
Three point function 
The spatial dependence of the three point correlation function is
completly determined by conformal symmetry,




where

. It remains
only to determine the pure number . For
generic values of , the following expression for
this structure constant was proposed by 
where the special function(Definitions and properties of
the special functions  are collected in the
Appendix B.)   is such defined: 
, with 
, and
 is the Double Gamma function
intruced by Barnes, which definition is
 
The function  defined above is such that
, and satisfies the following
functional relation
 
as well as the dual functional relation with  replaced by
. .

 The
three point function enjoys remarkable properties:
 
  It has poles located at 
 (other poles are obtained by reflection 
), whose residues exactly coincide whith the pertubative
computation in terms of screening integrals explained above.

  It satisfies the reflection property, for each 
 
where  is the reflection amplitude that enters the two
point function
 
Explicitly:





The reflection amplitude satisfies the unitarity property 
 It is invariant when  is replaced by , and  replaced
by  defined in ().




Crossing symmetry 
With the three point function and the space of states at hand,
we are in a position to write down a four point function by
summing over intermediate states. Let us denote the four point
function
 
It can be written first in the -channel
 
 
 is the
-channel Liouville conformal block ,
represented by power series of the form
 
where  and the cross ratio
. It is a chiral  object, completly determined by Virasoro symmetry
(although there is no closed form known for it in general). It
depends on conformal weights only. We can use invariance under
global transformations to set , so
. The conformal block is normalized such that
 
We would like to stress that in general, the set 
does not coincide with the spectrum . This is the case
however if the external  are in the range






as the three point functions are analytic in this range. Outside
of this range, meromorphic continuation should be understood. Some poles
of the three point functions will cross the real  axis and
their residues will give additional contributions besides the
integral over the spectrum. For our discussion, it
will be enough to consider the external spins in the range above,
so we will integrate over the spectrum only.
  The four point function
can be written equivalently in the -channel
 
By comparison with the -channel,  and
 have been exchanged, so the cross ratio  is
replaced by  in the -channel.
   There exist(This is supported by an explicit computation in
a particular case treated in, and was subsequently proven
in.)  invertible fusion transformations between - and
-channel conformal blocks, defining the Liouville fusion matrix
(or monodromy of conformal blocks):
 
Then the crossing symmetry condition becomes
 
Properties of the fusion matrix 
 
    It is quite obvious that the fusion matrix should be invariant
   when exchanging columns and rows:
 
    As the conformal blocks depend on conformal weights only, so does the fusion matrix, i.e. it remains
   unchanged
  when any of the six  is changed into
  .
  Moore-Seiberg equations (or polynomial equations).

Although the Moore-Seiberg equations are proven to hold in
rational conformal field theory, we believe they continue to hold
even in the non compact case for coherency of the operator
algebra. Actually, we will prove in the next section that they
do  hold in the case of Liouville field theory. Let us
remind that they consist of
 
  one pentagonal equation
   
  two hexagonal equations
   
where .

  
These equations generate in genus zero all other polynomial equations
.
If one of the , (say ), corresponds
to a degenerate Virasoro representation, then the fusion
transformations symplify: the conformal blocks then exist only for
a finite  number of values of  and , so
that the fusion coefficients form a finite dimensional matrix
. It is enough to consider the case where 
or , higher cases are generated by the use of
the pentagonal equation(For example, the fusion
coefficients
 are
computed by setting in the pentagonal equation
.) . For , the conformal blocks are
known explicitly in terms of hypergeometric functions .
They read in the -channel:
 
and in the -channel:
 
The computation of the monodromy of these quantities is then standard.  Let
us introduce




Then the entries of this  matrix are:
 
The dual case whith  is obtained by substituting
 by .



Construction of the fusion matrix: strategy 
We now make the following change of normalization that preserves
the Moore-Seiberg equations:
 
where the function  reads
 
Now the crossing symmetry condition takes the form of an
orthogonality relation for

 
where
 
If , the matrix  becomes
 
where .
The entries of the matrix are thus purely trigonometrical.


To construct the fusion matrix explicitly, we propose to do the
following:
 
    Choose an appropriate quantum group:  with deformation parameter
  , seems to be a reasonable candidate to describe
  the internal structure of Liouville field theory.
    Construct the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, then the  symbol (or
  Racah-Wigner coefficients), for the continuous unitary
  representations 
  of .
    Find a suitable normalization for the Clebsch-Gordan
  coefficients such that the  symbol constructed
  coincides with the function
   (this will be
   done by comparing the found expression for the  symbol
   for the special case  with ()).
We would like to emphasize that:
 
    Such a construction by means of representation theory methods will 
ensure 
  the validity of the Moore-Seiberg equations for our fusion
  matrix.
    In this framework, the orthogonality condition for the
  Racah-Wigner coefficients is equivalent to proving crossing
  symmetry in Liouville field theory.







Clebsch-Gordan coefficients and Racah-Wigner symbol for a
continuous series of representations of  

A class of representations of  
 is a Hopf algebra with
generators  that satisfy the
-commutation relations






The coproduct is






The center of  is generated by
the -Casimir
 
The real form , has the following star
structure for its unitary representations





We realize the set of unitary continuous representations
 on the Hilbert space
 in terms of the Weyl algebra generated by
 and  where
:
 
where  is the operator of multiplication by 
 and  is the shift operator acting on a function
 of the real variable  as
. Note that we are dealing with unbounded operators, as the quantum group is non compact.

Remark :

In the limit where ,
one has
 


The representation will be realized on the space
 of entire analytic functions  that have
a Fourier transform  which is meromorphic in
 with possible poles at
 
They are unitarily equivalent to a subset of the integrable
representations of  that appear in the classification of
. In particular, the generators have self-adjoint
extensions in . The -Casimir acts as a
scalar in this representation
 
Remark :

The representations we consider here have the remarkable property
that if one introduces  by
replacing  in the expressions for  given above,
one obtains a representation of
,
 on the same space .
On this space, the generators of the two dual quantum groups
commute. This autoduality of our representations
 is related to the fact that they do not 
have a classical limit when . This is after all not so
surprising, because autoduality in Liouville field theory is a
characteristic of the quantum theory only. We also refer the
reader to for discussions on the closely related
concept of the modular double of . Lastly, we note that
representations  and  are
equivalent.



Clebsch-Gordan decomposition of tensor products 
The Clebsch-Gordan map 
 can be explicitly represented by an integral
transform





The distributional kernel  is the
Clebsh-Gordan coefficients ( symbol). It is an invariant with
respect to the action of the quantum group and satisfies
 
where  means transposed action. These equations can be
solved with the following result:
 
We introduced the function 
(see Appendix B for the definition of ) that satisfies the
functional relation ,
as well as the dual equation with  replaced by . The
coefficient  is a constant that normalizes
the  symbol. We choose, for reasons that will be explained
later,
 
It follows from the construction of a common spectral
decomposition for the Casimir operator  and the
third generator  that the Clebsch Gordan coefficients
satisfy the orthogonality and completeness relations:
 
Note that  (see equation
()).
 
From the completness relation it follows that our autodual
representations are closed under tensor product , which is a
priori  non trivial if there are other unitary representations of
.




Racah-Wigner coefficients for  

It is possible to construct two canonical bases of  
. The decomposition of this representation into irreducibles can be done in two different ways, by iteration of the
Clebsch Gordan mapping
) 
either by using 
or 
The expression for the first base in the -channel is given by
 
and similarly for the -channel base
 
From an argument of completeness and orthogonality it follows that the bases 
and   are related by a transformation
 
defining thus the Racah-Wigner coefficients. Their construction
implies the othogonality condition which is equivalent to proving
crossing-symmetry in Liouville field theory
 



Explicit computation of the Racah-Wigner coefficients 
It seems a priori  difficult to compute the integrals
() and (), as
  are functions of the four variables ;
 however, one simplifies the problem in the limit where  and 
 by making use of the asymptotics of the  function
 
The result is then expressed in terms of  and
 . It turns out that it is convenient to set . Let .

We obtain in the -channel
 
with
 
where the function  is the -deformed
hypergeometric function in the Euler representation defined in the
Appendix C.

Similarly, we have in the -channel
 
with
 

Now we use the normalization
 
and the fact that 
 and 
 form complete sets of generalized
eigenfunctions for the operators  and  respectively
 
where 
. 

We get
the following expression for the Racah-Wigner symbol:
 
Using now the Barnes representation for the hypergeometric
function - presented in the Appendix C, the Racah-Wigner
coefficients can be expressed explicitly in terms of a
-hypergeometric function - in the Barnes
representation:

 
where:








Now we set : the fusion rules are





In this case some poles of the integrand will cross the imaginary
axis. It is not difficult to compute the residues, and one finds
 
The normalization  introduced in equation () has been chosen
such that the Racah-Wigner coefficient equals  for
. It follows from a uniqueness argument for the fusion
matrix (see and Appendix C of) that these
two objects are equal for any values of .


Expression of the fusion matrix  It is now shown that
,
so we deduce thanks to equation () the
expression for the fusion matrix:

 
where:








One can check explicitly that the fusion matrix is indeed
invariant with respect to the exchange of rows and columns, and
that it depends on conformal weights only. Some of these
properties are trivial to check, others requires the use of
transformation properties of -deformed hypergeometric functions
like the one presented in the Appendix C.




Application: Boundary three point function 
We now consider Liouville theory on a simply connected domain
 with a non trivial boundary . 
can be either the unit disk, the upper half-plane, or the infinite
strip. A conformally invariant boundary condition in LFT can be
introduced through the following boundary interaction
 
where the integration in  is along the boundary while  is
the curvature of the boundary in the background geometry . We
will consider the geometry of the Upper Half Plane (flat metric
background)
 
with the boundary condition at 
 
and the Neumann condition for the Liouville field  on the real
axis. We call  the boundary cosmological constant, by
analogy with the bulk case. There is actually a one-parameter
family of conformally invariant boundary conditions characterized
by different values of the boundary cosmological constant .
We shall denote the boundary operators
 (classically they correspond
to the boundary value of , where 
is the classical Liouville field: ). The boundary
operators have conformal weight ,
and are labelled by two left and right boundary conditions
 and  related to  and
 by the relation 
Let us note for real values of  the two following regimes
for the parameter :
 
if ,
then  is of the form 
if ,
then  is real.
Anticipating that all relevant objects will be found to possess
meromorphic continuation with respect to the boundary parameter
, we shall discuss only the first regime explicitly in the
following. The Hilbert space was found to decompose
into irreducible
 representations of the Virasoro algebra:
 
Contrary to the pure bulk case situation where the cosmological
constant enters only as a scale parameter, in the boundary case,
the observables depend on the scale invariant ration
: for example, a correlation function with the bulk
operators  and the
boundary operators

 scales as follow
 
where  is some scaling function. The observables are autodual
provided the dual cosmological constant  is related to
 as in (), and the dual boundary cosmological
constant is defined as follows





 In order to characterize LFT on the upper half plane,
one needs to know additional structure constants beside the bulk
three point
  function .
 
bulk one point function 
boundary two point function 
We give here the explicit expression for the boundary reflection
amplitude:
 
It satisfies the unitarity relation
.

bulk-boundary two point function(The bulk one point function is a special case of the
bulk-boundary coefficient with .) 
 
boundary three point function
 
We now proceed to the determination of the latter quantity.


Associativity condition 
Let us consider a four point function of boundary operators. This
quantity can be equivalently written(One restricts
oneself to the case where 
 are close enough to Q/2. In this case,  is of the
form . Meromorphic continuation is understood otherwise.) :
 
in the -channel
 
in the -channel
 
Using the fusion transformation (), the equivalence
of the factorisation in the two channels can be rewritten:
 
The following ansatz
 
yields a solution to (), as was noticed in
 (one recognizes the pentagonal equation
()). The functions 
appearing are unrestricted by (), and will
turn out to correspond to the normalization of the boundary
operators . We will show that it
is possible to compute this normalization explicitly, and that the
ansatz () is indeed consistent with the
normalization required for the boundary two point function.

Normalization of the boundary operator 
The normalization is easily computed using the special
value(In, it is the value  that is
used to determine to normalization of the boundary operators.) 
. The degenerate operator
 is a non vanishing  primary
field in general : it is shown in that already at
the classical level we have




where  is the boundary value of the classical
stress-energy tensor:




and  is the classical Liouville field. This
relation means that generically, the second order differential
equation has some non zero terms in the right hand side, unless 
 This effect holds at the quntum level too: if the boundary and bulk cosmological constant are related as



then the second order differential equations holds for the boundary operator
 .
It is argued in that this remark with the structure of
singularities of the boundary two point function suggests that the
level 2 degenerate boundary operator
 has a vanishing null vector if
and only if the right and left boundary conditions are related by
. Under this suggestion, the operator
product expansion of this degenerate operator with any primary
field  is truncated
 
where as in the bulk situation,  are structure
constants and are obtained as certain screening integrals. In the
first term of () there is no need of screening
insertion and therefore  can be set to 1. Let us
insert in () the operator
. Together with the two
point function
 
one gets the three point function
 
Plugging these special values in (), one
finds that the normalization satisfies the following first order
difference equation
 
where the fusion coefficient on the right hand side  is
explicitly written in the Appendix A. One finds for the
normalization
 
the remaining freedom being parametrized by the function
. Let us furthemore note that one may
derive a second finite difference equation for the normalization
 obtained by replacing  by
, if one considers the dual operator
. Taken together, these
functional relations allow one to conclude that our solution is
unique at least for irrational values of . Let us now turn to
the determination of the function : we now
insert the operator  and
take the expectation value
 
On the one hand,  requires one insertion of the
boundary interaction  and was
explicitly computed in with the following result
 
on the other hand, () reads
 
where the explicit expression for  can be found in the
Appendix A. By identifying the expressions obtained, one finds
 
One nows collects the pieces together and the expression for the
structure constant follows 
the coefficients ,  and  read












Remarks 
 
   One may explicitly check that





  It can be proven that the boundary three point function is cyclic
invariant with the help of symmetry properties of the fusion
coefficients, see Appendix B.2 of.
   One recovers the expression for the boundary reflection amplitude
from the boundary three point function the same way as in
 where the bulk reflection amplitude is recovered from
the bulk three point function (see equation ()). Using
the fact that the fusion matrix depends on conformal weights only,
and is thus invariant when ,
 
From the expression of the normalization of the boundary operator,
one recovers the boundary reflection amplitude computed in
 
        The expression of the boundary three point function in terms
    of the fusion matrix confirms the remark made in    that any degenerate field 
    has truncated operator product expansion if 

     and are therefore in analogy with the fusion rules for
    the degenerate bulk fields (and respectively with  replaced by ).


Acknowledgements 
The author gives heartfelt thanks to the organizers of the conference, in
particular to Sasha Belavin, for the invitation to participate.  A. Butscher
is acknowledged for improving the English of this manuscript.




Appendix A. Some
residues of the Liouville fusion matrix 

It is well known that in the case where one of 
, say  equals 
where  and where
a triple , 
 which contains  satisfies the fusion rules of,
 one will find that the fusion coefficients that multiply the conformal blocks are residues of the
  general fusion coefficient.

In the case where , the fusion rules are:





There are four entries for the fusion matrix in this special case




which expressions are well known to be:
 
The dual case where  is obtained by substituting
 by .

Appendix B. Special functions 
 
 function 

The Double Gamma function introduced by Barnes is
defined by:
 
Definition: .

Functional relations:
 
 is a meromorphic function of , whose poles are located
at
.

Integral representation convergent for 
 
 function 

Definition:  

Functional relations:
 
 is a meromorphic function of , whose poles are located
at ,
and whose zeros are located at .

Integral representation convergent in the strip 
 
 function 

Definition:  

Functional relations:
 
 is an entire function of  whose zeros are located at  and ,
 .

Integral representation convergent in the strip 
 



Appendix C. -deformed hypergeometric function 
 The results
presented here come mainly from. The
-hypergeometric function  is
solution of the second order finite difference equation:
 
where .

Remark: In the following limits, the equation becomes:











which is the usual hypergeometric equation. Note that in the
deformed case, there is no singularity at  anymore.

Integral representations:
 
Analogue of the Barnes representation:
 
The integration contour is located to the right of the poles:








and to the left of the poles:








where .

The integral is uniformely convergent in the set of 
 such that  
.
Analogue of the Euler representation:

Let .
 
where 

The integration contour is located to the right of the poles:








and to the left of the poles:








with .


A useful transformation: 
 


This is the equivalent in the deformed case of the classical
transformation:
 

Two identities: 
 





 99 

 A. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. B103  (1981)
207

T. Curtright, C. Thorn, "Conformally invariant quantization of Liouville
theory" Phys. Rev. Lett. 48  (1982) 1309



 J.-L. Gervais, A. Neveu, Nucl. Phys. B224  (1982) 329; Nucl. Phys. B238  (1984)
3125; Nucl. Phys. B238  (1984) 396;
Nucl. Phys. B257 [FS14] (1985) 59


 V. Kazakov, Phys. Lett. B150  (1985)
282; F. David, Nucl. Phys. B257  (1985) 45;  V. Kazakov,
I. Kostov and A. Migdal, Phys. Lett. B157  (1985)


 O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. Maldacena, H. Ooguri
and Y. Oz, "Large N field theories, string theory and gravity",
Phys. Rept. 323  (2000) 183, hep-th/9905111

 L. D. Faddeev, L. A. Takhtadjan, "Liouville model on
the lattice", Lect. Notes in Physics 246 ,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986, 166-179

 L. A. Takhtadjan, "Topics in quantum geometry of
Riemann surfaces: Two dimensional gravity", in: Quantum groups and
their applications in physics, Proceedings of Enrico Fermi summer
school, Como 1994. Edited by L. Castellani and J. Wess. IOS Press,
1996, hep-th/9409088



 O. Babelon,  "Extended conformal algebra and Yang-Baxter equation", Phys. Lett. B215 
(1988) 523-529


J.-L. Gervais, Comm. Math. Phys. 130  (1990) 252

 J.-L. Gervais and J. Schnittger, Phys. Lett. B315  (1993) 258,  Nucl. Phys. B413 
(1994) 433, Nucl. Phys. B431  (1994) 273

E. Cremmer, J.-L. Gervais and J.-F. Roussel,
Comm. Math. Phys. 161  (1994) 597

 J.-L. Gervais and J.-F. Roussel, Nucl. Phys. B426 
(1994) 140

B. Ponsot, J. Teschner, "Liouville bootstrap via harmonic analysis on a noncompact quantum group.",
 hep-th/9911110

B. Ponsot, J. Teschner, "Clebsch-Gordan and Racah-Wigner coefficients for a
continuous series of representations of ",  Comm. Math. Phys
224  (2001) 3, math-QA/0007097


B. Ponsot, J. Teschner, "Boundary Liouville Field Theory: Boundary three point function",
  Nucl. Phys. B622  (2002) 309, hep-th/0110244

J. Teschner, "Liouville theory revisited", Class. Quant. Grav. 18 : R153-R222 (2001),
 hep-th/0104158

I. Runkel, "Boundary structure constant for the A-series Virasoro
 minimal models", Nucl. Phys. B549  (1999) 563, hep-th/9811178

A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, "Infinite conformal symmetry in 2D
 quantum field theory", Nucl. Phys. B241  (1984) 333


B. L. Feigin, D. B. Fuchs,
 Representation of the Virasoro algebra, in: A. M. Vershik, D. P. Zhelobenko (Eds),
  Representations of Lie groups and related topics, Gordon and Breach, London, 1990.

V. S. Dotsenko and V. A. Fateev, "Four point correlations
functions and the operator algebra in the two dimensional
conformal invariant theories with the central charge "
Nucl. Phys. B251  (1985) 691




H. Dorn and H.-J. Otto, Nucl. Phys. B429  (1994) 375, hep-th/9403141

A. B. Zamolodchikov and Al. B. Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B477  (1996) 577, hep-th/9506136

E. W. Barnes, "The theory of the double
gamma function", Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A196  (1901) 265



 J. Polchinski, "Remarks on Liouville field theory"
in Strings'90, R. Arnowitt et. al.  eds, World Scientific
1991; Nucl. Phys. B357  (1991) 241



 A. Neveu, unpublished






G. Moore, N. Seiberg. "Classical and quantum conformal field theory", Comm. Math. Phys. 123 
(1989) 177

K. Schmuedgen, Lett. Math. Phys. 37  (1996) 211-222

L. D. Faddeev, "Modular Double of Quantum Group", math.QA/9912078


V. A. Fateev, A. B. Zamolodchikov and Al. B. Zamolodchikov, "Boundary Liouville field theory I",
hep-th/0001012

J. Teschner, "Remarks on Liouville theory with boundary", hep-th/0009138








J. Teschner, unpublished

K. Hosomichi, "Bulk-Boundary Propagator in Liouville Theory on a Disc", JHEP 0111 
 044 (2001), hep-th/0108093.

Al. B. Zamolodchikov, conference on Liouville field theory,
Montpellier January 1998, unpublished.
















M. Nishizawa, K. Ueno, Integral solutions of q-difference equations
 of the hypergeometric type with , q-alg/9612014









