










Cosmology of Rolling Tachyon
Proceedings of Pac Memorial
Symposium on Theoretical Physics, pp.209-239 (Chungbum Publishing 
House, Seoul). Talk was given by Y. Kim.  

Chanju Kim 

Department of Physics, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea

E-mail: cjkim@ewha.ac.kr 

Hang Bae Kim 

Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Lausanne,

CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

E-mail: HangBae.Kim@ipt.unil.ch 

Yoonbai Kim and O-Kab Kwon 

BK21 Physics Research Division and Institute of Basic Science,

Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea

and

School of Physics, Korea Institute for Advanced Study,

207-43, Cheongryangri-Dong, Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-012, Korea
 
E-mail: yoonbai@skku.ac.kr, okwon@newton.skku.ac.kr 





We study dynamics of rolling tachyon and Abelian
gauge field on unstable D-branes, of which effective action is given by
Born-Infeld type nonlocal action. Possible cosmological evolutions
are also discussed. In the Einstein frame of string cosmology, 
every expanding flat universe is proven to be decelerating. 







Introduction 
Recent analysis of string theory  suggests that classical dynamics of tachyon
on an unstable D-brane is described by a scalar Born-Infeld type action
with a runaway potential .
Characteristic of such tachyon effective theory is absence of perturbative
tachyonic modes around the potential minimum and existence of spatially
homogeneous rolling tachyon configuration . In the background 
of the rolling tachyon, Abelian gauge field on the D-brane cannot support
perturbative spectrum at late-time . In this review, we 
summarize firstly bosonic effective action both in the bulk and on the 
D-brane, together with shapes of the tachyon potential. In section 3, 
we introduce Carrolian limit, and then discuss nonexistence of perturbative
spectra of the tachyon and the Abelian gauge field in the potential
minimum, of which dynamics are governed by nonlocal D-brane action.
For the tachyon, there exists the classical rolling tachyon solution
connecting smoothly unstable maximum of the potential and stable minimum 
at infinity.

Though the situation seems not to be matured yet, string cosmology must
be an intriguing subject to be tackled at every step of progress in both
string theory and observational cosmology .
Recently, inspired by string theory D-branes and heterotic M theory,
brane cosmology attracted much attention.
Brane cosmology assumes that our universe starts out with branes embedded
in the higher dimensional spacetime, either stable or unstable.
In such context, cosmology of the rolling tachyon must be an attractive 
subject . Topics included inflation, dark matter, 
cosmological perturbation, and reheating despite stringent difficulty 
in the simplest versions of this theory. A nice aspect for the cosmology
is nothing but the absence of open string excitations so that
classical analysis of late-time based on homogeneity and isotropy may
lead to a solid prediction. In section 4, we briefly describe 
system of gravity and the tachyon. The obtained universe in the simplest
set predicts that expanding universe is accelerating at onset stage but
turns to decelerating phase at late-time . Finally, the
scale factor approaches a constant.
Our main concern is string cosmology involving graviton, dilaton, and the
tachyon. In the string frame, we obtain flat space solutions
at both the early epochs and late-times in closed form.
When transformed to the Einstein frame, analysis shows that every expanding
universe of the graviton-tachyon-dilaton system should be decelerating
irrespective of the specific shape of the tachyon potential. Specific form of
the scale factor is proportional to .

We conclude with a summary of this paper. Sometimes, same notations are used 
in different sections for convenience.










Setup 
Effective action of bosonic sector of D3-brane system of tension  
is described by the  
following action in string frame  
where cosmological constant  is assumed to be vanished in what
follows.(Other effective actions different from Eq. ()
can also be considered. For example boundary string field theory(BSFT)
action for a non-BPS D-brane was also proposed and studied .) 
The (quadratic) action in the first line of Eq. () 
is bulk action
of graviton , dilaton , and antisymmetric
tensor field  of rank 2 of which field strength  
is defined by 
. The action induced on the D3-brane
is Born-Infeld type nonlocal action given in the second line of 
Eq. (), which involves kinetic terms of tachyon  
and Abelian gauge field 
satisfying .
Note that the tachyon  and the Abelian gauge field  were
rescaled as  and 
 to absorb  in front
of the kinetic terms.
 
Since we will deal with two classical topics in this paper, i.e., one is
string cosmology including the rolling tachyon  and 
the other is evolution of electromagnetic waves in the background of 
the rolling tachyon , let us firstly read equations of motion
from the action ()
 
 
 
 
where
,
,  is the cofactor of ,
and  is the symmetric part of .

The tachyon potential  multiplied in front of the Born-Infeld type action 
() is known to measure varying tension of the unstable D-branes.
Though there seem no consensus and no exact computation on the
form of tachyon potential , it should have its maximum, max(, 
and minimum, min(. Some known computations from string theories are
as follows . For bosonic string theory, we have
 
and, for superstring theory, we have
 
String theory calculation ()-() tells us that 
favorable form of the tachyon potential supports  
for small  and  for large .
Since the potential  must be a smooth function in the intermediate region,
connecting two asymptotic expressions, a typical example is  
In this paper, considering convenience in analytic computation, we adopt
 
which is also consistent with the results of string theory 
()-() (See Fig. ).
 
figure=20pacfig1.eps,height=7cm  

Tachyon potential 
 




Tachyon and Gauge Field 

Among various bosonic degrees of freedom, dynamics of the tachyon  and
the gauge field  is governed by nonlocal kinetic terms 
in the brane action ().
Before discussing their dynamics directly, let us consider a massless 
noninteracting real scalar field  described by Lorentz-invariant 
linear wave equation
  
If we take two singular limits known as the Ino no -Wigner limits,
infinite velocity limit, , goes to Galileo's limit
of action at a distance described by an elliptic equation :
  
which we encounter frequently in Newtonian dynamics. On the other hand, 
the opposite velocity dominated limit, , called as
Carrolian limit is described by an ordinary differential equation :
 

A natural implication from the above discussion is possible absence of plane
waves in the Carrolian limit of corresponding field theory. Instead 
time evolution of homogeneous configuration may be dominated. 
Though both limits are singular in the context of group theory, we will
use the speed  as a continuous parameter of range  as we 
have done in the Galileo's limit where its value is taken from 
from one to infinity.

In this section, we will briefly review rolling tachyon in flat spacetime
with disappearance of perturbative tachyonic spectrum at the bottom of
the potential  and discuss singular evolution of perturbative 
electromagnetic field in background of the rolling tachyon.








Rolling tachyon in flat spacetime 

Let us begin this subsection with discussing physics of unstable D-branes 
in the simplest setup. If we consider solely motion of the tachyon 
in flat spacetime, it is depicted by  
 
where specific form of the tachyon potential  is chosen by 
Eq. (). 
Note that 
 up to the quadratic terms
and it holds in an exact form as far as homogeneous configurations are
concerned such as the cosmology described in terms of
Robertson-Walker metric of our interest. Equation of motion is
 
where  and 
 
Energy-momentum tensor  is given by
 

Since  is unique stationary point of the tachyon potential , 
we perturb
the action () up to quadratic terms to read perturbative spectrum.
For small , we have
 
where the positive cosmological constant at  is subtracted in the action.
As expected, the sign in front of mass term is negative so it is tachyonic
on top of the potential . For large , the tachyon potential 
is approximated as . Introducing a new small
order parameter such as , we obtain a 
quadratic action with positive mass term
   
Though this seems to imply existence of a perturbative tachyonic 
spectrum of mass 
, it is an artifact of quadratic approximation since
 is not a stationary point of the tachyon potential
as shown in the Fig. . 
To be specific, let us consider a plane wave solution
 and then we have 
. Inserting these into the equation 
of motion (), we get the following dispersion relation
 
Note that , the dispersion
relation does not have any nontrivial solution but can only be satisfied 
for infinite . The mass-shell condition we derived through a
quadratic approximation () was reproduced by a Taylor expansion of 
Eq. () up to quadratic terms for small .

Absence of perturbative tachyon spectrum does not lead to nonexistence of 
classical configurations. We may take into account an intriguing lesson
from the Carrolian limit () of the wave equation. Suppose that 
we have a homogeneous tachyon configuration with  and 
consider its classical time evolution . Then only diagonal components of
the energy-momentum tensor () survive and the equation of motion 
() is integrated to conservation of energy 
, i.e., 
Hamiltonian density  is
 
where  and
,  are the initial values of  and .
It is analogous to the aforementioned Carollian limit ().
Constancy of the Hamiltonian density () forces 
 for any finite  as .
For the tachyon potential (), we have a solution of rolling tachyon
 
where 
and .
At late-time regime, the obtained tachyon solution ()
is approximated as expected, i.e.,  irrespective of the 
initial values of  and .
Note that the pressure  is negative and 
approaches zero as time elapses, which
coincides with vanishing Lagrangian limit
 
 From equation of state , we read
 
where  at  and  at 
.






Gauge field and rolling tachyon 
When we turn off antisymmetric tensor field of second rank 
in the Born-Infeld type action in Eq. (),
effective bosonic action of unstable D3-brane system is given 
by  
 
To proceed, we introduce a few notations. We first define
 
and barred covariant field strength tensor 
 
with Eq. ().
Then we have contravariant barred field strength tensor  and
its dual field strength 
 
where 
 with .

In terms of barred quantities
Eq. () is computed as
 
Then equations of motion for the tachyon  and the gauge field
 are
 
Here  and  are symmetric
and asymmetric part, respectively, of the cofactor,
 
namely,
 

Energy-momentum tensor  is given by
 
where 
.
The diagonal components can be identified as density and pressure,
 
 From equation of state ,
we read
 
Thus the trace of the total energy-momentum tensor is given by
 

The equations of motion () and () admit homogeneous solutions
 and  which satisfy
 
where . Solving these equations we find that
 and .
The first equation is nothing but the statement of conservation of energy.

When , the solution reduces to that in the theory
with pure tachyon field given in the subsection 3.1.
When , one can simply read the solution from Eq. ()
by rescaling 
and  in the exponents of Eq. ().

Now we consider the propagation of the gauge field  in the
rolling tachyon background (). For this purpose we linearize the
equation of motion () in this background. Written in terms
of electric and magnetic fields, Ampe re's law is modified as
 
Combined with the Bianchi identity, the wave wave equations of the
electric field  and the magnetic field  become
 
Note that these equations are not identical.
Since the Hamiltonian density  () 
is a constant of motion, 
the wave equations () and () reduce to
 
One can also compute
the energy density () and pressure () as
are given by
 
Similarly, we read  from Eq. ()
 
The trace of the energy-momentum tensor () becomes
 

The speed of wave propagation is altered by  and thus time-varying.
One might expect from Eq. () that the propagation speed
roughly follows , but this is not necessarily so as we will see below.
Considering the shape of the potential in Eqs. () and (),
we see that it is the light speed on the top of the potential and
decreases monotonically to zero as the rolling of the tachyon proceeds.
For illustrative purpose, we take the tachyon potential ()
and the solution ().
Inserting the solution into the tachyon potential,
we have an expression of  as a function of time 
 
As shown in Fig. ,
 changes in the scale of a few 's from the light speed to zero,
which is nothing but elapsed time from the onset of the tachyon rolling
to the late-time.
Since the electric field and the magnetic field obey different wave equations,
they show different behaviors in propagation.

 
figure=20pacfig2.eps,height=16cm  

(Top) tachyon potential as a function of time, Eq. ()
for  and  ().
(Middle) amplitudes and (bottom) propagation speeds of
magnetic field (upper three lines) and electric field (lower three lines)
for  (dashed line),  (solid line),
and  (dotted line).
 

To investigate in detail the propagation of electromagnetic wave in the
rolling tachyon background,
let us try to find a plane-wave solution of the wave equations with
a time-varying propagation speed, () and ().
We consider the plane-wave propagating along the -axis,
, and make an ansatz  with
 
where  and  are real.
We assume that  and  so that
the ansatz () gives the normal plane-wave initially.
Since  and  are related through the Ampere's law
() and Faraday's law
 
the electric field  is then given by
 
with
 
With this ansatz, Eq. () reduces to
 
Eq. () implies
 
where  is a constant. From Eq. () we also find
 
Inserting Eq. () into Eq. (), we obtain a
second-order nonlinear equation for amplitude of the magnetic field
 
With the knowledge of , like the one given in Eq. (),
we can solve these equations for  and .
For  of Eq. (), the numerical solution is shown
in Fig. .
Let us first examine a few limiting cases.

On the top of the potential , we get a normal plane-wave solution
 with amplitudes of  and
 as expected from the original wave equations
()-().
At the top of the potential, the equation of states ()
gives  and the trace of the energy-momentum tensor
 up to quadratic terms () vanishes.

Once the tachyon starts
rolling from the top of the potential, the fluctuations of the gauge fields
starts deviating from the normal plane wave solution. With the
initial condition  for which ,  in Eq. ()
reduces to
 
Assuming that  is small, which means
the tachyon rolls slowly initially, we can solve 
Eqs. () and ()
to the first order in :
 
where we rescaled  so that . This solution is valid
as long as .
Thus the amplitude initially grows quadratically as the tachyon starts rolling.
On the other hand, electric field can be calculated from () and
(),
 
Note that  and  tends to decrease in contrast with the
behavior of magnetic field. This can be confirmed in Fig. .
As time elapses,  in Eq. () starts decreasing 
but 
up to quadratic terms in Eq. () develops nonvanishing
contributions.

At late-time, the value of the 
potential () decays exponentially to zero
 
In this case, it is more convenient to work with the original equation
() from which we see that the time dependence is exponentially
suppressed at late time. Therefore the magnetic field linearly diverges
in general,
 
Then the propagation speed decreases
according to Eq. () (See also Fig. ).
Since  linearly increases, our quadratic approximation of the Born-Infeld
action is not valid as  gets large. However, one may still
extract some relevant physics as the tachyon rolls to the vacuum,
. The electromagnetic waves become frozen and stop propagating.
For the magnetic field, short wavelengths freeze earlier than long wavelengths.
For the electric field in this limit, we have from Eq. (),
 
which is a constant. Note that in ()  contains
extra  compared with  and hence the electric field is
frozen more quickly than the magnetic field.

The density  () diverges 
exponentially from the electric
component but the pressure  () 
approaches a finite value, 
so that  in Eq. () becomes zero. 
Similarly, the trace of 
the energy-momentum tensor () also diverges exponentially.
Since the Hamiltonian density  
for the pure tachyon is almost a constant, the
energy density () can be compared with that in the materials
 
Then this material may be approximated by a dielectric material at least
formally
 
where its time-dependent dielectric function diverges as time elapses,

.



















Cosmological Aspects of Rolling Tachyon 
An attractable topic of the rolling tachyon is its application 
to cosmology  as indicated from the 
beginning . The simplest set for the cosmology of the 
rolling tachyon is composed of the graviton  and the tachyon .
Therefore, the action is read from Eq. ()
 

Without any computation, we read a few intriguing subjects from characters of
the tachyon potential in Eqs. ()-() 
(Refer also to Fig. ). At initial stage
of the rolling tachyon, there exists a cosmological constant 
 so that one expects easily solutions of inflationary 
universe. At late-time of , we have tiny nonvanishing 
but monotonically-decreasing cosmological constant at each instant, which
lets us consider it as a possible source of quintessence. Bad news for
comprising a realistic cosmological model may be absence of reheating 
and difficulty of density perturbation at late-time due to disappearance
of perturbative degrees reflecting nonexistence of stationary vacuum point
in the monotonically-decreasing tachyon potential.

For cosmological solutions, we try a spatially-homogeneous but 
time-dependent solution
 
where  corresponds, at least locally, to the metric of
, , or  according to the value of , respectively.
Then the Einstein equations are summarized as 
 
 
and the tachyon equation becomes
 
where is equivalent to conservation equation of the energy-momentum tensor.

For the flat universe of , cosmological evolution is rather simple
since both sides of Eq. () are positive semi-definite.
The second equation () tells us that the expanding universe 
is accelerating at onset of  since the right-hand side of
Eq. () is also positive definite. As time  goes,  
exceeds  so that expansion of the universe slows down and then
finally the scale factor  will halt as 
.
This makes the second term of the tachyon equation () vanish
at infinite time so that we confirm  and
 as .








String Cosmology with Rolling Tachyon 
In this section, we study the role of rolling tachyons in the cosmological 
model with dilatonic gravity. In the string frame, flat space solutions of 
both initial-stage and late-time will be obtained in closed form.
In the Einstein frame, we will show that every expanding solution in flat space
is decelerating.










String frame We begin with a cosmological model induced from string theory, which
is confined on a D3-brane and
includes graviton , dilaton , and tachyon .
In the string frame, the effective action of the bosonic sector of the D3-brane
system is given by 
 
where we turned off an Abelian gauge field  on the D3-brane and
antisymmetric tensor fields of second rank  both on the brane and
in the bulk.
Equations of motion for the metric, the dilaton, and the tachyon
derived from the action () are
 
 
 
where energy-momentum tensor of the dilaton is
 
and that of the tachyon
 

For cosmological solutions in the string frame, we try in addition to 
the metric ansatz ()
 
 From the action (),
we obtain the following equations
 
 
 
 
where tachyon energy density  and pressure 
defined by 
 are
 
which formally coincide with Eq. () and Eq. ().
The tachyon equation () is equivalent to the following
conservation equation
 
where  is the Hubble parameter.
In the absence of detailed knowledge of ,
we will examine characters of the solutions
based on the simplicity of tachyon equation of state 
 
which is exactly the same as Eq. (). 

By defining the shifted dilaton ,
we rewrite the equations ()-() as
 
Note that , or  is not a scalar quantity
even in flat spatial geometry,
the shifted dilaton  is not a scalar field in 3+1 dimensions.
The conservation equation () becomes
 
Now Eqs. ()-() and Eq. ()
are summarized by the following two equations
 
Let us consider only the flat metric  in the rest part of the paper.
If we express the dilaton  as a function of the scale factor ,
, we can introduce a new variable  such as
 
where the prime denotes the differentiation with respect to , and the
second equality shows that  is the ratio between  and .
Then Eqs. () and () are combined into a single first-order
differential equation for  :
 

 From now on we look for the solutions of Eq. ().
Above all one may easily find a constant solution
 which is consistent with
Eqs. ()-() only when  :
 
where , , and 
throughout this section. However, exactly-vanishing tachyon density
 from Eq. () restricts
strictly the validity range of this
particular solution to that of vanishing tachyon potential, ,
which leads to .
The tachyon equation () forces  and  so
that the tachyon decouples .
Therefore, the obtained solution ()-() corresponds to
that of string cosmology of the graviton and the dilaton before stabilization
but without the tachyon.

Since it is difficult to solve Eq. () with dynamical ,
let us assume that  is time-independent
(or equivalently -independent).
We can think of the cases where
the constant  can be a good approximation.
 From the tachyon potential (),
the first case is onset of tachyon rolling around the maximum point
and the second case is late-time rolling at large  region.
In fact we can demonstrate that those two cases are the only possibility
as far as no singularity evolves.

When  is a nonzero constant, Eq. () allows
a particular solution
 
This provides a consistent solution of Eqs. ()-()
 
 From Eq. () and Eq. (),
the tachyon energy density  is given by
 
Since the obtained solution is a constant solution of ,
it has only three initially-undetermined constants.
Specifically, the solution should satisfy 
so that the initial conditions also satisfy a relation
.
Once we assume general solutions of -dependent 
with keeping constant nonzero , they should be classified 
by four independent parameters 
instead of three in Eq. ().

According to the aforementioned condition for valid  values,
the obtained solution in Eq. () may be physically
relevant as the onset solution of  .
In this case,  is reduced to a constant
.
Comparing this with the definition of  in Eq. (),
the initial Hubble parameter  is related to the dilaton as
. Then, with ,
the tachyon equation of motion is automatically satisfied and hence
Eq. () becomes an exact solution of the
whole set of equations of motion ()-().
Since the tachyon field remains as constant at the maximum of the potential,
this solution describes the expanding or shrinking solution depending
on the initial Hubble parameter, with a constant vacuum energy corresponding
to brane tension due to tachyon sitting at the unstable
equilibrium point.(The interpretation as expanding or
shrinking solution needs to be more careful,
since we are working in the string frame.
Actually the behaviors are reversed in the Einstein frame as we will
see in the next subsection.) 

In order to study the behavior of the tachyon rolling down from the top of
the potential, now we slightly perturb this solution, i.e., look for a
solution with nonzero but small  dependence.
So we treat  as a small expansion parameter
and work up to the first-order in .
Since the unperturbed solution satisfies ,
the tachyon equation of motion () becomes, to the
first-order in ,
 
This can easily be integrated to
 
where we used the form of the potential near the origin ().
Given the initial condition that  and  at ,
we can solve this equation () and obtain
 
where .
Therefore tachyon starts to roll down the potential as a hyperbolic
cosine function.
Taking derivative, we find .
The range for which  remains small is then
,
during which the approximation  is good.
Unless the initial value  is fine-tuned,
the tachyon follows the onset solution ()-()
for  and enters into rolling mode.

For more general solutions, the first-order differential
equation () can be integrated to
 
where  is an integration constant.
Note that this algebraic equation does not provide a closed form of 
in terms of the scale factor  except for a few cases, e.g.,
.

Fortunately, for the late-time case of vanishing ,
we can obtain the solution in closed form
 
Then the scale factor  and the dilaton  are explicitly
expressed as functions of time  by solving the equations
()-():
 
where .
We also read the tachyon density  from Eq. ()
 

Note that  should have the same sign
from the positivity of the tachyon density ().
Let us first consider that both  and  are positive.
When  or equivalently , the scale factor  is growing
but saturates to a finite value
such as  in the string frame.
When , it decreases.
When ,  so that the scale factor is a constant, .
For all of the cases, the dilaton  approaches negative infinity.
Note that  means late-time, the tachyon density decreases like
 as . Consistency check by using
Eq. () or equivalently by Eq. () provides us
the expected result, .
If both  and  are negative, there appears a singularity at
finite time irrespective of relative magnitude of  and .











Einstein frame In the previous subsection, it was possible to obtain the cosmological solutions
analytically in a few simple but physically meaningful limiting cases.
To study the physical implications of what we found,
however, we need to work in the Einstein frame.
In this subsection, we will convert the cosmological solutions obtained
in the string frame to those in the Einstein frame
and discuss the physical behaviors.

First of all, let us rewrite the action () in the Einstein frame 
of which metric
 is related to the string metric by a conformal transformation
 
Note that we abbreviate the superscript  for convenience in what follows.
Then the action () is changed to
 
Equations of motion are
 
) 
 
where the corresponding energy-momentum tensors are
 
 

For cosmological solutions, we use again Eq. () and 
Eq. ()
and then the equations of motion ()-() become
 
 
 
 
Tachyon energy density  and pressure  in the Einstein frame
are obtained by the replacement 
in Eq. (),
 
and thereby  is given as
 

Alternatively, we can obtain the same equations
from Eqs. ()-()
by using the metric of the form (In this subsection 
all the quantities are in the Einstein frame
except the variables with subscript  which denote the quantities
in the string frame.) 
 
and hence the time  and the scale factor  are related to
those in the string frame as
 
Then the Einstein equations for the flat
case  in the string frame ()-()
are converted to
 
Demanding constant  is nothing but asking a strong
proportionality condition between the dilaton and tachyon,
.
Note that the pressure  as shown in Eq. () is always
negative irrespective
of both specific form of the tachyon potential  and the value of
the kinetic term , and the value of 
interpolates smoothly between  and 0.

First we observe that the right-hand side of Eq. () is always
positive, which means that the Hubble parameter  is either
positive definite or negative definite for all  and it cannot change
the sign in the Einstein frame.
Obviously it is a natural consequence of the weak energy condition.
Let us first consider the case of positive Hubble parameter, .
Eq. () shows  consists of two
terms both of which are negative definite for all .  Since  by
assumption, the only consistent behavior of  in this case is that
 vanishes as , which, in turn implies that
 and  go to zero, separately.
It also means that  should be a regular function for all . In order to
find the large  behavior of , one has to study 
in large  limit which appears in the definition of  in the
Einstein frame. Knowing that the functions are regular, it is not difficult
to show that the only possible behavior is 
as  after some straightforward analysis of
Eqs. ()-(). Combining it with the fact that
 and  vanish, we can immediately
conclude from Eq. () that  should go to zero in large
 limit.

The asymptotic behavior of fields in case of the positive Hubble parameter
can be found from the solution () since  is essentially
zero for large  as we just have seen above. The only thing to do is
to transform the expressions in the string frame to those in the
Einstein frame, using the relation ().
Therefore, for large , we find
 
One can also identify the initial Hubble parameter  in terms of  as
 
Note that  have the same sign as the Hubble parameter .
Now, with , one can easily confirm from the above equation
() that all the functions indeed behave regularly.
In  limit,  and 
so that the asymptotic behavior of the scale factor becomes .
This power law expansion in flat space is contrasted with the result of
Einstein gravity without the dilaton , where ultimately the scale
factor ceases to increase,  constant.
The behavior of tachyon density  can be read from
Eq. () with  replaced by , which shows that
.
Since  also goes to zero, the fluid of condensed tachyon becomes
pressureless.
Differently from ordinary scalar matter where matter domination
of pressureless gas is achieved
for the minimum kinetic energy , it is
attained for the maximum value of time dependence 
 as  for the tachyon potential
given in Eq. ().

When the Hubble parameter  is negative, the situation is a bit more
complicated. Since  always,
 becomes more and more negative and there is a possibility that
eventually  diverges to negative infinity at some finite time.
Indeed, it turns out that all solutions in this case develop a singularity
at some finite time at which  and .
These big crunch solutions may not describe viable universes
in the sense of observed cosmological data.
Depending on initial conditions, the dilaton  diverges to either  or
 and  goes to either  or zero with the factor
 remaining finite. It is rather tedious and not much
illuminating to show this explicitly, so here we will just content
ourselves to present a simple argument to understand the behavior.
Since the tachyon field  rolls down from the maximum of the potential
to the minimum at infinite , it is physically clear
that  would eventually go to one unless
there is a singularity at some finite time. Suppose that there appeared
no singularity until some long time had passed so that 
approached to one sufficiently closely. Then Eq. () should be
a good approximate solution in this case. However, we know that both
 are negative when  and Eq. () is clearly
singular in this case. We have also verified the singular behavior for
various initial conditions using numerical analysis.

As mentioned in the previous section, the tachyon  is decoupled when
 and . In this decoupling limit, characters of
the Einstein equations ()-() that 
and  do not change so that all the previous arguments can be applied.
Well-known cosmological solution of the dilaton gravity before stabilization
of the dilaton is
 
where the  sign in Eq. () is due to the reflection symmetry
 in the equations
()-().
This solution can also be obtained throughout a transformation ()
from Eqs. ()-().
For , it is a big crunch solution  which encounters
singularity  as 
. For , it is an expanding but decelerating solution.
Since , the power of expansion rate is increased from  to
 by the tachyonic effect as expected.

So far we discussed generic properties and asymptotic behaviors of solutions
in the Einstein frame. Now we consider the behavior at the onset.
The solution () obtained by assuming constant  is
transformed to the Einstein frame as
 
where the initial Hubble parameter  is related to that in the string
frame by .
Note that  and  have opposite signs since . Therefore
the expanding (shrinking) solution in the string frame corresponds to the
shrinking (expanding) solution in the Einstein frame.
For the onset solution with , the tachyon energy density 
is a constant as before, .
Then the initial Hubble parameter is given by
, which describes the exact
solution that tachyon remains at the origin as explained in section 2.
Under a small perturbation tachyon starts
rolling down according to Eq. () with  replaced by
. The rest of the discussion on the rolling behavior is the same as
in the string frame and the details will not be repeated here.

In conclusion the cosmological solution can be classified into two categories
depending on the value of the Hubble parameter  in the Einstein frame.
When the initial Hubble parameter  is positive, the solution is
regular and the universe is expanding but decelerating as
 while  vanishes. When  is negative,
there appears a singularity at some finite time  at which the universe
shrinks to zero.

Summary 

In this paper we have discussed basic field theoretic properties of
rolling tachyon and Abelian gauge field, and then cosmological solutions.
We have shown that both tachyon and Abelian gauge field cannot propagate
in terms of perturbative modes when the homogeneous tachyon rolled
to the infinity which corresponds to the minimum of its potential. 
Throughout the study of homogeneous and isotropic universes in string frame, 
we found initial-stage and late-time solutions in closed form in addition to
the known solution of the gravitons and dilaton in the decoupling
limit of the tachyon. We have also provided a description of 
cosmological solutions in
the Einstein frame : Once the universe starts expanding, then it continues
expanding eternally but decelerating. 

We conclude with the list of intriguing questions for further study.
The nonlocal effective action we dealt with is not valid for large 
value of the tachyon field, so genuine string theory description 
is needed in such regime, including tower of massive string spectra.
Since both the tachyon and Abelian gauge field cannot support
propagating physical degrees in a perturbative way, an intriguing
question may be existence of extended objects in the background of
the rolling tachyon configuration. In relation with tachyon cosmology,
we may raise a number of questions. Stabilization mechanism of dilaton
should be understood and its positive effect to our unsatisfactory
decelerating universe solutions is carefully investigated.
Various topics for the rolling tachyons asked in the Einstein gravity
should be addressed again in the context of dilaton gravity
such as existence of inflationary era, possibility as a source of
quintessence, reheating without oscillating tachyon modes,
cosmological perturbation and structure formation, and so on.
When the Abelian gauge field in concerned, one can ask whether or not
radiation dominated era is possible.










Acknowledgments 
Three of the authors(C.Kim, H.B. Kim, and Y. Kim) never forget 
Pong Youl Pac as our teacher and mentor.
Y. Kim would like to acknowledge the hospitality of E-Ken researchers
of Nagoya University where a part of this work has been done.
This work was supported by Korea Research Foundation Grant
KRF-2002-070-C00025(C.K.) and the Swiss Science Foundation,
grant 21-58947.99(H.B.K.), and is
the result of research activities (Astrophysical Research
Center for the Structure and Evolution of the Cosmos (ARCSEC) and
the Basic Research Program, R01-2000-000-00021-0)
supported by Korea Science  Engineering Foundation(Y.K. and O.K.).





 99 
M.R. Garousi, Nucl. Phys. B584 , 284 (2000), hep-th/0003122;
E.A. Bergshoeff, M. de Roo, T.C. de Wit, E. Eyras, and S. Panda, JHEP
0005 , 009 (2000), hep-th/0003221;
J. Klusen, Phys. Rev. D62 , 126003 (2000), hep-th/0004106.
 S. Sugimoto and S. Terashima, JHEP 0207 , 025 (2002),
hep-th/0205085; J.A. Minahan, JHEP 0207 , 030 (2002), hep-th/0205098.
 G.W. Gibbons, K. Hori, and P. Yi, Nucl. Phys. B596 , 
136 (2001), hep-th/0009061.
 A.A. Gerasimov and S.L. Shatashvilli, JHEP 0010 , 034 (2000),
hep-th/0009103;
D. Kutasov, M. Marino, and G.W. Moore, JHEP 0010 , 045 (2000),
hep-th/0009148; hep-th/0010108.
A. Sen, JHEP 0204 , 048 (2002), hep-th/0203211;
hep-th/0203265; Mod. Phys. Lett. A17 ,
1797 (2002), hep-th/0204143; hep-th/0207105; hep-th/0209122; 
N. Moeller and B. Zwiebach, hep-th/0207107.
 A. Ishida and S. Uehara, Phys. Lett. B544 , 353 (2002),
P. Mukhopadhyay and A. Sen, hep-th/0208142;
hep-th/0206102; G. Gibbons, K. Hashimoto, and P. Yi, hep-th/0209034.
 T. Mehen and B. Wecht, hep-th/0206212.
 S.-J. Rey and S. Sugimoto, hep-th/0301049.
 C. Kim, H.B. Kim, Y. Kim, and O-K. Kwon, hep-th/0301076.
 For a review of the string cosmology, see one of
the followings : G. Veneziano, 628p in the proceedings of Les Houches 1999,
(Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 2001), hep-th/0002094;
N.E. Mavromatos, hep-th/0111275; E.J. Copeland, hep-th/0202028.
 G. W. Gibbons, Phys. Lett. B537 , 1 (2002), 
hep-th/0204008; For a review, see hep-th/0301117.
 S. Alexander, Phys. Rev. D65 , 023507 (2002),
hep-th/0105032; A. Mazumdar, S. Panda, and A. Perez-Lorenzana, Nucl. Phys.
B614 , 101 (2001), hep-ph/0107058.
 L. Kofman and A. Linde, JHEP 0207 , 004 (2002),
hep-th/0205121;
A.V. Frolov, L. Kofman, and A.A. Starobinsky, Phys. Lett. B545 ,
8 (2002), hep-th/0204187;
G.N. Felder, L. Kofman, and A.A. Starobinsky, JHEP 0209 , 026 (2002),
hep-th/0208019.
M. Fairbairn and M.H.G. Tytgat, hep-th/0204070;
S. Mukohyama, Phys. Rev. D66 , 024009 (2002), hep-th/0204084;
A. Feinstein, Phys. Rev. D66 , 063511(2002), hep-th/0204140;
T. Padmanabhan, Phys. Rev. D66 , 021301(R) (2002), hep-th/0204150;
D. Choudhury, D. Ghoshal, D.P. Jatkar, and S. Panda, Phys. Lett. B544 ,
231 (2002), hep-th/0204204;
X. Li, J. Hao and D. Liu, Chin. Phys. Lett. 19 , 1584 (2002),
hep-th/0204252;
G. Shiu and I. Wasserman, Phys. Lett. B541 , 6 (2002), hep-th/0205003;
H.B. Benaoum, hep-th/0205140;
M. Sami, hep-th/0205146;
M. Sami, P. Chingangbam, and T. Qureshi, Phys. Rev. D66 , 043530 (2002),
hep-th/0205179;
J. Hwang and H. Noh, hep-th/0206100;
Y.-S. Piao, R.-G. Cai, X. Zhang, and Y.-Z. Zhang, hep-ph/0207143;
G. Shiu, S.-H. H. Tye, and I. Wasserman, hep-th/0207119;
X.-z. Li, D.-j. Liu, and J.-g. Hao, hep-th/0207146;
J.M. Cline, H. Firouzjahi, and P. Martineau, hep-th/0207156;
S. Mukohyama, hep-th/0208094;
M.C. Bento, O. Bertolami, and A.A. Sen, hep-th/0208124;
J.-g. Hao and X.-z. Li, Phys. Rev. D, hep-th/0209041;
J.S. Bagla, H.K. Jassal, and T. Padmanabhan, astro-ph/0212198.
 C. Kim, H.B. Kim, and Y. Kim, Phys. Lett. B552 ,
111 (2003), hep-th/0210101.
 For example, see Chapter 3 and 8 of String Theory  
by J. Polchinski, (Cambridge University Press, 1998).








