
equation section  .equation  

 

 
FIAN/TD/03/03

January 03




 
BRST-Invariant Constraint Algebra 

 
in Terms of Commutators and Quantum Antibrackets 



 
Igor Batalin and Igor Tyutin  

 
Lebedev Physical Institute RAS,

53, Leninsky Prospect, 117924 Moscow, Russia 




 
General structure of BRST-invariant constraint algebra is established, in
its commutator and antibracket forms, by means of formulation of
algebra-generating equations in yet more extended phase space. New
ghost-type variables behave as fields and antifields with respect to quantum
antibrackets. Explicit form of BRST-invariant gauge algebra is given in
detail for rank-one theories with Weyl- and Wick- ordered ghost sector. A
gauge-fixed unitarizing Hamiltonian is constructed, and the formalism is
shown to be physically equivalent to the standard BRST-BFV approach.


 


width 5.cm 2.mm  E-mail: batalin@lpi.ru 

 E-mail: tyutin@lpi.ru 








Introduction 

When quantizing general gauge theories, a basic principle- is to construct a BRST-charge Fermionic operator 
which satisfies the standard BRST algebra 
, ,
with  being a ghost number Bosonic operator. As expanded in power
series in ghost canonical pairs
, the operator 
begins with  more, where  are
original first-class constraints working as gauge algebra generators.

It is remarkable that there exist BRST-invariant modified constraints

 more, satisfying
 by construction, which determine
substantially a new, dynamically prescribed, set of gauge algebra generators.
As these generators depend actually on ghost operators 
, they live in an extended phase space,
in contrast to original first-class constraints .

The main idea of the present paper is to reformulate the standard BRST-BFV
quantization scheme directly in terms of BRST-invariant constraints
 considered as new basic ingredients, by means of further
extension of the phase space previously spanned by original phase variables
and ordinary ghosts .

Our main motivation is that new gauge generators  are
expected to have, in general, certainly better algebraic properties as
compared with original constraints . As a particular case, we can
mention the well-known situation in Bosonic string theory (see
 and references therein) where the algebra of original
Virasoro generators is centrally extended, while the algebra of the
corresponding BRST-invariant generators coincides exactly with the classical
one.

It is a characteristic property of BRST-invariant generators
 that their algebra is closed only if original constraints
form a Lie-type algebra with constant structure coefficients. It appears,
however, that the algebra spanned by generators  and ghost
momenta operators  is always closed by construction.

The above circumstance allows us to formulate closed generating equations of
the BRST-invariant gauge algebra in further-extended phase space. With this
purpose, we introduce two sets of new ghost-type canonical pairs,
 and , which
behave as fields and antifields with respect to quantum antibrackets.

It then appears possible to recast the new generating equations of the
BRST-invariant gauge algebra to the form of operator-valued master equation
 - formulated in terms of quantum
antibrackets defined originally in. In a natural way, these
quantum antibrackets generate operator-valued anticanonical transformations.
We represent their general form and the transformation properties of the
antibrackets by means of ordinary differential equations in an auxiliary
variable.

As a result, we obtain two dual descriptions of BRST-invariant gauge algebra,
in terms of standard commutators and quantum antibrackets. To illustrate the
dualism in technical respect, we consider in more detail the case of a
rank-one gauge theory with Weyl- and Wick- ordered ghost sector.

As usual,  denotes the Grassmann parity
of a quantity , while  stands for the standard supercommutator
 of any two operators
 and . It satisfies the standard Leibniz rule,
, and Jacobi
identity,  cycle
. Other notation is clear from the context.

Quantum antibrackets and anticanonical transformations 

Here we recall main definitions and properties of quantum antibrackets as they
formulated in -. Then we define
operator-valued anticanonical transformations and derive how quantum
antibrackets behave under anticanonical transformations of their entries.

Let  be a Fermionic nilpotent operator,
 

Then the general quantum antibracket is defined by the formula
 
for any two operators  and .

It satisfies
 
and
 
It follows from () that the modified Leibniz rule



 
and Jacobi identity
 
hold, where
 
defines the next, 3-antibracket, for any operators , , .

In its own turn, the 3-antibracket () satisfies the next Jacoby
identity involving the next, 4-antibracket, and so on. In,
, this hierarchy of subsequent higher-order quantum
antibrackets is determined substancially by means of the corresponding
generating mechanism.

Let  be a Bosonic operator, and  is an arbitrary one. Then, it follows
from () that
 
 
 
Another important consequence of the definition () and nilpotence
condition () reads
 

Now, let us define an operator-valued anticanonical transformation as follows.
Let  be an initial operator, and , , be a
Fermionic anticanonical generator. Then, the equation
 
determines the anticanonical transformation .

It follows from (), () that
 
and thereby  serves as a canonical Bosonic generator transforming
. The general solution to the parametric differential equation
() reads
 
where
 
and
 
There exists a nice interpretation of the solution (): the first
term in r.h.s., , is just a canonical transform of 
with  being a generator, while the second term, , is an
"exact" form. When taking the formula () in the first order in
,
 
we see that the part  of quantum antibracket  in
() is just an infinitesimal transform of  with 
being a generator, while the part  (the "exact"
one) represents the nonunimodularity characteristic to anticanonical
transformations.

Now, let  and  be anticanonical transforms of  and  in
the sense of the equation (). Then the quantum antibracket
 satisfies the equation
 
where the modified Jacobi identity () for , ,  is
taken into account. It follows from () that the deviation of the
antibracket  from its anticanonical invariance (solution to the
homogeneous part of eq. ()) is given by the "exact" form
 

Thus we conclude that the appearance of nonzero "exact" form 
, which deviates the modified Jacobi identity from being a strong one,
results in a similar deviation of the invariance property of quantum
antibracket under anticanonical transformation of its entries.

BRST-invariant constraint algebra 

Let  be a Fermionic operator which satisfies the standard BRST
algebra
 
with  being a ghost number Bosonic operator.

For the sake of definiteness, we assume that ghost sector is represented by
canonical pairs ,

, with the only nonzero commutators
 
and the BRST operator  is -ordered. As for the
ghost number assignment, we assume that
 
which corresponds to irreducible theories. BRST-invariant constraints are
defined as
 

In terms of quantum antibracket () with  standing for  we
have the following relations
 
 
 
where structure coefficient operators
 
are, in general, ghost-dependent.

If, in accordance with the ghost number prescriptions (),
(), we represent the operator  explicitly in the form of a
-ordered power series expansion in ghosts,
 
then the corresponding expansions for  and
 are
 
 
Now, due to the property () and definition (), we get the
following commutator algebra
 
 
 
Thus we conclude that the BRST-invariant constraints 
together with ghost momenta  form two dual
operator algebras, namely, the quantum-antibracket algebra () -
() and commutator algebra () - ().

Generating equations of BRST-invariant constraint algebra. 

As we have established that  together with
 form two dual algebras, it seems quite natural to
formulate the corresponding generating equations, in the line of general
ideology of BRST-BFV approach. We can regard  and
 as first-class constraints with () -
() being their involution relations. Moreover, we can rotate these
first-class constraints with some (nonsingular) matrices, so that it seems
natural to generalize a little bit the definition of 

First of all, let us rotate  in (),
 
so that new  read
 
These , however, remain strongly BRST-invariant,
. To weaken the invariance, we can modify the
definition of  yet more,
 
with  being a flat BRST connection,
 
Then we have a weak BRST invariance,
 
which corresponds to the rotation
 
in (), together with the choice
 
We expect the above rotations () - () to be a part of
natural arbitrariness in the general solution to the algebra-generating
equations.

Now, let us turn directly to the formulation of generating equations in
question. We begin with some operators  and 
living in the same extended phase space as a BRST operator  does.
Their Grassman parities are
 
and their intrinsic ghost number values are given by
 
Next, let us extend the phase space yet more by introducing new ghost-type
canonical pairs via the correspondence
 
with the only nonzero commutators
 
Their Grassmann parities are
 
All new operators commute with the intrinsic ghost number operator .
However, they have their own ghost number operators  and

 
 
 
 
A total ghost number operator is
 
where
 

Let  be an arbitrary operator. We define the total ghost number value,
gh(), and total degree, deg(), as
 
so that
 
We have, in particular,
 

In what follows, it is convenient to use the condensed notation
 
 
We have
 
 
 
 

In the new extended phase space, spanned by original phase variables,
ordinary ghosts and new variables (), let us consider the following
set of equations
 
 
 
together with the boundary conditions
 
where dots, , mean all possible higher-order terms in
, allowed by (), ().

We also require for the operator  to satisfy the extra condition:
the -antibracket matrix  should be
invertible.

We state that the equations () - (), when expanded in
, generate a BRST-invariant constraint algebra.

In order to see this, let  us consider the -ordered expansions
for  and 
 
 

By substituting () into the first in (), we get, in the
second order in , the standard involution relations,
 
Next, by substituting () into the second in (), we get,
in the zeroth and first order in ,
 
and
 
In the same way, by substituting (), () into the third in
(), we get, in the first order in ,
 
In () we recognize the nilpotence condition for . It is
remarkable that () is nothing but the nilpotence condition for
matrix-extended , ,
 

In their turn, the involution relations () determine  to be
BRST-invariant constraints in the most general (weak) form.

It is easy to see that the previous (particular) representations (),
(), () follow immediately from () when choosing
 in the form
 

Now, let us consider the second in () in the second order in .
We get





 

In the same order in , the third in () yields




 
where
 
 
By multiplying () by  from the right, we get, identically, zero
due to (), ().

There are no more equations up to the third order in .

Given first-class constraints , eqs. () determine .
Then, eqs. (), () determine . Then, eqs. (),
() determine , and so on.

If generating equations () allow for  linear in ,
 
which implies, in accordance with (), (), that
 
and




 
then, for any quantities , , , depending on ,
 only, their -antibrackets satisfy
 
so that their 3-antibrackets vanish
 
and, thereby, Jacobi identities () become strong.
As these , ,  commute among themselves, Leibniz rule ()
becomes strong as well. Besides, we have
 
 
 
by assignment.
So, it follows from () - () that the variables 
and  behave as normal fields and antifields with respect to
-antibracket, provided the conditions (), () are
satisfied.

We emphasize, however, that the conditions (), () are not
required imperatively to be fulfilled in any case. They merely specify a
certain basis of constraints  and quantities , in which the
formalism allows for a simple interpretation to the variables ,
. In the general case, the coefficients  are
nonzero, and the expansions (), () involve all higher orders
in ghosts. Therefore, -antibrackets do not meet, in general, a strong
Jacobi identity, even if their entries depend on , 
only.

In principle, the involution relations () - () are the only
conditions the lowest-order terms in (), () should satisfy
to. However, we require for r.h.s. in () to resolve for 
: this is just the extra condition formulated below ().
This condition means that any constraints , satisfying these involution
relations, can be rotated with a nonsingular matrix to take the form
.

Generating equations of antibracket algebra 

As we have seen above, the variables  and  behave as
fields and antifields with respect to -antibracket. It seems quite
natural to expect a similar behaviour for momenta  and
 with respect to some "dual" antibracket.

To put the above idea into effect, let us define the resolvent operator
 to satisfy the generating equations
 

 
together with the boundary condition
 
where dots, , mean  all possible higher order terms in the variables
, allowed by (), while  is of
the zeroth order.

Let us consider for  the -ordered power series
expansion
 
similar to (). Then, we get from (), () the
following lowest-order equations for coefficient operators
 
 
) 
 
In terms of the operator-valued matrix () and the same for
,
 
equations () - () rewrite as
 
 
As for the nilpotent operator , it lives in the same phase
space as  does, and, when expanded in ordinary ghosts 
, begins with 
, where 
are linear combinations of the first-class constraints , dual to
, .

The same as for , if generating equations allow for 
linear in , then, for any quantities depending on ,
 only, -antibracket meets a strong Jacobi identity.

However, now we have, by assignment, a counterpart of () -
() in the form
 
 
 
We see that the signs in r.h.s. of () and () are opposite,
which means that, in contrast to , , the momenta
 and  behave as "twisted" fields and antifields
 -.

In what follows, we imply that a solution to the generating equations
() - () and () - () does exist.

Then, by commuting  with the third equation in (),
and using the third in () and the second in (), we get

 
where
 
and  is an arbitrary Fermionic operator with gh, deg.

For  itself, we have
 

By substituting () into the first in (), and using the
property (), we get
 
In its turn, by commuting  with (), we obtain,
similarly to (),
 
where
 
and  is an arbitrary Fermionic operator with gh, deg.

For  itself, we have
 

Now, let us consider the following master equation
 
for a Bosonic operator  of the form
 
We have
 
By substituting () into (), and using (), we
get the following chain of equations
 
where
 
 
At , () coincides exactly with (), so that we can
identify  and  in () with () and (),
respectively. Then, by making use of the identity () for
, , it is easy to show that
 
provided the equations
 
are satisfied.

Indeed, it follows from () that
 
where
 
Let the equations () be satisfied. Then, by taking in ()
the sector with degree equal to , we get
 
which yields immediately
 
Finally, by commuting  with (), we obtain
() with
 
 
Thus, we conclude that all the operators  entering the expansion
() for  do exist. Thereby, we have established that master
equation () has a solution generated by  via (),
(). This solution describes the antibracket algebra generated by
BRST-invariant constraints.

Let us consider the simplest case of a rank-one theory, a Lie-type algebra
with constant structure coefficients. Then, by choosing
-ordering in ghost sector, we have the following BRST operator
,
 
with  being constant.

Consider the simplest possible form of the operator , which is
 
so that the corresponding resolvent operator  reads
 
With an operator  chosen in the form (), the equation
() has a solution of the form
 
 
while the nilpotent operator  in () is given by the formula



 
where  are -ordered BRST-invariant
constraints,
 

In the general case, it can be shown that the appearance of nonzero ,
, entering the expansion (), is an effect of anticanonical
transformation () - () applied to the operator 
satisfying the homogeneous master equation (). Roughly speaking, we
can say that r.h.s. of () comes just from the deviation
().

Let us also mention that the solution (), () remains valid
even if structure coefficients  in () are
not constant but satisfy the quasigroup conditions
 

BRST-invariant constraint algebra in rank-one theories 

Here, we give some explicit formulas potentially useful for practical
applications to rank-one theories. We consider BRST-invariant algebra in its
commutator and antibracket form in the cases of Weyl- and Wick- ordered
ghost sector, which are most popular ones.

Weyl-ordered ghost sector 

In the case of Weyl-ordered ghost sector, a rank-one theory is described
by the following BRST-operator linear in ghost momenta,





 
 Original constraint algebra is given by the involution relation
,
 

BRST-invariant constraints are
 
Their commutator algebra reads





 
 
We see that the extension, represented by the third term in r.h.s. in
(), is absent in (), although we have in () an
admixture of ghost momenta , instead.

The antibracket algebra, corresponding to (), (), reads
 
 

Wick-ordered ghost sector 

As usual, Wick ghost sector is represented by two sets of Wick pairs,
() and
(), with the only nonzero
commutators,
 
In a rank-one theory, Wick-ordered BRST operator reads


 
Original constraint algebra is given by the involution relations
 
 

BRST-invariant constraints are
 
 
Nonzero relations of their commutator algebra read
 
 
 
 
 
 
The same as in the case of Weyl-ordered ghost sector, we see that the
extension, represented by the third term in r.h.s. of (), is absent
in (), although we have in () an admixture of ghost
momenta  and , instead.

The antibracket algebra, corresponding to () - (), reads
 
 
 
 
 

Explicit formulas given in Subsections 6.1 and 6.2 demonstrate in a
transparent way that there exists an obvious dualism, represented via the
general correspondence
 
between the two alternative forms of BRST-invariant constraint algebra.

Conclusion 

In previous sections, we have formulated a new approach to
quantization of gauge-invariant dynamical systems, which is based
substantially on the concept of BRST-invariant constraints.

The hearth of the construction is the new nilpotent "BRST-charge"
, which lives in yet more extended phase space. Former extended
phase space, spanned by initial phase variables and ordinary ghosts, now
becomes a new "initial" space. New canonical pairs 
(), () play the role of new "minimal" ghosts, while a
new quantum number, the degree, plays the role of a new ghost number.
Regarding these new canonical pairs as "minimal" ghosts in effect, we can
introduce new antighosts, ,
,
,
,
and Lagrange multipliers, ,
,
,
, with the only
nonzero commutators
 
and then construct, in a usual way, a new gauge-fixed unitarizing
Hamiltonian.

To realize the above program, we have to construct first a "minimal"
Hamiltonian , which satisfies the equations
 
 
and boundary conditions
 
Then, we construct a complete unitarizing Hamiltonian in the standard form,
 
 
where
 
and  are gauge-fixing operators. Original Hamiltonian and first-class
constraints are contained in  and , respectively, in their
lowest-order terms, when expanded in power series in ordinary ghost operators
.

Physical observables commute with , while physical states
are annihilated by this operator. Being a physical scalar product defined
appropriately, physical matrix elements of physical operators are expected to
be gauge independent. If so, one can transit to the unitary limit by choosing
a unitary gauge of the form
 
where  is an ordinary gauge with respect to original constraints
, to identify physical transition amplitude (-matrix) with the
one in the standard BRST-BFV approach. However, when using general
relativistic gauges, the formalism generalizes essentially the standard one
by supporting yet more explicit BRST symmetry of the gauge algebra generating
mechanism.

We finish with the following remark.
Let us consider the standard form, of an
unitarizing Hamiltonian in BRST-BFV approach,
 
where  is a minimal Hamiltonian,
 
 
 is a minimal BRST operator, and  is a gauge-fixing Fermion.

We have
 
In the second and third terms in r.h.s. we recognize the constraints
 and  in their simplest possible form,
 
with  and  being their respective
Lagrange multipliers.

Then, the fourth and fifth terms are gauge-fixing ones with  and
 being gauge-fixing operators to
 and , respectively, and ,
 being their respective Lagrange multipliers.

So, it appears that the standard Hamiltonian () - () is,
actually, constructed just in terms of the "standard" BRST-invariant
constraints () and their respective gauge-fixing operators.

However, as compared with general operators , which satisfy (),
() only, the constraints () are rather special ones in the
sense that they relate to a special basis in terms of .

Contrary to that, our new Hamiltonian (), living in yet more
extended phase space, is constructed directly in terms of general operators
 subject to (), () only. Thus, the involvement of the new
variables , ,
 is just a price of arbitrariness in choosing possible
basis to the general BRST-invariant constraints .

It is also worthy to mention that the step, we have made from () -
() to () - (), seems to be only the first one in,
possibly infinite, hierarchy of Hamiltonians.

Acknowledgements 

The authors are grateful to Maxim Grigoriev and Alexei Semikhatov for
fruitful discussions. I.A.B. would like to thank Robert Marnelius for
illuminating discussions of aspects related to the quantum antibrackets and
operator-valued master equation. The work of I.A. Batalin is supported in
part by the President grant 00-15-96566, the RFBR grant 02-01-00930, and the
INTAS grant 00-00262. The work of I.V. Tyutin is supported in
part by the President grant 00-15-96566, the RFBR grant 02-02-16944, and the
INTAS grant 00-00262.

 111 


C. Becchi, A. Rouet and R. Stora, Phys. Lett. B54  (1974) 344; Commun.
Math. Phys. 42  (1975) 127; Ann. Phys. (NY) 98  (1976) 287.

I.V. Tyutin, Lebedev Institute preprint N  39 (1975).

E.S. Fradkin and G.A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. B55  (1975) 224; CERN
preprint TH 2332-CERN (1977).

I.A. Batalin and G.A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. B69  (1977) 309.

E.S. Fradkin and T.E. Fradkina, Phys. Lett. B72  (1978) 343.

I.A. Batalin and E.S. Fradkin, Phys. Lett. B128  (1983) 303; Riv. Nuovo
Cim. 9  (1986).

T. Kugo and I. Ojima, Progr. Theor. Phys., Suppl., 66  (1979) 1.

K. Nishijima, Nucl. Phys.B238  (1984) 601; Progr. Theor. Phys. 80 
(1988) 897, 905.

M. Henneaux, Phys. Rep., 126  (1985) 1.

M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, "Quantization of Gauge sistems", Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1992.


M.B. Green, J.H. Shwarz and E. Witten, "Superstring Theory", I, Cambridge
University Press, 1987.


I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Phys. Lett. B441  (1998) 243,
hep-th/9806114.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Nucl. Phys. B551  (1998) 450,
hep-th/9809208.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Mod. Phys. Lett. A14  (1999) 1643,
hep-th/9905193.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Int. Journ. Mod. Phys. A15  (2000)
2077, 
 hep-th/9909223.


I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Phys. Lett. B434  (1998) 312,
hep-th/9805084.


I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Theor. Math. Phys. 120  (1999) 1115,
hep-th/9905083.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Int. Journ. Mod. Phys. A14  (1999)
5049, hep-th/9909210.


A.S. Cattaneo and G. Felder, Commun. Math. Phys. 212  (2000) 591,

math.QA/9902090.

A.S. Cattaneo and G. Felder, Mod. Phys. Lett A16  (2001) 179,
hep-th/0102208.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, Phys. Lett. B512  (2001) 225,
hep-th/0105190.

I.A. Batalin and R. Marnelius, "Superfield algorithms for topological field
theories", in: Memorial volume dedicated to M. Marinov, edited by M.
Olshanetsky and A. Vainshtein, WSPC 2002, hep-th/0110140.


I.A. Batalin and E.S. Fradkin, Ann. Inst. Henri. Poincare 49  (1988)
145.








