




















17cm 21.2cm=-1cm


   
   



Basic Twist Quantization of  and -Deformation
of  Superconformal Mechanics 

A. Borowiec, J. Lukierski and V.N.
Tolstoy


 


Institute for Theoretical Physics, 

 University of Wroclaw,
pl. Maxa Borna 9,                             

 50-205 Wroclaw, Poland

 

Departimento de Fisica Teorica,

 Universidad de Valencia,  Av. Dr. Moliner 50,

46100 Burjasot (Valencia), Spain

 

       Institute of Nuclear Physics,
  

Moscow State University, 119992 Moscow, Russia 

 
 
The twisting function describing nonstandard (super-Jordanian)
quantum deformation of  is given  in explicite closed
form. The quantum coproducts and universal -matrix are
presented. The non-uniqueness of twisting function as well as two
real forms of deformed  superalgebras are considered.
One real quantum  superalgebra is interpreted as
describing the -deformation of  superconformal
algebra, which can be applied as symmetry algebra of 
superconformal mechanics.


Introduction 

It is well-known that for the Lie algebra 
do exist only two inequivalent deformations, generated by the classical
-matrices with the following antisymmetric parts
():

i) Standard deformation with
 
where
 
defines the Cartan-Chevalley basis of 
, and  is a deformation parameter. Classical
-matrix () determines the term linear in
deformation parameter in the coproduct of Drinfeld-Jimbo quantum
algebra  where  or
. The classical -matrix ()
satisfies the modified  YB equation (MYBE).

ii) Nonstandard (Jordanian) deformation with
 
The classical -matrix () satisfies the classical  YB
equation (CYBE), and the corresponding quantization of  can be
obtain by using Drinfeld twist technique with the twisting
two-tensor 
where
  describes deformed the generator
 with proper no-deformation limit . The
quantum Hopf algebra  has the classical
non-deformed  algebra sector but the deformed twisted coproduct and
antipode
 
where  for any ,
and  provided that the twist factor
() is written .
The nonstandard quantum Hopf algebra  can be also described
in a nonclassical algebra basis with deformed 
Lie-algebraic relations.

The  algebra () with the following reality conditions
 
can be considered as  conformal algebra 
 
where  describes the time translation generator (Hamiltonian),
 is a scale generator, and  is a conformal acceleration
generator. We can identify () and () if
 
One gets
 
Further we shall choose classical -matrix purely imaginary
under the involution ()(In such a case we
obtain a form of quantum group, which was also called an imaginary
form (see e.g.)) , what implies after the assumption
 that 
and  are purely imaginary. We see that under the physical
scaling transformations
 
the parameter  is dimensionless, and  has the inverse
mass dimension. If we put  we see that
the Jordanian deformation of  describes the
-deformation of  conformal algebra with
 describing the fundamental mass deformation parameter and
classical limit given by  ().

The aim of this paper is to provide explicite formulae for the super-Jordanian
twist quantization of the superalgebra  which is
supersymmetric extension of 
. The classical -matrices () and ()
are supersymmetrically extended as follows 
where for odd generators , and
the standard relations of the  Cartan-Chevalley basis looks as
follows

 

One sees that  play the role of composite "double
root" generators, extending  Cartan-Chevalley basis
().

One can consider two different reality conditions which represent
two possible supersymmetric extensions of the antilinear
antiinvolution defining () - we shall call them Hermitean  and  graded super-Hermitean :

 The Hermitean  reality conditions defined as follows


 
provided that
  for any homogeneous elements 
.

 The graded super-Hermitean reality conditions we define
 
provided that
  for any
homogeneous elements .

The reality conditions () and () for
odd generators will provide new real  -Hopf
superalgebras generated by the classical -matrix
().

The quantization with  describes Drinfeld-Jimbo
type of the quantum superalgebra, , studied firstly
in. The quantization with  is
a subject of the present paper. One can show that
() satisfies graded CYBE and can be quantized by
superextension of the Drinfeld twisting procedure. Further
introducing the  conformal supercharges  which
transform under scaling () as follows


 
we easily see that the classical -matrix ()
describes via identification  the
-deformation of  superconformal algebra.

We would like to point out that in this paper we complete the discussion of
the super-Jordanian deformation of  presented in.
In the proposed ansatz for the super-Jordanian twisting two-tensor
was not properly chosen what subsequently did not allow to complete the twist
quantization procedure generated by the classical -matrix (),
and in particular it was not possible to write down  all coproduct formulae.
It should be admitted however, that several results on the super-Jordanian
deformation of  which did not require the complete knowledge of
the twisting two-tensor were presented in.

The plan of our paper is the following:

In Sect. 2 we present an explicite formula for the super-Jordanian
twisting two-tensor, calculate coproducts for all generators and
present the universal -matrix.


We shall also discuss in Sec. 2 the real forms of quantum
 superalgebras as well as non-uniqueness of the twisting
procedure. In Sect. 3 we interpret the super-Jordanian deformation
of  generated by the classical -matrix
() as a -deformation of the 
superconformal algebra. Final Sect. 4 contains an outlook.


Super-Jordanian Twist Quantization of  

Firstly we shall outline basic elements of Drinfeld's theory of twisting
quantization of Hopf algebras. A Hopf algebra
) with a multiplication
, a coproduct ,
a counit , and an antipode  due to
twisting procedure can be transformed with a help of an invertible element
, , into a twisted Hopf
algebra ) which has the same
multiplication  and the counit mapping  but the twisted coproduct
and antipode
 
The twisting element (twisting two-tensor)  satisfies the cocycle equation
 
and the "unital" normalization condition
 
The Hopf algebra  is called quasitriangular if it has an
additional invertible element (universal -matrix) 
 which relates the coproduct  with its
opposite coproduct  by the similarity
transformation
 
with  satisfying the quasitriangularity conditions
 
The twisted ("quantized") Hopf algebra  is also
quasitriangular with the universal -matrix  defined as
follows
 
where  provided
. For the nondeformed, classical case
, where   is a simple Lie algebra, the universal -matrix is
trivial, i.e. .

Our goal is to construct the twisting two-tensor 
 for , such that the universal -matrix
 
has the form
 
where  is the classical -matrix () linear
in deformation parameter . The Taylor-series expansion of 
with respect to the parameter  looks as follows
 
and it is consistent with the relations (), ().
One can show that (see also) the twisting two-tensor 
describing the quantization of the classical -matrix ()
can be factorized as follows:
 
where  is the Jordanian twisting two-tensor () for
 depending on  and  (i.e.  and )
and , the supersymmetric part, depends only on odd generator
 (remember ). The Jordanian twisting two-tensor
 as well as  should satisfy the cocycle and "unital"
conditions (), ().

Substituting () into () one obtains the following
twisted cocycle condition for 
 
where
 
We mention that because  the classical -matrix
() for  satisfying CYBE can be considered also as the
classical -matrix for . The coproducts () have
been calculated in and are given by the formulae:
 
where .
The coproducts  can be calculated from
() and (). 


We also recall the antipodes  given by the formulae 
It should be added that the coproduct   is real
under both involutions (,c), i.e.
  as
well as antipode  satisfies the consistency condition
(see e.g.,  1.7)
 
() as well as
 is trivially valid. We see
therefore that the formulae (-e) define two real
quantum  superalgebras subject to a choice of reality
condition () or ().

The "super" part  of the twist element
() can be given as solution of Eq. ()
by the following explicite formula
 
and obviously
 
where ,
. Further one can rewrite () as follows
 
It can be also shown that the element
 
is inverse to , i.e.
,
where .

Using the formula
,
which follows from (), and (-e), (),
() one can calculate explicitly the super-Jordanian twisted
coproducts for . One gets after quite involved calculations that
  
and ,
where we use the denotation . It can be added that
the coproduct relations (,b) remain still valid.



The formula () and an analog of ()
(see ()) were given by Kulish; due to
the explicit knowledge of the super-Jordanian twisting two-tensor
we calculated also the coproduct ().

The formulae for the antipode  look as follows:
 
Supplementing with  we
obtain the complete set of formulae describing the super-Jordanian deformation
 as non-cocommutative Hopf algebra.

It is easy to see that the formulae
()-() do not satisfy neither the
reality conditions  () nor (), i.e.
 for some
element , where  or .
However, if we require that the super-Jordanian coproduct

 satisfy the -reality
condition it is necessary and sufficient to assume the following
unitarity condition for the twisting two-tensor
:
 
The condition () can be achieved because the twisting
element () is not unique - without modifying
corresponding -matrix (11b) it can be multiplied by suitable
multiplicative factor 
 
provided that .
It can be shown that modified twisting element
 

satisfies the relations () and (). Different choices
of  in the multiplicative factor  describe nonuniqueness (up to Hopf
automorphism) of the twist quantization of the classical -matrix
(11b). In particular, we can choose the element  such that the twisting
two-tensor will satisfy the reality condition (). Indeed,
choosing in ()
 one obtains the
formula for the super-Jordanian two-tensor
 
with
 
which satisfies with respect the Hermitean  () and
super-Hermitean conjugation () the following
unitarity condition
 
provided that the parameter  is purely imaginary,
. 
Such choice will modify the coproduct,
, and we
obtain
  
The formulae for the antipode  look as follows:
 
It is easy to see that the formulae (-c) satisfy
the reality condition

for  and any  and the
antipodes (-c) satisfy respectively the condition
(). Subequently, we can state that the relations
(-c) and (-c) describe two real
quantum  Hopf superalgebras.

 The universal -matrix has the form
 
where

and
 

If  is purely imaginary one can show that the universal
-matrices  and  are unitary or
superunitary, what depends on the choice of reality condition and
is inherited from analogous properties of  and 
.

The twist deformations described by the formulae
(-c) and (-c) locates whole
deformation in coalgebra sector. In order to distribute "more
evenly" the deformation in algebraic and coalgebraic sector one
should introduce the suitable deformation map from classical to
deformed  quantum superalgebra basis. If we know
explicitly the universal -matrix (see ()) one can
write down so-called RLL relations given firstly by Faddeev,
Reshetikhin and Takhtadjan, considered in graded
 fundamental  triangular matrix form in
. Because, however, the universal -matrix
() does not depend on , the RLL method can
provide only the deformation maps for  and . The
deformation map for the generator  can be determined
from the requirement that it simplifies the coproduct
().

Quantum  and Deformed  Superconformal
Mechanics 

The  conformal algebra (7) can be extended to the 
simple superconformal algebra by adding two Hermitean (real) odd
supercharges  and , describing the "supersymmetric roots" of
the momenta  and conformal momenta  (see e.g.
). In order to have a standard description
of supercharges in Hilbert space we shall use the reality
condition () with  the antilinear antiinvolutive
mapping  satisfying properties ().

 From the reality condition () follow the
following definitions of real supercharges
 
and from (-b) one gets
 
The  covariance relations for the supercharges
 look as follows
 
The relations () and ()-()
after taking into consideration the relation ()
and() can be identified with  algebra.


The algebra (7) can be realized in two-dimensional phase space, generated
by one pair of phase space variables  satisfying Heisenberg relations
 (we put ). One can assume (see e.g.):
 
Adding one real fermionic variable satisfying the anticommutation relation
 
one can realize the superalgebra (,b) if we supplement the
generators () by the following  odd ones
 
The realization ()-() can be
generalized to -dimensional superconformal mechanics in curved
target superspace with a  suitable torsion,
with the generators described by 2N bosonic phase space variables
() () and N real vectorial fermionic
variables , satisfying -dimensional Clifford algebra.

We would like to point out that quantum -deformed
 superalgebra, obtained via twist quantization
technique, can be applied to the deformation of supersymmetric
conformal mechanics. If we use the classical  basis,
satisfying the relations (), (), one can
use coproduct of energy operator  in order to describe
the two-particle interactions (For  relativistic
case an attempt in this direction leading to analogous formula was
proposed in) . Using the formulae (),
(), () and the property of graded
tensor product one gets (recall that 
 and we put
)
 
i.e. we obtain the energy of two-particle system described by the
formula
 
We see that the deformation parameter  describes a
geometric mass parameter and its inverse  can be
interpreted as coupling constant in superconformal two-particle
dynamics. Surprisingly, the formulae (),
() are the same as for the well-known bosonic
Jordanian deformation of , given by the twist
(); the supersymmetric corrections depending on the
supercharges () will be however presented in
coproducts  of  and .

In this section we applied the quantum deformation of
 with the reality condition ().
It is interesting to find an application of quantum deformation of
 with the reality condition ()
defined by the graded antiinvolution  which, as we
expect, can be employed in the superspace formulation of dynamical
models.

Outlook 

The super-Jordanian twist and super-Jordanian deformation of
 should play a basic role in the description of twist
quantizations of superalgebras. The role of  in the
theory of superalgebras is analogous to the role played by 
in the theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras. In particular any
superextension of the twist quantization techniques of classical
Lie algebras (see e.g.) requires the twist
element () as its basic building block. We expect
that the results of this paper can help substantially for  the
construction of extended twist elements for arbitrary
orthosymplectic algebra , which for  and arbitrary
 should describe  -extended supersymmetric conformal
mechanics, and for  has physical interpretation as describing
four-dimensional anti-de-Sitter supersymmetries.

Also it should be recalled here that the twist element (4) has been used for
two-parameter deformations of quantum infinite-dimensional algebras, e.g. the
Yangians . Having an explicite form of super-Jordanian
twist () it is a matter of standard calculation to obtain the
twisted form of  super-Yangian(The  super-Yangian
has been described recently by one of the authors.) . Other possible
application of our deformation of  are integrable vertex models
(see e.g.) and  Gaudin lattice models.
Also the knowledge of super-Jordanian twist (14) permits to calculate the
Clebsch-Gordon coefficients of -deformed  by using the
technique of projection operators proposed in.

Acknowledgments 
The paper has been supported by KBN grant 5PO3B05620 (JL) and the
grants RFBR-02-01-00668, INTAS OPEN 00-00055 and CRDF
RMI-2334-MD-02 (VNT). A.B. would like to thank the Catedra de
Investigaciones "Algebra y Logica" en UNAM, FESC, Me xico for
financial support. V.N. Tolstoy would like to thank Institute for
Theoretical Physics University of Wroclaw for hospitality. One
of the authors (JL) wishes to acknowledge the financial support of
Valencia University and of grant BFM2002-03681.

 99 

 P.P. Kulish and N.Yu. Reshetikhin,
Journ. Sov. Math. 23 , 2435 (1983).

 V.G. Drinfeld, "Quantum Groups", in Proc. XX-th Int.
Congress of Math. (Berkeley, USA, 1986), p. 798.

 M. Jimbo, Lett. Math. Phys. 10 , 63 (1985).

 L.D. Faddeev, N.Yu. Reshetikhin and L.A. Takhtadjan,
Algebra i Analiz, 1 , 178 (1989).

 M. Dubois-Violette and G. Launer, Phys. Lett. B245 , 175 (1990).

 O.V. Ogievetsky, Suppl. Rendic. Cir. Math. Palermo,
Serie II, No 37, p. 185 (1993); preprint MPI-Ph/92-99 (1992).

 C. Ohn, Lett. Math. Phys. 25 , 85 (1992).

 V.G. Drinfeld, DAN USSR 273 , 531 (1983).

 V.G. Drinfeld, Leningrad. Math. Journ. 1 , 1415
(1990).

  V. Lyubashenko, in "Quantum Groups", ed. P.P.
Kulish, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. N.1510, p. 67 (1992).

 J. Lukierski, P. Minnaert and M. Mozrzymas, Phys. Lett.
B371 , 215 (1996).

 M. Scheunert, W. Nahm and V. Rittenberg, J. Math. Phys.
18 , 146 (1977).

 F.A. Berezin and V.N. Tolstoy, Comm. Math. Phys. 78 ,
409 (1981).

 C. Juszczak and J. Sobczyk, Czech. J. Phys. 48 ,
1375 (1998).

 P.P. Kulish, Preprint RIMS-G15  (1988).

 P.P. Kulish and N.Yu. Reshetikhin, Lett. Math. Phys.
18 , 143 (1989).

 S. Majid, "Foundations of Quantum Groups Theory",
Cambridge Univ. Press 1995.




 E. Celeghini and P.P. Kulish, J. Phys. A31 , L79;
preprint q-alg/9712024 .

 P.P. Kulish, preprint math.QA/9806104 .

 S. Fubini and E. Rabinovici, Nucl. Phys. B245 , 17 (1984).

 P. Claus, M. Derix, R. Kallosh, J. Kumar, P. Townsend and
A. van Proyen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 , 4553 (1998).

 J.A. de Azcarraga, J.M. Izquierdo, J.C. Perez-Bueno and
P.K. Townsend, Phys. Rev. D59 , 084015 (1999).

 V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and G. Furlan, Nuovo Cimm. 34A ,
569 (1978).

 J. Michelson and A. Strominger, Comm. Math. Phys. 213 ,
1  (2000), hep-th/9907191 .

 R. Britto-Pacumio, J. Michelson, A. Strominger, and A. Volovich,
JHEP 9911 , 013 (1999), hep-th/9911066 .

 J. Lukierski and A. Nowicki, in the Proceedings of Quantum Group
Symposium at "Group21", eds. H-D. Doebner and V.K.Dobrev, Heron Press, Sofia,
1997, p. 173 (see  2).

 P.P. Kulish, V.D. Lyakhovsky and A.I. Mudrov, J. Math. Phys.
40 , 4569 (1999).

 V.D. Lyakhovsky and M.A. del Olmo, Journ. Phys. A32 ,
4541 (1999); A32 , 5343 (1999).

 S.M. Khoroshkin, A.A. Stolin and V.N. Tolstoy, Commun.
Algebra, 26 , no. 4, 1041 (1998).

 S.M. Khoroshkin, A.A. Stolin and V.N. Tolstoy,

Yadernaya Fizizika, 64 , No. 12, 2262 (2001); 
Physics of Atomic Nuclei, 64 , No. 12, 2173 (2001); 
arXiv:math.QA/0012207 .

 V.N. Tolstoy, SQS'99, Proc. of Dubna Workshop "Supersymmetries
and Quantum Symmetries", Jul 1999, eds. E. Ivanov et al., Dubna 2000, p. 431.

 H. Saleur, Nucl. Phys. B336 , 363 (1990).

  T. Brzezinski and A.J. Mecfarlane, J. Math. Phys. 35 ,
3261 (1994).

 P.P. Kulish, N. Manajlovic, J. Math. Phys. 42 , 4757 (2001).


