









 
 Relativistic Phase Space: Dimensional Recurrences 
 

 
 R. Delbourgo(Email address: Bob.Delbourgo@utas.edu.au)  
 and M.L. Roberts(Email address: Martin.Roberts@utas.edu.au) 


 
School of Mathematics and Physics,
University of Tasmania,
 GPO Box 252-21, Hobart,
Tasmania 7001, Australia 




 
We derive recurrence relations between phase space expressions in
different dimensions by confining some of the coordinates to tori
or spheres of radius  and taking the limit as .
These relations take the form of mass integrals, associated with extraneous
momenta (relative to the lower dimension), and produce the result in the 
higher dimension.




Establishing the Recurrences  

Formulations of field theories in higher dimensions are now quite 
commonplace, with 10 to 12 dimensions featuring prominently, especially in the 
context of M-theory. Mostly the coordinates which are additional to the usual 
four space-time ones are either very tiny or else the fields possess a 
severely damped behaviour as one moves away from the 3-brane. Thus the extra 
coordinates are characterized by one or more length scales , that are
generally miniscule or, if larger, only affect gravity. At the other extreme
one can contemplate the  as being huge; indeed the method of 'box 
normalization' with a large  has a venerable pedigree and allows us to
describe vacuum diagrams or compute properties per unit volume when they so
depend. The same method also permits us to make sense of quantities like the 
volume of space-time or  in the limit as .

One of the primary objects of interest in these higher dimensions 
 is the behaviour of relativistic -body phase space  since 
it primarily governs the magnitudes of transmutations, ignoring amplitude
modulation. Based on earlier coordinate space methods, 
this behaviour has been recently studied and codified 
; a summary of how the -body result in fixed , flat  
space can be evaluated by means of Almgren recurrences-mass 
integrals over smaller  but with the same  - was given in ref.[2]. 
In this paper we wish to establish 
relations between  having the same , but different , which are
quite interesting in their own right. They may well have some use in the
context of recent developments in string or M-theory or -brane physics;
for such theories possess a set of length scales  (or parameters
arising in the extended metric) which serve to
constrain the motion of particles to subspaces or 'branes' of lower dimension.
Each theory produces its own particle spectrum whose spacing is determined
by the . As the limit  is taken, we may
anticipate that the particles freely explore the higher-dimensional space,
and the corresponding phase space at a given energy reduces to the
relativistic phase space for the entire 'bulk'.

The strategy for deriving such recurrence relations in the flat space
limit is quite simple. We
just confine one or several of the -dimensional coordinates to a 
torus or sphere of radius  and take the limit  at the
very end, in much the same way that box normalization is handled. The act of
confinement creates a series of discrete modes in the restricted coordinates 
and phase space must be summed over the various modes, subject to mass
bounds. By choosing the topology of the extra space to be spherical or
toroidal, the masses of the modes are easy to work out. (Had we been
considering more complicated topologies, the mass spectra would have been
much harder to calculate although we still expect the  
limit to yield results coinciding with our choices.)
Because the contributions to the masses from the confined coordinates
are inversely proportional to , the summation reduces to a mass integral in
the limit of enormous : hence the result  in higher  is 
expressible as a set of mass integrals of  over lower , but with the 
same ; one can readily understand this as the effect of integrating over 
extra momentum components relative to those in the lower dimension. The
forms of such connections are rather intriguing and some are not at all
obvious; in fact for larger  they are quite intricate. We know of course
in advance that they must work out somehow; the interest is in the 'somehow',
not why they do so. For smaller values of  we are able to check their
validity, but verifying them for  is a daunting task in many cases. 

In the following section we suppose that one or several of the coordinates are
confined to a torus, so the recurrence relation is effectively that between
 and . Its nature is pretty simple since there 
is only one extra coordinate to contend with, so we are dealing with a 
one-dimensional sum or integral in the continuum limit. We show how the 
recurrence pans out for few-body processes. The next two sections deal with 
the case when there are several extra coordinates (confined to a sphere) and 
here we encounter a multidimensional summation or integration, which is 
nontrivial. When  we demonstrate how the relations work out for any 
number of extra coordinates, but for  we have only succeeded in following 
through the connection when the dimension difference equals two or more, 
though no doubt it must apply to any  value.


Relations between  and  phase space 

Let us begin by specifying our notation. Our metric is +,-,-,-... with a total
of  coordinates. The -body phase space integral in flat  space is 
defined by
 
where .
We separate spacetime coordinates  into  coordinates called  
and extra ones labelled ,  of which are independent; 
likewise for the conjugate momenta. (For the purpose of this section  
equals 1, but we shall consider other  values later on.) 
The general aim of the exercise is to establish a connection 
between  and  and see how that works out analytically 
because it is nontrivial for large  or .

The first step is to confine (periodic)  to the circumference of a circle 
of radius . Thus the space is considered to have the direct product topology
. Then 
Fourier expand a (real) field  into modes in the standard way so as to 
fix the normalization correctly:
 
Being complex in general,  can be regarded as the antiparticle field
to  where  is positive say.  must run from  to , 
to ensure that, upon integration over , the free action takes its proper
form,
 
where  corresponds to the mode  mass squared.
Note that if one restricts the sum to positive  (because of repetition) the 
factor of 1/2 disappears and one gets the right normalization for a complex 
field. A zero-mode field which is of course real and -independent is 
given by .

To determine the phase space integral we consider the point interaction between
a heavy field  (with mass ) decaying into  distinguishable 
fields which carry their own distinct quantum numbers, so  matches all 
of them. (One may also consider the case where some of the final particles are 
identical, but that just serves to introduce symmetry factors which must be 
taken into account and adds little to the discussion.) Write the effective
interaction as , so that integration over
the 'extra' coordinate produces


with the sum taken over positive and negative  values. Thus we deduce 
the effective coupling of  with the various  in the lower 
dimension to be 
This means that the higher dimensional phase space can be written in the
more explicit form,
 
subject to energy-momentum conservation of course, which thus provides upper
bounds on the magnitudes of the running -values.  

The second step is to 
take the limit as  and let . We see that 
the connection (4) reduces to the continuous version,
 
where again the range of -values is restricted by the condition
. This last form is quite readily
understood as a consequence of writing the mass shell condition, 
, where  stands for the last momentum component 
. The phase space integral over  then produces the delta function
, because the initial zero-mode has no dependence on 
.

Equation (5) is the recurrence relation we were seeking, so now let us see how
it works out for those cases which we can tackle explicitly. Start with the
easiest case, , where we know that
 
involving the Kallen function, 
. The recurrence relation (5) reduces to the prediction that
 
and its verification relies upon the observation that


plus the basic integral ( and
 below)
* 

The recurrence relation becomes much more interesting for the three-body case,
 
upon recalling that even and odd dimensional phase space behave rather 
differently: odd  leads to a Laurent series in the masses, while even  
generally leads to elliptic functions; eq.(8) signifies 
that there exists an integral relation between elliptic functions and 
polynomials/poles. 
Moreover the nature of the integral displays explicit  symmetry in the 
masses which is useful. Because of the  function constraint and the 
fact that the  run over positive and negative values, the rhs of (8) can 
be broken up into the sum of three terms:




We may quickly check the truth of relation (8) for the test case 
when all particles are massless, since that limit of phase space simply 
yields



for the lhs. On the other hand for the rhs, substituting the 3-D result 
,


each of the three permutations produces the same answer and we obtain a perfect
check of the recurrence relation. However one learns something new in the 
massive case since a new  symmetrical representation for 4-D phase space
emerges:
 
One expects the right hand integral to produce elliptic functions, but the 
main virtue of (9) is that we get a pleasingly symmetrical sum of them which 
in principle ought to match an earlier form, albeit obtained in a 
different manner. Although we have not yet succeeded in establishing the 
precise relation with the Jacobian zeta function form, we have performed a
series of successful  numerical checks of (9), using typical mass values.

The same thing happens for larger . For instance in 4-body decay there
arise four permutations with three of the  having the same sign, 
opposite to the last one, plus six permutations where two pairs of 
have the same sign and opposite to the other pair. This would provide an
elegant symmetrical way of evaluating 4-body decay without resorting to
Almgren's nonsymmetrical way of pairing two bodies together and 
then summing over their pairwise mass sums.

One may of course continue in this vein and discuss spaces with the topology
, but one learns very little new by this ruse because the 
process just yields a set of angles  and a set of mode 
numbers  which collectively lead to .
There is little gain in taking the limit as each 
separately because we only care for the final result where none of the
radii is finite.

Relations between  and  phase space 

Next we shall suppose that w are dealing with the direct topology 
 so that the two extra angular coordinates are confined to the
surface of a 2-sphere having radius ; thus 
, whereas previously
 was identified with the circumference  rather than the radius 
vector. In such a situation expand the fields in spherical harmonics,
 
before considering the limit of large . The chosen factors ensure that
the lower-dimensional field modes  are properly normalized:
 
where . [In eq. (11) it is really meant that
 and 
.] Again we note that 
so the complex modes are found by just summing over positive  and
discarding the factor of 1/2.

The two-body recurrence relation can be verified in its entirety, since the
effective coupling of a zero-mode mass  field 
 to two others yields a uniform amplitude, 
independently of the angular momentum eigenvalues  as we see from
 
The  degeneracy in  leads to
 
In the limit , with , this reduces to the 
continuum prediction,
 
which is readily verified from the explicit result (6).

The three body case is altogether more fascinating. Here the effective 
interaction reduces to
 
To make progress, use the orthogonality property of spherical 
harmonics,






This then specifies the magnitudes of the mode couplings. When evaluating
the sum over modes, apply the completeness relation of C-G coefficients,






signifying



Therefore the summation over modes produces the discrete recurrence relation,
 
whose continuum limit is of interest. To take , first note
that Wigner's 3-j symbol





Since we are concerned with the large  limit, apply Stirling's formula,
 
to the previous expression. The square of the 3-j symbol then magically 
simplifies to the inverse area of a triangle having sides :
 
which makes good sense, recalling the vector addition formula for
angular momenta. One finishes with the continuum result
 

This recurrence is very difficult to verify in general, especially for even
. We can however make a fist of it for 5-D in the massless limit when
the check collapses to the veracity of
 
The lhs of (19) is known to equal . To integrate the rhs, 
change variables according to 
,


may be carried out with 
. The result indeed 
reproduces the lhs. We have also verified the truth of (19) numerically.

The miraculous birth of the Euclidean Kallen function  in (17) 
and (19) can be rendered less mysterious if we look upon this as the result of 
integrating over the last 2 components of momentum , corresponding 
to a 'radial kernel'. Thus from the mathematical fact that




we find that this expression equals



Moreover the extension to -body phase space suggests itself immediately
via an -fold kernel, associated with the integral

although this is not readily stated in terms of simple functions for ;
something geometrical associated with the lengths  is certainly involved.
This kernel has to be folded over 

and integrated with respect to all  to establish the recurrence.

Relations between  and  phase space 

With the torus and 2-sphere thoroughly understood, it is natural to extend
the argument to coordinates confined to an -sphere where the topology
is . Here we need to make use 
of hyperspherical harmonics defined over  angles. Associated 
with them are the generalized quadratic Casimir operator with eigenvalue 
 and  angular momentum components (generically labelled 
), producing a degeneracy of 
 Thus the free action may be
normalized according to eq. (11), where


and we must sum over  of the  labels. Now the squared mass
equals  of course, because the last term corresponds to a 
hyperspherical Laplacian eigenvalue.

Running through similar steps as before and skipping details, we arrive at
the two-body recurrence relation for finite ,
 
where  is the total solid angle
corresponding to  angular coordinates. In the limit of large  and 
therefore large , since , we obtain the 
continuum limit,
 
and this is readily checked via the explicit answer (6). Eqs. (7) and (14)
are particular cases of (21).

While we have succeeded in treating the two-body decay by this procedure, it
clearly becomes unwieldy and probably useless for  and larger values
of , since we would have to integrate over multiproducts of hyperspherical
harmonics, which are not exactly well-known, though some fancy generalisations 
of 3-j symbols and the like must exist. On the other hand one can make much 
better progress by regarding the recurrence as the result of
integrating over the last  momenta :
 
Now in general,


and ,
so (20) simplifies to
 
As far as we are aware there is no amenable formula for the radial kernel: an 
integral over the product of  Bessel functions of the first kind with 
different arguments for all . However the cases  and  are known 
and for positive  read:



For  it is even known that

where  is associated with the
maximal area of a (cocyclic) quadrilateral formed by the lengths 
and  is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Anyhow,
this means that we may at least write a simple closed form for the three-body
recurrence relation, when  is arbitrary:
 
An interesting case occurs when , whereupon (24) reduces to
 
and because 3-D phase space is so simple, we obtain an intriguing 
representation for 6-D phase space on setting . Specifically,







With larger , presumably the radial kernel on the right of (23) involves all 
lengths  and something geometrically more complicated than , 
connected with the closed figure . [Thus we expect it to 
vanish when any length exceeds the lengths of the other three, amongst other 
conditions. This is a very interesting topic worth future investigation.]

Conclusions 
In this paper we have established the connection between relativistic phase 
space for different dimensions by two methods. They complement Almgren's 
connection between phase space
in the same dimension, but for different numbers of decay products. Our 
recurrence relations have practical utility when the difference in dimensions
 is odd since it leads to elegant symmetrical representations of
 for even  involving elliptic functions.

Last but not least, one should observe that phase space is nothing but
the imaginary part of a sunset Feynman diagram. Since recurrence relations
between sunset diagrams differing in dimensionality by 2 have been found by
other methods, it should be possible to rewrite our results that way, 
for even  at any rate. We should also point out that as a rule those
relations do not connect even and odd  because they are obtained by 
integration by parts from scalar particle Feynman graphs.

Acknowledgements 

We are pleased to acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research
Council under grant number A00000780. Comments and suggestions by 
A.I. Davydychev are also much appreciated.



 99 

 D.A. Akyeampong and R. Delbourgo, Nuovo Cim. 19A , 141 
 (1974); E. Mendels, Nuovo Cim. 45A , 87 (1978).

 S. Groote, J,G. Korner and A.A. Pivovarov, Nucl. Phys. B542 , 515
 (1999) and Eur. Phys. J. C11 , 279 (1999); S. Groote and
 A.A Pivovarov, Nucl. Phys. B580 , 459 (2000).

 A. Bashir, R. Delbourgo and M.L. Roberts, J. Math. Phys. 42 , 5553
(2001).

 B. Almgren, Arkiv for Physik 38 , 161 (1968).

 S. Bauberger, F.A. Berends, M. Bohm and M. Buza, Nucl. Phys.
 B434 , 383 (1995).

 A.K. Rajantie, Nucl. Phys. B480 , 729 (1996).

 A.I. Davydychev and R. Delbourgo, "Three-body phase space: 
 symmetrical treatments", hep-th/0209233, to appear in AIPC 2002, 347.

 E.P. Wigner, Group Theory , Academic Press, London (1968).

 A. Gervois and H. Navelet, J. Math. Phys. 26 , 633 (1985).

 A.P. Prudnikov, Yu.A Brychkov, O.I. Marychev, Integrals
 and Series, Vol. 2 , Gordon and Breach, Amsterdam (1986). See sections 2.12.42 
 and 2.12.44 in particular.

 H. Bateman, Higher Transcendental Functions, Vol. II ,
 McGraw-Hill, NY (1953).

 O.V. Tarasov, Nucl. Phys. B502 , 455 (1997)  and
 Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 89 , 237 (2000). See also eq. (25) in
 A.I. Davydychev and J.B. Tausk, Phys Rev. 53 , 7381 (1996). 



