








theorem Theorem 
definition [theorem]Definition 

 Towards the Construction of Wightman Functions of Integrable 
Quantum Field Theories(To appear in
the proceedings of the 
'6th International Workshop on Conformal Field Theories and Integrable 
Models', in Chernologka, September 2002.
)  
H. Babujian Permanent address: Yerevan Physics Institute,
 Alikhanian
Brothers 2, Yerevan, 375036 Armenia.   e-mail: babujian@lx2.yerphi.am,
babujian@physik.fu-berlin.de   and M. Karowski 
 e-mail: karowski@physik.fu-berlin.de 
Institut fur 
Theoretische Physik
Freie Universitat Berlin, 
Arnimallee 14, 
14195 Berlin, Germany
 
 
 
The purpose of the "bootstrap program" for integrable quantum field theories
in 1+1 dimensions is to construct a model in terms of its Wightman functions
explicitly. In this article, this program is mainly illustrated in terms of
the sine-Gordon and the sinh-Gordon model and (as an exercise) the scaling
Ising model. We review some previous results on sine-Gordon breather form
factors and quantum operator equations. The problem to sum over intermediate
states is attacked in the short distance limit of the two point Wightman
function for the sinh-Gordon and the scaling Ising model.



Introduction 

The 'bootstrap program for integrable quantum field theories in
1+1-dimensions' does not   start with any
classical Lagrangian. Rather this program classifies integrable quantum field
theoretic models and in addition it provides their explicit exact solutions in
term of all Wightman functions. We have contact with the classical models
only, when at the end we compare our exact results with Feynman graph
expansions which are based on the Lagrangians.

One of the authors (M.K.) et al.  formulated the on-shell program
i.e. the exact determination of the scattering matrix using the Yang-Baxter
equations. Off-shell quantities, namely form factors were first investigated
by Vergeles and Gryanik in the sinh-Gordon model and by Weisz
 in the sine-Gordon model. The concept of generalized form factors was
introduced by one of the authors (M.K.) et al. . In this article
consistency equations were formulated which are expected to be satisfied by
these objects. Thereafter this approach was developed further and studied in
the context of several explicit models by Smirnov who proposed the
form factor equations  (see below) as extensions of similar formulae
in the original article. The formulae were proven by the authors et
al. .

Finally the Wightman functions are obtained by taking integrals and sums over
intermediate states. The explicit evaluation of all these integrals and sums
remains an open challenge for almost all models, except the Ising model
. In this article we attack this problem for the examples of
the sinh-Gordon model and, as an exercise, of the scaling Ising model. We
investigate the short distance behavior of the two-point Wightman function of
the exponential of the field.

The "bootstrap program" 

As the final result the 'bootstrap program' for integrable quantum field
theories in 1+1-dimensions provides a model in term of all Wightman functions.
The result is obtained in three steps:

 
The S-matrix is calculated by means of general properties such as
unitarity and crossing, the Yang-Baxter equations (which are a consequence of
integrability) and the additional assumption of 'maximal analyticity'. This
means that the two-particle S-matrix is an analytic function in the physical
plane (of the Mandelstam variable ) and possesses only
those poles there which are of physical origin. The only input which depends
on the model is the assumption of a particle spectrum. Usually it belongs to
representations of a symmetry. Typically there is a correspondence of
fundamental representations with multiplets of particles. A
classification  of all S-matrices obeying the given properties is obtained.

Generalized form factors which are matrix elements of local operators




are calculated by means of the S-matrix. More precisely, the equations
 as listed in section  are solved. These equations follow
from LSZ-assumptions and again the additional assumption of 'maximal
analyticity'.

The Wightman functions are obtained by inserting a complete set of
intermediate states. In particular the two point function for a hermitian
operator  reads
* 
0  O (x)O (0)  0_n=0 ^ 1 n! dp_1 dp_n  (2)^n 2_1 2_n  

  0  O (0)  p_1 
,,p_n ^in   ^2 e^-ixp_i  .
Up to now a proof that these sums converge exists only for the scaling Ising
model and the 'Yang-Lee' model.

Integrability 

Integrability in (quantum) field theories means that there exist -many
local conservation laws



A consequence of such conservation laws in 1+1 dimensions is that there is no
particle production and the n-particle S-matrix is a product of 2-particle
S-matrices



If backward scattering occurs the 2-particle S-matrices will not commute and
one has to specify the order. In particular for the 3-particle S-matrix there
are two possibilities
* 
S^(3) =S_12 S_13 S_23 =S_23 S_13 S_12  

 
which yield the "Yang-Baxter Equation". 
Examples  of
integrable models in 1+1-dimensions are the sine-Gordon  model defined
by the classical field equation




and the massive Thirring model defined by the classical Lagrangian




Coleman proved that both models are equivalent on the quantum level.

Further integrable models are: -Ising models, nonlinear 
-models, Gross-Neveu models, Toda models etc. In the following most of the
formulae and explicit solutions are given for the sine-Gordon alias massive
Thirring model although often corresponding results exist also for other models.

The S-matrix 

For the Sine-Gordon alias massive Thiring model the particle spectrum consists
of: soliton, anti-soliton and breathers (as soliton anti-soliton bound
states). Since backward scattering can only appear for particles with the same
mass, the two-particle S-matrix is of the form














where the rapidity difference  is defined
by .

We start with the soliton (anti-soliton) S-matrix:












 soliton,  anti-soliton. As input conditions we have:

 
Unitarity:  
* 

Crossing: 




Yang-Baxter: 





Maximal analyticity: 

 is meromorphic in the 'physical strip' 
 and all poles there have a physical interpretation, in
particular all bound states correspond to simple poles. An S-matrix satisfying
this condition is also called 'minimal'. For couplings  (in the language
of the massive Thirring model) there are no soliton anti-soliton bound states.
Therefore in this region of the coupling constant  is holomorphic
in the 'physical strip' .

The S-matrix bootstrap using the Yang-Baxter  relations was proposed by
Karowski, Thun, Truong and Weisz. It was shown in this article
that the 'minimal' general solution  to these equations is





This S-matrix was first obtained by Zamolodchikov from the
extrapolation of semi-classical expressions. It has been checked in
perturbation theory. The free parameter  is related to the coupling
constants by



The second equation is due to Coleman and the first one is obtained by
analyzing the pole structure of the amplitude . The assumption
of 'maximal analyticity' and comparison with the known semi-classical bound
state spectrum provides the identification of the parameter .

The two-breather S-matrix
 
is obtained by the bound state fusion method.

  

Form factors 

 
For a local operator  the generalized form factorsare defined as





for . For other orders of the rapidities they are
defined by analytic continuation. The index denotes the
type of the particle with momentum . We also use the short notations
 or 
.

For the sine Gordon model  denotes the soliton, anti-soliton or
breathers. Similar as for the S-matrix, 'maximal analyticity' for generalized
form factors means again that they are meromorphic and all poles in the
'physical strips'  have a physical
interpretation. Together with the usual LSZ-assumptions of local
quantum field theory the following form factor equations can be derived

 
[]Watson's equations:
 

[] Crossing relation (for the connected part of the matrix
element):
 

[] Recursion relation:
 
where  is the charge conjugation matrix.

[] Bound state form factors equations:
 
where  is the fusion angle and  is the fusion
intertwiner.

[] Lorentz invariance:
 
where  is the "spin" of .

These equations have been proposed by Smirnov as generalizations of
equations derived in the original articles. They have been
proven by means of the LSZ-assumptions and 'maximal analyticity'.
They hold in this form for bosons; for fermions or more generally for anyons
there are some additional phase factors.

Two-particle form factors 

For the two-particle form factors the form factor equations are easily
understood. The usual assumptions of local quantum field theory yield




where the rapidity difference is defined by 
. For integrable theories one has particle number conservation which implies
(for any eigenstate of the two-particle S-matrix)





Crossing () means




where for one-particle states in- and out-states coincide. Therefore Watson's
equations follow








For general theories Watson's equations only hold below the particle
production thresholds. However, for integrable theories there is no particle
production and therefore they hold for all complex values of . It has
been shown that these equations together with "maximal
analyticity" have a unique solution.

As an example we write the sine-Gordon two-breather form factor 

A formula for sine-Gordon breather form factors 

We are looking for solutions of the form factor equations . The
generalized form factors for arbitrary numbers of breathers are of the form
 
where  is the two-breather form factor above and the 'K-function'
satisfies Watsons equations with . We make the Ansatz 
(Using an integral representation for general soliton
form factors we derived this formula in for several local operators
(see also). Here we consider it as an Ansatz also for operators
such as the general exponential of the breather field which is nonlocal with
respect to the soliton field.) 
 
The dependence of form factors on the operator  enters only
through the p-functions 
. This Ansatz transforms the form factor equations  to simpler
equations for the p-function 
. The p-function 
 is holomorphic with respect to all
variables . It is symmetric with respect to the
exchange of the variables  and  at the same time and it is
periodic with period .
 
With the short hand notation 

 and  the
recursion relation
 
holds where  and  is
independent of . Lorentz covariance reads as
 
These conditions of the p-function are sufficient to guarantee the properties
of the form factors.

 
If the p-function 
 satisfies the conditions (-) the form
factor function  satisfies the properties
(-).

This theorem has been proven in.

Examples of operators and their p-functions:   

For several cases the correspondence between local operators and their
p-functions have been proposed in. Here we provide three examples:

 
The normal ordered exponential of the field (see also) 
 

Expanding the last relation with respect to  one obtains the
p-functions for normal ordered powers   in particular
for 





which yields (for ) the 'wave function renormalization constant'




(see also).

The higher conserved currents  (which are typical for integrable
quantum field theories)






Asymptotic behavior of the form factors for 
 

Let  be the normal ordered power of a bosonic
field. Write the rapidities as 

 and consider the limit 
. Then the asymptotic behavior of the n-boson form factor is
* 
This can be proven in any order of perturbation theory as follows. The matrix
element on the left hand side may be written in terms of Feynman graphs as
























where all other graphs not drawn have lines which connect both parts directly.
Weinberg's power counting theorem for bosonic Feynman graphs implies that
these contributions decrease for  as 
. This behavior is also assumed to hold for the exact form
factors (the fact is that the 'logarithmic terms'  do not show up
for the exact expressions since the K-functions are meromorphic in the
). Therefore for the exponentials of the boson field
 we have the asymptotic behavior






It is easy to see that our proposal () together with
() and () satisfies this asymptotic behavior(This type
of arguments has been also used before.) . The asymptotic
behavior of other form factors is more complicated in particular if
fermions are involved.

Quantum field operator equations 

The sine-Gordon equation 

We start with the local operator 
. For the
exceptional value  we find that also 
 is local. Moreover the quantum sine-Gordon
field equation
 
holds for all matrix elements, if the "bare" mass  is related
to the renormalized mass by(Before such a formula was found
 by different methods.) 
 
where  is the physical mass of the fundamental boson. The result may be
checked in perturbation theory by Feynman graph expansions. In particular in
lowest order the relation between the bare and the renormalized mass
() had already been calculated in the original article.
The result is




which agrees with the exact formula above.

Here is a sketch of the proof of the field equation which uses
induction and Liouville's theorem. Consider the K-functions of the left hand
side of eq. ()





The results of the previous section imply 
 for . As an induction assumption we take
. The function 
 is meromorphic in terms of the 
with at most simple poles at  since 
. The residues of the poles at
 vanish because of the symmetry under the exchange of
. The residues at  are proportional
to  because of the recursion
relation . Furthermore it can be shown that 
 for . Therefore
 vanishes identically by Liouville's theorem.

The factor  in () modifies the classical
equation and has to be considered as a quantum correction. For the sin- and
sinh-Gordon model an analogous quantum field equation has been discussed
previously. Note that in particular at the 'free fermion point'
 this factor diverges, a
phenomenon which is to be expected by investigations of the short distance
behavior. For fixed bare mass square  and 
 the physical mass goes to zero. These values of the
coupling are known to be specific: 1) the Bethe Ansatz vacuum in the language
of the massive Thirring model shows phase transitions and 2) the
model at these points is related to Baxters RSOS-models
which correspond to minimal conformal models with central charge
.

The trace of the energy momentum tensor 

As a further operator equation we find (see also)
that the trace of the energy momentum tensor satisfies
 
Again this operator equation is to be understood as a relation of all its
matrix elements. The equation is modified compared to the classical one by a
quantum correction . As a consequence of this fact the
model will be conformal invariant in the limit  for
fixed bare mass square . This is related to a
Berezinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless phase transition.

This results may be checked again in perturbation theory by Feynman graph
expansions. The quantum corrections of the trace of the energy momentum tensor
() yields




This again agrees with the exact formula above since the usual normalization
for the energy momentum given by 
 implies .

 Wightman functions 

As the simplest case we consider the two-point function of two local scalar
operators  and 




Summation over all intermediate states 

Inserting a complete set of in-states we may write
* 
We have introduced the functions
* 
where crossing has been used. In particular we consider exponentials of a
scalar bose field



where  means normal ordering with respect to the physical vacuum
which means that



and therefore .

The Log of the two-point function 

For  we may write (see also)
* 
It is well known that the functions  and  are related by



where we use the short hand notation 
 with . The relations of the 's and
the 's may be depicted with   
  and  
  as

















For example
* 

Due to Lorentz invariance it is sufficient to consider . Let
 and  be scalar operators. Then the
functions  depend on the rapidity differences only.
We use the formula for the modified Bessel function of the third kind




to perform one integration
* 

with





Short distance behavior  

In order to perform the conformal limit of masive models one investigates the
short distance behavior (see e.g. ). For small 
we use the expansion of the modified Bessel function of the third kind and
obtain
* 
where  is Euler's or Mascheroni's constant. Therefore
the two-point Wightman function has power like behavior for short distances



where the dimension is given by




if the integrals exist. This is true for the exponentials of bose
fields because of the asymptotic
behavior for 
* 
as shown above. Therefore the functions  satisfy (see also)




This follows when we distinguish in the relation of the 's and the 's
above the variable  and reorganize the terms on the right hand
side as follows



The constant  is obtained as





and it should be related to the vacuum expectation value 
 in the 'conformal normalization'



Such vacuum expectation value was calculated in for the sine-Gordon model.

Examples 

For simplicity let us consider the case that both operator are the exponential
of the field at the  special value 




1. The free case: 

For the free case  and all
 for 
* 
which is a well known result.

2. The sinh-Gordon model 

The 2-particle S-matrix is obtained from the sine-Gordon breather S-matrix
() for imaginary couplings 




The 2-particle form factor function is given by () for 
. The sinh Gordon model has the self-dual point



The dimension of the exponential of the field 
 for the sinh-Gordon model is in the 1- and 1+2-particle
intermediate state approximation (see Fig. )
* 
The integral may be calculated exactly with the result






























































































































































































































































Dimension of an exponential of the field for the sinh-Gordon
model: 1- and 1+2-particle intermediate state contributions  

In principle the higher particle intermediate state integrals may
also be calculated, however, up to now we could not derive a general formula.
This is possible for the scaling Ising model which is considered as the next
example. The constant  in the approximation of 1-intermediate states is
given as




We have not calculated the integrals appearing in higher-particle intermediate
state contributions.

3. The scaling Ising model 

 The S-matrix is . The form factors of the order
parameter  are non-vanishing for odd 



and for the disorder parameter  for even 




We introduce the operator 
normalized such that  and  It
obviously satisfies the asymptotic cluster behavior like an exponential of a
bose field





This allows us to apply the same methods as above
* 
with 
. To obtain dimension the  and the constant  we have
to calculate
* 
All integrals in the sum over the intermediate states in the formula of the
dimension can be performed. The result may be expressed by a recursion
relation













The sum over all intermediate states can be performed by solving the recursion
relation which yields
* 
and which is a well known result (see for example). For the
constant  we calculated the 1- and 2-particle intermediate state
contributions
* 
Using
* 
this approximation may be compared with the results of



Acknowledgments 

We thank A. Belavin, M. Jimbo, V.A. Fateev, A. Fring, T. Miwa, Y. Pugai, F.A.
Smirnov, R. Schrader, B. Schroer, J. Teschner, and A.B. Zamolodchikov for
discussions. H.B. was supported by DFG, Sonderforschungsbereich 288
'Differentialgeometrie und Quantenphysik' and partially by the grants INTAS
99-01459 and INTAS 00-561.

 99 
B. Schroer, T.T. Truong and P. Weisz, Phys. Lett. 
B 63 (1976) 422.

M. Karowski, Field Theories in 1+1 Dimensions with Soliton
Behaviour: Form Factors and Green's Functions , in 'Lecture Notes in Physics
126' (Springer) (1979) p. 344

M. Karowski, The bootstrap program for 1+1 dimensional field
theoretic models with soliton behavior , in 'Field theoretic methods in
particle physics', ed. W. Ru hl, (Plenum Pub. Co., New York, 1980).

M. Karowski, H.J. Thun, T.T. Truong and P. Weisz, Phys.
Lett.  B67  (1977) 321.

S. Vergeles and V. Gryanik, Sov. Journ. Nucl. Phys. 
23  (1976) 704.

P. Weisz, Nucl. Phys.  B122  (1977) 1.

M. Karowski and P. Weisz, Nucl. Phys.  B139  (1978) 445.

F.A. Smirnov 'Form Factors in Completely Integrable Models
of Quantum Field Theory', Adv. Series in Math. Phys.  14 , World
Scientific 1992.

H. Babujian, A. Fring, M. Karowski and A. Zapletal, Nucl.
Phys.  B538  [FS] (1999) 535-586.

R.Z. Bariev, Phys. Lett.  55A  (1976)
456;B. McCoy, C.A. Tracy and T.T. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
38  (1977) 783; M. Sato, T. Miva and M. Jimbo, Proc.
Japan Acad.  53A  (1977) 6.

B. Berg, M. Karowski and P. Weisz, Phys. Rev.  D19 
(1979) 2477.

V.P. Yurov and Al. B. Zamolodchikov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. 
A6  (1991) 4557.

F.A. Smirnov, private communication.

S. Coleman, Phys. Rev.  D11  (1975) 2088.

A.B. Zamolodchikov, JETP Lett.  25  (1977) 468.

M. Karowski and H.J. Thun, Nucl. Phys.  B130  (1977) 295.

H. Lehmann, K. Symanzik and W. Zimmermann, Nuovo Cimento 
1  (1955) 205; 6  (1957) 319.

K.M. Watson, Phys. Rev.  95  (1954) 228.

M. Karowski,  Nucl. Phys.  B153  (1979).

H.M. Babujian and M. Karowski, Phys. Lett. B 411  (1999) 53-57.

H. Babujian and M. Karowski, Exact Form Factors in
Integrable Quantum Field Theories: the Sine-Gordon Model (II) , Nucl.
Phys.  B620  (2002) 407.

F.A. Smirnov, Nucl. Phys.  B337  (1990) 156-180.

H. Babujian and M. Karowski, Journ. Phys. A: Math. Gen.
 35  (2002) 9081-9104.

V. Brazhnikov and S. Lukyanov,Nucl. Phys.  B512
 (1998) 616-636.

A. Fring, G. Mussardo and P. Simonetti, Nucl.
Phys.  B393  (1993) 413, Phys. Lett.  B307  (1993) 83.

A. Koubek and G. Mussardo, Phys. Lett.  B311  (1993) 193.

G. Mussardo and P. Simonetti, Int. J. Mod. Phys. 
 A9  (1994) 3307-3338.

V.A.Fateev, Phys. Lett.  B 324  (1994) 45-51.

Al.B. Zamolodchikov, Int. Journ. of Mod. Phys. 
A10  (1995) 1125-1150.

B. Schroer and T. Truong, Phys. Rev.  15  (1977) 1684.

V. E. Korepin, Commun. Math. Phys.  76  (1980) 165.

M. Karowski, Nucl. Phys.  B300  [FS22] (1988) 473;
-, Yang-Baxter algebra - Bethe ansatz - conformal quantum
field theories - quantum groups , in 'Quantum Groups', Lecture Notes in
Physics, Springer (1990) p. 183.

A. LeClair, Phys. Lett.  B230  (1989) 103-107.

F.A. Smirnov, Commun. Math. Phys.  131  (1990) 157-178.

J.M. Kosterlitz and J.P. Thouless, Journ. Phys.  C6 
(1973) 118.

A.B. Zamolodchikov, JETP Lett.  43  (1986) 730.

J.L. Cardy, Phys. Rev. Lett.  60  (1988) 2709.

G. Delfino, P. Simonetti and J.L Cardy,  Phys. Lett. 
B387  (1996) 327.

O.A. Castro-Alvaredo and A. Fring, Phys. Rev.  D63
 (2001) 2170; Nucl. Phys.  B604  (2001) 367.

S. Lukyanov and A.B. Zamolodchikov, Nucl.Phys. 
B 493 (1997) 571-587.

H. Babujian and M. Karowski, in preparation.

J.L. Cardy and G. Mussardo, Phys. Lett.  B225 
(1989) 275; Nucl. Phys.  B340  (1990) 387.

