








1.4 






























equation section 
.equation  


 
 
  scaled1
  
 hep-th/0301035 
       UT-03-01 
          

    
 Thermal Partition Function  
 of Superstring on Compactified PP-Wave 

 2.0 truecm
Yuji Sugawara  

sugawara@hep-th.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 .6 truecm
  Department of Physics,  Faculty of Science, 

  University of Tokyo 

  7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan 
  
 .4 truecm


 
  0.5 truecm


 
6.7mm

We study the thermal partition function of superstring 
on the pp-wave background with the circle compactification
along a transverse direction. We calculate it in the two ways:
the operator formalism and the path-integral calculation.
The former gives the finite result with no subtlety of the Wick rotation,
which only contains the contributions of physical states.
On the other hand, the latter yields the manifestly modular 
invariant expression, even though we only have the winding modes
along the transverse circle (no Kaluza-Klein excitations). 
We also check the equivalence of these two analyses. 
The DLCQ approach makes the path-integration quite easy. 
Remarkably, we find that the contributions from the transverse
winding sectors disappear in the non-DLCQ limit,  
while they indeed contribute in the DLCQ model, 
depending non-trivially on the longitudinal quantum numbers.


18pt



Introduction 
The string theories on the supersymmetric pp-wave backgroundshave been gathering  much attentions after the works, 
as new classes of exactly soluble superstring vacuaand as a powerful tool to analyze the AdS/CFT correspondence 
beyond the supergravity approximation. 


In this article we study the thermal partition function (or the 
free energy in space-time theory)of the superstring theory on the pp-wave background 
compactified on a space-like circle presented in. 
The recent related papers analyzing the one-loop amplitudes 
in the strings on pp-waves are given in
.
While the one-loop partition functions are comparably easy to analyze 
even in the pp-wave backgrounds, we still have several non-trivial 
points:
 
 We need clarify the building blocks possessing good modular 
properties to describe the massive world-sheet theory for the transverse
sector.
 We need integrate out suitably the longitudinal degrees of freedom that
       are not decoupled in the relevant backgrounds.
 It is known that the world-sheet Hamiltonian 
       in the light-cone gauge only includes the winding modes and 
       includes no Kaluza-Klein (KK) momenta along the compactified circle. 
       It seems quite puzzling how we can achieve modular invariant 
       amplitudes in this situation.
The first and second points are common features in general pp-wave 
backgrounds with RR-flux.
As for the first one, only the non-trivial point is how we should 
evaluate the regularized zero-point energies (or the normal order
constants) compatible with the good modular transformation properties.
This problem has been nicely solved in.
The wanted zero-point energies are given as the Casimir energies 
which are defined by subtracting the divergence  of "bulk"
energies  not sensitive to the boundary conditions. 
We summarize the formulas of relevant building blocks, which 
we call "massive theta functions" in this paper, and 
the zero-point energies in appendix.


The second point is much more non-trivial. 
In the path-integral approach we have to integrate out the longitudinal 
zero-modes in order to obtain modular invariant amplitudes.
For the familiar string vacua with the flat space-time , 
the longitudinal momenta are completely decoupled and 
we can obtain finite results by simply taking the Wick 
rotation in space-time. However, in the present case of pp-wave,
the naive Wick rotation leads to a difficulty of complex 
mass parameter in the light-cone gauge action. It seems quite subtle
whether such models are really meaningful. 

To avoid this difficulty we shall consider the thermal model
as in. To be more precise, we first 
adopt the DLCQ approach 
and later take  the decompactification limit, following 
our previous study. 
In our approach the mass parameter can be always treated 
as a real parameter.   However, as the cost we must pay for it, 
the longitudinal instanton actions, which capture the contributions 
from topological sectors,  include pure imaginary  terms    We would like to emphasize that this is not a peculiarity 
     of the pp-wave. This phenomenon appears already in 
     the thermal model of flat DLCQ string, and is justified
     by comparing with the operator calculation. .


Although our approach seems to have the similar difficulty 
of the complex world-sheet action, we can justify the result by 
comparing with the operator calculation, which only includes 
the contributions from the physical states and is 
a manifestly meaningful quantity. 


The third point is a characteristic feature of the compactified
pp-waves, and is actually the main motivation by which we study
this background.  This problem will be resolved in this article. 
As a remarkable feature, we will show that the winding modes along
the transverse circle are decoupled in the non-DLCQ model, 
while the non-trivial contributions from them are found 
in the DLCQ model.  


This paper  is organized as follows:
We first calculate the free energy by means of  the operator formalism,
after making a brief review on the compactified pp-wave.
We next derive the modular invariant expression of it based on the 
path-integral approach along the same line as in,
and finally make some discussions.





 



Operator Calculation of Space-time Free Energy in 
Superstring on the Compactified PP-Wave 
We start by making a brief review on the type IIB superstring theory on
the maximally supersymmetric pp-wave compactified around 
a space-like circle to mainly prepare our notations.
(A good review is also found in the recent paper.)
Suppose a compactification along a circle in the  plane
in the space-like directions.
According to,  we introduce the following 
new coordinates which simplify a Killing vector on the pp-wave 
background ( is the strength of 5-form RR-flux);
 
and the other coordinates   remain unchanged.
Because the relevant Killing vector 
is now written as , 
we can take an -compactification
 
which is known to give a supersymmetric sting vacuum
with 24 Killing spinors. 
Under the light-cone gauge 
 
the Green-Schwarz action is written as
 
where  and 
 in our convention.
The  matrices ,
 () are defined so that the chiral 
representation of  gamma matrices is given by







 
and satisfy
 
We also set .
We note that the the coordinate system rotated frame 
reduces to the rotated frame after taking the light-cone gauge.
The absence of the harmonic potential (mass term)
and the existence of interaction with a  constant magnetic field
(or the Coriolis force) for ,  is originating from this fact.


Combining ,  to a complex boson ,
the equations of motion are written as
 
It is convenient to solve the equation for  in the following form;
 
where  is the standard massive complex boson satisfying
. 
 is the winding number for the circle along  and
 is the center of mass
coordinate. We remark that the zero-mode part of the
solution sol Z  does not include the KK momentum term 
, which is not compatible with the equations of motion eom .
Similarly, for the fermionic coordinates, it is convenient to rewrite as
 
where  satisfy the usual Dirac equation with mass
;
 
The canonically conjugate momenta are given as
 
Since  is canonically conjugate to the compactified coordinate
, it  must be quantized as
   
We thus find the quantization of zero-mode coordinate ,
since  holds 
as we mentioned above. This phenomenon is the well-known one,
giving rise to the degeneracy of the "Landau levels";
   
where we set the volume along the -direction , 
which should be decompactified after the calculation. 


The canonical quantization is defined in the standard manner.
The easiest way to do so is to introduce the mode expansions 
with respect to , , ,  (and
, of course), since they satisfy the same equations of motion
as in. The Virasoro constraints lead us to 
the following world-sheet Hamiltonian 
 
In this expression we set .
 are the mode counting operators for , and 
 () is the one associated to 
the positive (negative) frequency modes of  and the negative
(positive) frequency modes of . The fermionic 
mode counting operators  are defined as follows:
Let ,  be the decomposition
according to  the eigen-value of . 
 () is the one associated to 
the positive (negative) frequency modes of ,  
and the negative (positive) frequency modes of , .
We have no normal order constant here thanks to the SUSY cancellation,
since both the bosonic and fermionic coordinates obey the periodic 
boundary conditions. We will later face the situations in which 
this cancellation fails due to the twisted boundary conditions 
in the calculation of thermal amplitudes. In those cases 
we need the non-trivial formula of regularized zero-point energies
Delta m a  given in (see also 
). It is obvious that the energies of 
each bosonic and fermionic oscillators in the Hamiltonian 
H 1  are not balanced. This fact implies that all of the 
24 Killing spinors are "time-dependent", corresponding to the 
supercharges that do not commute with the Hamiltonian.


The Virasoro condition also provides the level matching condition
in the standard manner;
 
where  means the oscillator part of the world-sheet
momentum operator defined as
 
Notice that the canonical momentum 
is absent in the Hamiltonian H 1  as is expected, 
but the level-matching condition depends on it. 


For later convenience, we shall take the DLCQ compactification
 from now on;
 
This is really well-defined since  is still a
covariantly constant Killing vector in the rotated coordinates 
rotated frame .
Under DLCQ , the light-cone momentum is quantized as
 
and the level-matching condition lm 1  is deformed as
 


 




Now, we are in the position to calculate 
the free energy (with vanishing chemical potential) 

in the thermal ensemble of free strings on the relevant pp-wave
backgrounds.
Let  be the inverse temperature, then the free energy 
should be written as
 
where  denotes the space-time fermion number (mod 2)
and  
is the space-time energy operator. The trace should be 
taken over the single particle physical Hilbert space on which 
the on-shell condition and the level matching condition are imposed.
The following calculation is almost parallel to that of
. 
In the present problem, however,  
we must care about the degeneracy of Landau levels.
We thus calculate the free energy, dividing it by the degeneracy 
 given in LL d , and then take the 
 limit. 

The on-shell condition is written as 
 
Imposing  the level matching condition lm 2  is slightly a 
non-trivial task. It is achieved by inserting 
the following projection operator into the trace
 
We so obtain 
 
where  denotes the oscillator part of 
Hamiltonian H 1 . The trace is taken over the Fock space associated 
to the light-cone momentum .
The summation of  is readily carried out under the large -limit
(large -limit) as 
 
where we set
 
Let us introduce , and write 
, .
Since  and  are relatively  prime, the 
"discrete delta function" d delta fn 
imposes that  must  be written as the form 
 
It is also convenient to introduce the "modulus parameter" 
 with the constant 
. 
The trace of oscillator part is now written as


.
This is  easily evaluated from the explicit form
of Hamiltonian H 1  and expressed concisely 
in terms of the massive theta functions defined in massive theta .
The temporal boundary condition of fermionic coordinates should be
periodic for even  and anti-periodic for odd  because of the
insertion of .
Combining all the things, we finally obtain 
 
where the integers  run over the range such that 
 with the definition
 
It is interesting that the winding modes  along the 
space-like circle is not independent of the longitudinal
quantum numbers , . 
This feature is  in a sharp contrast with the flat backgrounds.  


Let us finally discuss the decompactification limit 
. The desired free energy  should be defined as


 
in which the summation of  is replaced with the integration
 
To consider this limit we first note that the winding modes 
 are trivially decoupled,  unless 
 is the value of the same order of .
In the cases when   holds and ,  however, 
the discrete sum  is still negligible
because of the small factor .
We thus conclude that only the no winding sector  survives
and the summation of  reduces to an integral
 
In this way, we have achieved  the wanted decompactification limit;
 
where we set
.
It is also not difficult to derive free energy 3 
directly from the non-DLCQ model. The light-cone momentum  
is now continuous. The level matching condition is given by lm 1 
instead of lm 2 , and hence the projection operator 
lm projection 1  should be replaced with
 
W projection 1  is further replaced with
 
Therefore, we again find that the  sectors are decoupled,
and obtain the same result free energy 3 .


 


Path-Integral Calculation of Thermal Partition Function in 
Superstring on the Compactified PP-Wave 
Next we perform the path-integral calculation of the toroidal 
partition function with the thermal compactification.
The wanted partition function 
will have a manifestly modular invariant form and 
should be equated with the free energy considered above
by the next simple relation;
 
We shall first deal with the DLCQ model,
and will later consider the decompactification limit. 
The calculation is again almost parallel to that 
presented in (see also). 
We need the Wick rotation in both of the world-sheet and
space-time. Although the Wick rotated pp-wave backgrounds 
have a difficulty of complex mass parameter as we already mentioned,
in our approach the mass parameter  can be always treated 
as a real parameter .  As the cost we must pay for it, 
the longitudinal string coordinates become complex, 
leading to a complex instanton action. 
Nevertheless, the final result will turn out to be a  real function
and to be justified by confirming the relation Z and F .



We define the Wick rotated world-sheet coordinates as
 
In the Wick rotated space-time 
,
the DLCQ string theory () is 
described by the complex identification
 
and the thermal compactification is defined as
 
where  denotes the inverse temperature.


The longitudinal coordinates have various topological sectors;
 
Let , 
be the instanton solution obeying the boundary conditions instanton .
Even though the light-cone gauge is not compatible with instanton ,
we can take the "instanton gauge" ,
which makes the world-sheet action quadratic 
as in.
In fact, consider the rotation of the world-sheet coordinates as 
  
with
 
Then,  behaves in this new coordinate as
  
As a result, we obtain the equation of motion of the same form as 
eom  (on the Euclidean world-sheet);
 
but with the non-trivial mass parameter
 
This again leads to 
 
under the transformation of string coordinates 
 
where  is a real number (not necessarily  an integer ) 
which will be determined by the boundary conditions of .
Since eom 3  has the manifest rotational symmetry,
we can move back to the original coordinates , 
which is independent of the modulus  without changing 
the form of equation;
 
This fact makes things quite easy. We can calculate the one-loop amplitude
as the determinant of standard Kaluza-Klein operator, resulting 
the massive theta functions massive theta .
However,  obeys the non-trivial boundary conditions as the function
of , . We must carefully evaluate them from 
the boundary conditions of ;
 
Based on ws rotation , th w n  and sol Z 2 
we first find the constraints on ;
  
These constraints are quite non-trivial to solve, and 
probably we could not have the solutions everywhere on
the moduli space of torus.    
However, it will later turn out that we can always solve it 
for the DLCQ model which effectively has the discretized moduli space. 
Secondly, the periodicity of the oscillator part of  
leads to 
 

Similar arguments work also for the fermionic coordinates.
We finally achieve  the GS fermions , 
that satisfy the Dirac equation with the mass mass 2 
 
and obey the boundary conditions
 
Here the extra phase factors ,  are due to 
the thermal boundary conditions for world-sheet fermions.


The contributions from the zero-modes are described 
by the instanton actions, being summed over possible 
topological sectors.  
For the longitudinal modes we obtain
 
where the instanton action is evaluated as
 
 denotes the volume
of the longitudinal directions and we again set 
. 
We here define the amplitude by subtracting the  sector
following the arguments given in ,
which could induce a trivial divergent sum of the remaining 
winding numbers , .  
This term corresponds to the total vacuum energy under the zero temperature
limit . We will discuss it later.


We also obtain for the zero-modes along the space-like circle 
 
where the summation is over all the real numbers  satisfying 
the constraints  given in constraints a  and the winding numbers
,  are determined by the relations
 

Taking all the things into account, we obtain  the 
following partition function
 
where we set
, and 
 
indicates the summation over ,  except for .
 denotes the fundamental domain of moduli space
 
However, th part 1  is not the desired one, because the condition 
cannot be easily solved and the windings , 
have complicated forms depending non-trivially on the modulus .
Fortunately, we can improve this point drastically in our DLCQ approach. 
In fact, we can explicitly carry out the summations  over , , since 
the remaining sectors do not depend on them. (Recall our assumption 
.)  
We so find  the periodic delta function term;
  
which imposes the constraints
 
With the helps of them, the condition  is explicitly solved;
  
and ,  are determined as 
 
where we again set , , .
After a short calculation using again delta constraints ,
we finally achieve the expression as follows; 
 
This is the desired partition function. 
The modular invariance of integrand is confirmed
because of  modular mt .
Especially, the -transformation brings about  the exchanges 
, ,
and leaves   unchanged. 

It is now straightforward to check the equivalence with the 
operator calculation. In fact, the modular invariance 
allows us to make th part 2  a simpler form by setting 
 and replacing  with the larger domain  strip 
as discussed in. 
After performing the modulus integral explicitly, 
we find the relation Z and F  is really satisfied.


Let us  finally argue on  the decompactification limit

 as we promised.
We can again show that only the  sector survives 
in this limit. The summations with respect to ,  
reduce to integrals and easily carried out.
We hence obtain 
 
where we set 
 
The modular invariance in th part 3  is similarly checked.
Moreover, we can again rewrite it by setting  and replacing the 
integration region  with . Transforming the integration 
variable as ,
we can again show  the relation Z and F  with free energy 3 .




 


Comments 
In this paper we have calculated the thermal partition function (free
energy) of superstring on the compactified pp-wave. We have presented 
two analyses, that is, the operator formalism and path-integral
approach.  We have also checked their equivalence. 
Now, the several comments are in order:


 



1. 
We have observed  that the winding modes along the transverse circle
non-trivially depend on the longitudinal quantum numbers in the DLCQ
model, and are decoupled in the non-DLCQ model. These aspects are in a 
sharp contrast with the usual toroidal compactifications 
in  flat backgrounds. We here illustrate why such peculiar
phenomenon occurs:

We first point out that it depends on the modulus  
whether the string can wind around the space-like circle 
contrary to the flat cases. This is essentially 
due to the fact that we are working on the time-dependent frame. 
In the DLCQ model we effectively have the discretized moduli space,
and we observed that the winding modes consistently exist at each point
of the discretized modulus. 


On the other hand, we have the continuous modulus which should be 
integrated out in the non-DLCQ model.
However, the existence of winding modes limits the modulus 
to  "rational points", which have the zero measure and do not 
contribute to the modulus integral. In other words, recall that 
the physical spectrum does not  really degenerate with respect to
the canonical momentum  unless .
Although the momentum  does not appear in the 
Hamiltonian H 1 , it controls the physical spectrum   
through the level matching condition lm 1 . Only in the case 
we have the infinite degeneracy of Landau levels which cancels the 
infinitely small factor .

 


2. 
The analysis on the Hagedorn behavioris quite easy, since we have already known the modular invariant forms 
th part 2 , th part 3 . 
We follow the argument given in. 
Namely, it is enough to investigate the IR behavior
of the term with ,  in th part 2  (or th part 3 ),
which could be tachyonic at a sufficiently high temperature 
and brings about  the thermal instability as in the flat backgrounds
. We can show that 
 
with the equation determining the Hagedorn temperature 
;
 
where the zero-point energy  of the massive theta functions
is defined in Delta m a .
The equation H temperature  does not depend on  the DLCQ radius
 as well as the compactification radius ,
as should be (see). 
We should here note that the Hagedorn temperature determined by
H temperature  is not equal to that of the original 
coordinate system in , which is studied in
, even under the uncompactified model
.   One might suppose this fact peculiar, but it is 
not a contradiction. The temperature is 
defined associated to the Euclidean time axis, and hence should be
a quantity not  independent of the choice of
space-time coordinates.


On the other hand, we know a manifestly coordinate free quantity; 
the cosmological constant. So, one might ask how we can avoid the contradiction
even though the partition function th part 1  
(or th part 2 ) apparently has a different form 
compared with that calculated in the original coordinate.
To answer this question, we first note  that  
the vacuum energy densities should be compared 
at the zero-temperature limit 
,   because  
the temperature is not coordinate free as pointed out above. 
Moreover, the amplitude in the zero-temperature limit
is described by the sectors with no thermal winding . 
We thus have to confirm that the contribution 
from this sector, which we omitted in our analyses, 
does not depend on the choice of coordinate system. In particular,
we must show that it really vanishes, as is expected from the space-time SUSY.
In a naive sense this is very easy to confirm. In fact, in our instanton 
gauge we have , if  holds, leading  
to the 8 massless bosons and 8 massless Dirac fermions in the transverse 
sector as in the flat backgrounds. We hence trivially obtain
the vanishing cosmological constant irrespective of 
the choice of coordinate system. However, the gauge choice 
 is supposed to be the "singular point"
of the light-cone gauge , 
which is not compatible with the usual Virasoro constraints. 
We thus may need more careful study about this problem,
probably with introducing a suitable regularization scheme to evaluate the 
vacuum energy   A possible way to evaluate it may be to first calculate it with 
    the small non-zero , and then to take the 
     limit. With the non-zero  the
    partition function could not vanish. However, since we are now 
    considering the vacuum energy density , the result 
    actually seems to vanish because of the infinite volume factor 
    due to the non-compact background.
    (See for the more detail.) .



 



3. 
Generalizations to the compactifications on higher
dimensional space-like tori are straightforward. Among others,
let us consider the -compactification in which a circle
lies along the  plane and another circle does along the
 plane,  for example.



In that case we should work on  the rotated frame generalizing 
rotated frame . We find 20 Killing spinors and 
obtain the same  spectra of 
the bosonic and fermionic oscillators as follows; 
 
This fact suggests that some of Killing spinors are
"time-independent" and define the supercharges commuting with the
world-sheet Hamiltonian.
The similar analysis gives the following thermal partition function
(in the DLCQ model);
 
where ,  are the compactification radii.
We again set  in the second line 
and the summations of ,  and  are taken in the range such that 
. 
These are  quite reminiscent forms  of those given in.
The first line is the modular invariant expression and the second line 
only contains the contributions from physical states.
The first term in the second line (the terms with  even )
corresponds to the Witten index 

and the second one describes the thermal excitations.

 


4. 
We have various future directions for this work. 
A natural generalization of our calculations is to include
the non-vanishing chemical potential as in.
As for the gauge theory duals, the DLCQ model for the uncompactified 
pp-wave was studied in, and more recently
the compactified models with/without DLCQ have been
investigated in. It may be interesting 
to compare the thermodynamical aspects in these dual field theories
with our string calculations. Moreover, it will be a tractable and 
interesting problem to analyze the compactified pp-wave backgrounds 
originating from the  backgrounds, and to discuss 
the aspects of holographic dualities as in. 
Among other things, it is well-known that we have the -family 
of supersymmetric vacua possessing both the RR and NSNS flux in those cases. 
There would appear non-trivial zero-modes which could allow  new winding 
sectors under the suitable choice of flux. We would like to explore
this aspect in a detail elsewhere.




 

 





Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank Y. Imamura, T. Kawano, S. Mizoguchi,
T. Takayanagi and S. Yamaguchi for stimulating conversations.
This work is supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for 
the Encouragement of Young Scientists 
() from the Japanese Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.









Appendix A   :   Massive Theta Functions 
A.equation  


































The "massive theta functions" are defined as 
 
where the regularized zero-point energy  is defined 
 as 
 
They have the following modular properties 
The next formulas are also useful;
 
The partition function for the -components complex
massive boson (non-chiral fermion) with the boundary conditions
, 
,
is calculated  as  
 
where  for the boson and  for the fermion.  
In this expression we introduced the momentum operator for the 
twisted fields
 
and the "helicity operator"
 
where ,  express the mode counting operators
associated to the Fourier modes 
,  respectively.








 99 


R. Guven,

Phys. Lett. B 191 , 275 (1987);

D. Amati and C. Klimcik,

Phys. Lett. B 210 , 92 (1988);

G. T. Horowitz and A. R. Steif,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  64 , 260 (1990);

G. T. Horowitz and A. R. Steif,

Phys. Rev. D 42 , 1950 (1990);

A. R. Steif,

Phys. Rev. D 42 , 2150 (1990);

A. A. Tseytlin,

Phys. Lett. B 288 , 279 (1992)
[arXiv:hep-th/9205058];

A. A. Tseytlin,

Nucl. Phys. B 390 , 153 (1993)
[arXiv:hep-th/9209023];


Phys. Rev. D 47 , 3421 (1993)
[arXiv:hep-th/9211061];

E. A. Bergshoeff, R. Kallosh and T. Ortin,

Phys. Rev. D 47 , 5444 (1993)
[arXiv:hep-th/9212030].


M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, C. Hull and G. Papadopoulos,

JHEP 0201  (2002) 047, hep-th/0110242;



Class. Quant. Grav.  19  (2002) L87,
hep-th/0201081.













R. R. Metsaev,


Nucl. Phys. B 625  (2002) 70, hep-th/0112044;

R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin,

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 126004 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0202109].



D. Berenstein, J. M. Maldacena and H. Nastase,

JHEP 0204  (2002) 013, hep-th/0202021.




J. Polchinski,

Commun. Math. Phys.  104 , 37 (1986).



B. Sathiapalan,


Phys. Rev. D 35 , 3277 (1987);

Y. I. Kogan,

JETP Lett.  45 , 709 (1987)
[Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.  45 , 556 (1987)];

K. H. O'Brien and C. I. Tan,

Phys. Rev. D 36 , 1184 (1987).



J. J. Atick and E. Witten,


Nucl. Phys. B 310 , 291 (1988).

J. Michelson,

Phys. Rev. D 66 , 066002 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203140].









J. G. Russo and A. A. Tseytlin,


JHEP 0204  (2002) 021, hep-th/0202179.




O. Bergman, M. R. Gaberdiel and M. B. Green,

arXiv:hep-th/0205183.




T. Takayanagi,

arXiv:hep-th/0206010.



Y. Hikida and Y. Sugawara,

JHEP 0210 , 067 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207124].



L. A. Pando Zayas and D. Vaman,

arXiv:hep-th/0208066.


B. R. Greene, K. Schalm and G. Shiu,


arXiv:hep-th/0208163.


Y. Sugawara,

Nucl. Phys. B 650  (2003) 75,
[arXiv:hep-th/0209145]. 



A. Sinha and N. V. Suryanarayana,

JHEP 0211 , 026 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0209247].


A. B. Hammou,

JHEP 0211 , 028 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0209265].


J. F. Morales,

arXiv:hep-th/0210229.


M. R. Gaberdiel and M. B. Green,

arXiv:hep-th/0211122.





R. C. Brower, D. A. Lowe and C. I. Tan,

arXiv:hep-th/0211201.




L. Susskind,
hep-th/9704080;
A. Sen,
hep-th/9709220;
N. Seiberg,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79  (1997) 3577, hep-th/9710009.


G. Grignani and G. W. Semenoff,

Nucl. Phys. B 561 , 243 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9903246];

G. Grignani, P. Orland, L. D. Paniak and G. W. Semenoff,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  85 , 3343 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0004194];

G. W. Semenoff,

arXiv:hep-th/0009011;



Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  108 , 99 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0112043].



M. Bertolini, J. de Boer, T. Harmark, E. Imeroni and N. A. Obers,

arXiv:hep-th/0209201.


R. Hagedorn,
Nuovo Cim. Suppl. 3 (1965) 147.



S. Mukhi, M. Rangamani and E. Verlinde,

JHEP 0205 , 023 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0204147].



M. Alishahiha and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari,

Phys. Lett. B 538 , 180 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0204174].




A. Parnachev and D. A. Sahakyan,

JHEP 0206 , 035 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205015];



Y. Hikida and Y. Sugawara,

JHEP 0206 , 037 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205200];



S. R. Das and C. Gomez,

JHEP 0207 , 016 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206062];



O. Lunin and S. D. Mathur,

Nucl. Phys. B 642 , 91 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206107];



J. Gomis, L. Motl and A. Strominger,

JHEP 0211 , 016 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206166];



E. Gava and K. S. Narain,

JHEP 0212 , 023 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0208081].























