

 orbifold construction of
  GUT with  
Jihn E.
Kim(jekim@th.phyik.uni-bonn.de, 
jekim@phyp.snu.ac.kr)  

School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747,
KOREA, and

Physikalisches Institut, Universita t Bonn, Nussallee 12,
D53115 Bonn, GERMANY
 


 
It is argued that a phenomenologically viable
grand unification model from superstring is
, the simplest gauge group among
the grand unifications of the electroweak hypercharge embedded
in semi-simple groups. We construct a realistic 4D
 model with the GUT scale 
 in a  orbifold with Wilson line(s).
By two GUT scale vacuum expectation values, we obtain
a rank 4 supersymmetric standard model below the GUT scale,
and predict three more strange families.


[Key words:  orbifold, 4D superstring,
trinification]

12.10.-g, 11.25.Mj, 11.30.Hv, 11.30.Ly 

  

1 
2 
5 
10 
10  
5  
3   
3  
F   
h   
H   

#1/ 
12 

A  
Q  



  

  


Introduction and motivation 

Supersymmetric standard models(SSM), if proven
experimentally, need a theoretical explanation
of why they become the effective theory below the
Planck scale  GeV.
A most probable scenario is that they result from
compactifications of superstring models preserving one
supersymmetry . The effective 4D  field theory
models were extensively considered in this regard in the
Calabi-Yau compactifications and orbifold
compactifications. Furthermore, the
standard-like models initiated more than 15 years ago
opened up the search for SSM
directly from superstring.

The initial standard-like
models  were very attractive,
in realizing the standard model(SM) gauge group and reasonable
matter spectrum, with possible
desirable physics on the strong CP problemand cosmology with a hidden world. Furthermore,
the doublet-triplet splitting has been realized in
some standard-like models.
However, these standard-like
models failed because they generally do not predict
correct weak mixing angle  at the string scale.
To predict the observed coupling constants at the
electroweak scale successfully at least in 
level, the  at the unification scale 
 GeV is required to be .
The reason is very simple. In these standard-like models,
the electroweak hypercharge group  is one
combination out of  's. Thus, the singlet
representations of the standard-like gauge group, not
belonging to the family structure of the fifteen(or sixteen
if we include a heavy Majorana neutrino),
can have nonvanishing  charges, which lowers
the string scale weak mixing angle from the
needed value of , because the string scale
weak mixing angle  is expressed if we assume
 at the string scale,
 
This sin problem  can be resolved if the
standard model
gauge group is unified in a simple group GUT, for
example , where  is a subgroup of the GUT
group. Then, the electroweak hypercharge generater is an
 generator. Namely,  singlets do not carry
nonvanishing electroweak hypercharges and we conclude that
the string scale is .
To obtain a supersymmetric standard model in 4D, 
must be broken by a VEV of an adjoint Higgs field().
However, it is impossible to obtain an adjoint matter
field at the level 1, i.e. .
(At higher level ,
it was shown that the adjoint representation
45  of  can be
obtained.) 
If simplicity is any guidance to the truth of
nature, one must break the GUT group without an
adjoint matter representation. This leads us to GUT
groups with a  factor, notably  which
is now called flipped . The flipped  is
an interesting rearrangement of a singlet field and
fifteen chiral fields
of . The symmetry breaking of the
flipped  is particularly interesting in supersymmetric
flipped . In this regards, the string
compactifications toward flipped  is very interesting,
since breaking of  down to the standard
model gauge group can be achieved without an adjoint Higgs
representation. Indeed, the fermionic
construction of 4D flipped  was obtained
already fifteen years ago. As shown in many
subsequent papers, the flipped  has many
phenomenologically interesting features.

However, the flipped  generally fails in the
aforementioned problem. The reason is the following.
The flipped  needs three  singlet representations
which carry +1 unit of the electric charge
for the three singlet charged leptons of SSM.
This implies,  singlets can carry electromagnetic
charges, or the electroweak hypercharge . Since there appear
numerous  singlets from string compactification,
the charged singlets generally reduce dramatically
 from the needed value ,
 viz. ().

In the orbifold construction, this problem
has been really serious. In the literature,
one can find many models with 
groups, and even it was
claimed that there are flipped 's,
but as shown above these models ignored
the problem. However, one may argue that
even if the flipped  contains a  factor,
the problem goes away if the representations are
embeddable in . In this case,
the  generator belongs to  and hence
 singlets do not carry the  charge.
Then, the singlets of the flipped  carry
only the needed electroweak hypercharges of the flipped
, and hence the string scale  is .
However, this scenario is not realized generally in orbifold
compactifications, which can be easily understood by
remembering that orbifolds generally choose
only part of the original complete representation.
In fact, this property is the root for the solutions of the
doublet-triplet splitting problem in the 4D orbifold
compactifications.

However, if it happens that the extra fields beyond
the complete multiplets conspire to contribute to
 and  in the ratio 3/8, then we can
obtain 3/8 as the string scale value of .
Therefore, the above argument is not a no-go theorem.
It may be extremely difficult however, if not impossible,
to find such a model with the
electroweak hypercharge leaking to  at the GUT scale.

Before considering our 4D string model, let us
comment on the recent field theoretic orbifold breaking
of grand unification group with extra
dimensions. One interesting feature here has been
family unification groups with  with 
.
In these extra-dimensional field theories,
it is possible to allow fixed point fields as far as
there are no anomalies, and hence it is not much achieved
in the prediction of the matter representations
at the orbifold fixed points. In this
context, 6D string theoretic models were considered
as an intermediate step toward a final 4D string theory
construction. In this paper, however, we attempt
to obtain a more ambitious 4D model.

 orbifold with Wilson line 

 

In 4D, if a GUT group containing a , as in the
, is difficult to obtain,
the next simple
GUT groups to try are semi-simple groups. Therefore, we
propose grand unified theories with
the hypercharge embedded in a semi-simple group
with no adjoint representation needed (HESSNA)
as possible 4D string models toward a
realistic SSM. For a realistic
4D superstring model, we must require that the factor groups
of the HESSNA can be broken to SSM without an adjoint
representation. In this regard, note that the Pati-Salam
GUT group  is
not a HESSNA because it has the same problem as that
in the  model: one needs an adjoint representation.
Therefore, the simplest HESSNA is .
The next simple HESSNA is .
If we find a realistic HESSNA, then it is a simple matter
to find a SSM from this HESSNA, as the
SU(5) model leads to the SM.

In the HESSNA also, the orbifold compactification is
very much chiral, and may be too much chiral. But here at
least it is easy to study the electroweak
hypercharge concretely in a few steps.

At the phenomenological level, the group  has been
extensively considered.
Our objective in this paper is to realize a string
theory . If we obtain such a model, it can be considered
as a realistic superstring GUT.

We expect that one family in the  HESSNA is composed
of 27 chiral fields,
 
under  group. It can be embeddable in 27  of
. Suppose, we assign the electroweak hypercharge
in  such that the two neutral members in 27 
appear in the  singlet and  10 ,
namely as in the flipped  subgroup.
If we do that in ,  is completely broken
down to the SM. Similarly,
two neutral members in the Higgs representation,
transforming like (), are given large
HESSNA vacuum expectation values and a SSM can be obtained.

Only two possible  groups can be found in the
extensive tables of  orbifold models.
They appear in  orbifold models. However, the
fermionic spectrums of these  compactifications are
not the one required in ().
This leads us to consider orbifold models with Wilson
lines.(
Since there does not exists
a complete table for  orbifolds,
we are not sure whether
HESSNA is possible for .) 
In a separate publication, we tabulate
 orbifold models with one Wilson line.

In the remainder of this paper, we present
a  model in a  orbifold compactification
with one Wilson line. Let us denote the  shift vector
as  and the Wilson line as . These must satisfy the
conditions for the shift vectors,
 
The modular invariance condition requires in addition,
 
The notation is the same as those discussed in.
For an  gauge group,
we choose the following shift vector and a Wilson line,
 

Untwisted sector 

Gauge group :  From the mass shell condition
, we find the massless
spectrum in the untwisted sector. For the
gauge bosons, the  root vectors, satisfying
 and  mod integer, are
the nonvanishing roots. These are presented for the
first  subgroup in Table .
The second  gauge group is not broken.

 
 
Root vectors  in untwisted sector satisfying
 and . The underlined entries
allow permutations. The  and  in the spinor part
denote  and , respectively. 
and  spin directions of 's are also shown. 
 
 
In Table , we use the convention that the underlined entries
allow permutations. There are 6 winding states in the first row and
adding two oscillators we have the 8 roots for the first .
Similarly, we obtain the rest 's.
Thus, we obtain the gauge group 
with the corresponding
nonvanishing root vectors explicitly shown. Note in passing
that there is no  subgroup, which means that there
is no anomalous  gauge group with the above orbifold.
Thus, it is possible to realize the model-independent
axion as a quintessential axion.



Matter from the untwisted sector :  The matter fields
from the untwisted sector satisfy the condition
 
In Table , we present the root vectors satisfying these.

 
 
Root vectors  in untwisted sector satisfying
 and . The underlined entries
allow permutations. The notations are the same as in Table I,
except that  [ ] implies even numbers of sign flips.
In the last column, we reverseed the chirality to compare directly
with the twisted sectors. 
 
 
Matter from the twisted sectors 

In  orbifolds, there are three fixed point
on a 2-torus. Since we compactify six internal
spaces via three 2-tori, there are 27 fixed points.
These 27 fixed points look the same in every aspect
if we do not introduce Wilson lines. If we allow
the possibility to wrap the 2-torus by a Wilson line,
then three fixed points on the torus can be
distinguished by the gauge fields going around the
torus. There are two directions to wrap the torus, but
the modular invariance requires that
they must be the same, i.e. . Similarly, if we
wrap more tori, we have 
and . Thus, we can consider at most three
independent Wilson lines, , and . In
this paper, we considered the simplest Wilson line, i.e.
, and . So the 27 fixed points
are grouped into three classes: 9 trivial fixed
points around which there is no Wilson line(),
9 positively wraped fixed points(),
and 9 negatively wraped fixed points(),
which are denoted as T0, T1, and T2 twisted
sectors, respectively.

In our model, the massless matter
fields from the twisted sectors satisfy
, where
, for T0, T1, and T2, respectively.
Of course, the weights we present
survive the GSO-like projection.
For the vectors corresponding to  the multiplicity
is 9 as described above, and for the vectors
corresponding to  the
multiplicity is 27 because of the three oscillator modes
in this case.

In general, the matter fields from the twisted sectors make the
theory extremely chiral which was the reason that we have not
obtained yet any realistic SSM or flipped  model
from orbifold compactification of the heterotic string. Since it
is very chiral, there is a chance that the spectrum
() can appear through orbifolding.

In Tables III, IV, and V, we list the massless
spectrum from the twisted sectors. But note
that the chirality of the
twisted sector in the 
orbifold is the opposite of the chirality of the
untwisted sector matter fields.

 
 
Root vectors  in the T0 twisted sector
satisfying . The notations
are the same as in Table II. 
 
 

 
 
Root vectors  in the T1 twisted sector. 
 
 

 
 
Root vectors  in the T2 twisted sector. 
 
 

Electroweak hypercharge 

In the  GUT, the color factor should not carry the
electroweak hypercharge. To break  gauge group
down to  another  should not carry the
hypercharge. Let us break  completely by two
independent vacuum expectation values of (1,1,1,3 ).
Thus the  group is 
. We identify  as the group containing
the  bosons and  as QCD.
Under the ,
we obtain the following chiral fermions,
 
where  represents 27 multiplets of the
vectorlike combination  (3,1,1) 
   
   +3.
Eq. () realizes
the representation given in ().

The hypercharge( electroweak hypercharge) 
is a combination of generators of  and ,
 
where  is the third component  of the isospin
generators
of the group , and  is the 
hypercharge .
The eigenvalues of  and  are 
 and , respectively.
One can easily check that the model presented
in () gives , thus
solving the string problem.
Since the hypercharge
 does not leak to (=QCD), in counting
the eigenvalues of the electroweak  and
, the contributions from
the first and the second [ ] brackets of
Eq. () are exactly the same.
We also checked that the vectorlike representation
contributes in the same ratio. There
unfamiliar particles such as lepton doublets with
 appear, but they form a vectorlike representation,
are removed at the GUT scale and do
not alter . This miraculous prediction of
 is based on the fact that everything appears in the
multiples of 3. The model given in
Eq. () gives 9 families. But note that
there appear additional 9 families with the opposite
colors. By adding more Wilson line(s) in the
hidden sector 
part, the family number can be easily reduced to 3,
not spoiling our precious spectrum obtained in ().
Below, we comment on six family models obtained by adding
more Wilson line(s) at .

The spectrum () has two villages, each having three
families. The family mixing is allowed inside the village
but is forbidden between different villages, predicting two
CP phases, one in each village. To explain the three light
families, the members of the strange village are required to
be heavy at the electroweak scale.
With 6 families, the QCD coupling is not asymptotically
free, but still perturbatively unifiable at the GUT scale.
The rank-6  is directly broken down to the rank-4 SSM
by two vacuum expectation values in , i.e.

(GUT scale) and 
(GUT scale), where

is the  member in  of
, etc.
With some hypotheses on removing a set of
vectorlike representations at the GUT scale, we obtain a
realistic SSM in the present orbifold compactification
with the help of the GUT scale VEV's. Here, we assume that
three SM singlets in our village are removed
at high energy scale, but the three singlets of the stranger
village are left light so that they can acquire Dirac masses
at the electroweak symmetry breaking scale. Namely, we will have
three light neutrinos.


The three strange village families presented in
() may be considered
as a drawback of the present construction. But remembering
the enormous difficulties during the last two decades
in obtaining a superstring derived
SSM, in view of a model like ()
we may envision a Planck scale string theory
verifiable through TeV-scale probing colliders.


I thank K.-S. Choi, K. Hwang, and H. P. Nilles
for helpful discussions. I thank the Physikalisches Institute
of Univ. of Bonn, and in particular Hans Peter Nilles,
for the hospitality during my stay for this work.
I also thank the Humboldt Foundation
for the award. This work is supported in part by the BK21
program of Ministry of Education, and the KOSEF Sundo Grant.


 99 

Astrophys. J. #1  (#3) #2 
Int. J. Mod. Phys. #1  (#3) #2 
Mod. Phys. Lett. A#1  (#3) #2  
Nucl. Phys. B#1  (#3) #2 
Phys. Lett. B#1  (#3) #2 
Phys. Rev. D#1  (#3) #2 
Phys. Rev. Lett. #1  (#3) #2 
Phys. Rep. #1  (#3) #2 
Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. #1  (#3) #2 
Z. Phys. #1  (#3) #2 
JHEP #1  (#3) #2 
Europhys. J. C #1  (#3) #2 


 P. Candelas, G. T. Horowitz, A. Strominger,
and E. Witten, 258 46 1985 .

 L. Dixon, J. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten,
261 1985 651 ; 274 285 1986 .

 L. Ibanez, H. P.
Nilles, and F. Quevedo, 187 25 1987 .

 L. Ibanez, J. E. Kim, H. P. Nilles, and F. Quevedo,
191 282 1987 .

 L. Ibanez, J. Mas, H. P. Nilles, and F.
Quevedo, 301 157 1988 .

J. A. Casas and C. Munoz, 209 214 1988 ;
214 63 1988 ;
A. E. Faraggi, 403 101 1993 , and references therein;
M. Cvetic, G. Shiu and A. M. Uranga, 615 3 2001 
[hep-th/0107166]; L. E. Ibanez, F. Marchesano and
R. Rabadan, 0111 002 2001 ;
C. Kokorelis, 0209 029 2002 ;
M. Cvetic, P. Langacker and G. Shiu, 642 139 2002 
[hep-ph/0206115].

J. E. Kim, 207 434 1988 ; E. J. Chun, J. E. Kim
and H. P. Nilles, 370 105 1992 .

J. E. Kim and H. P. Nilles, 263 79 1991 .

 See, for example, L. Ibanez,
303 55 1993 .

 Z. Kakushadze and S. H. H. Tye, 77 2612 1996 .

 S. M. Barr, 112 219 1982 .

 J.-P. Derendinger,
J. E. Kim, and D. V. Nanopoulos, 139 170 1984 .

I. Antoniadis, J. Ellis, J. S. Hagelin, and D. V.
Nanopoulos, 205 459 1988 .
For more references, see, I. Antoniadis, J. Ellis, J. S. Hagelin,
and D. V. Nanopoulos, 231 65 1989 .

 Y. Katsuki, Y. Kawamura, T. Kobayashi, N.
Ohtsubo, Y. Ono, and K. Tanioka,
Kanazawa Univ. preprint DPKU-8904 (1989).

 Y. Katsuki, Y. Kawamura, T. Kobayashi,
N. Ohtsubo, Y. Ono, and K. Tanioka, 341 611 1990 .

 Y. Kawamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 103 
(2000) 613 [hep-ph/9902423];
G. Altarelli and F. Ferugulio, 511 257 2001 ;
A. Hebecker and J. March-Russel, 613 3 2001 ;
H. D. Kim, J. E. Kim and H. M. Lee, 24 159 2002 ;
T. Asaka, W. Buchmuller and L. Covi, 523 199 2001 .

K. S. Babu, S. Barr, and B. Kyae, 65 115008 2002 ;
K. Hwang and J. E. Kim, 540 289 2002 ;
H. Georgi, 156 126 1979 ;
J. E. Kim, 45 1916 1980 ; 23 2706 1981 .

 K.-S. Choi and J. E. Kim, 552 81 2003 .

 S. L. Glashow, in Proc. Fourth Workshop(1984)
on Grand Unification , ed. K. Kang et al.(World Scientific,
Singapore, 1985), p. 88;
G. Lazarides and C. Panagiotakopoulos,

51 2486 1995 .

 K.-S. Choi, K. Hwang and J. E. Kim, to
be published.

 H. B. Kim and J. E. Kim,
300 343 1993 .

 J. E. Kim and H. P. Nilles,
553 1 2003  [hep-ph/0210402].




