-0.5cm 6.5in 9in 0pt 0pt =0cm =0cm

The strong magnetic field asymptotic behaviour
 for the fermion-induced  effective energy in the presence of a magnetic flux tube 
Pavlos Pasipoularides  (paul@central.ntua.gr)  

       Department of Physics, National Technical University of
       Athens 
 Zografou Campus, 157 80 Athens, Greece 
  
        
The strong magnetic field behaviour of the fermion-induced
effective energy in the presence of an inhomogeneous magnetic
field, has recently attract attention, see Refs.
. In Ref., we presented an asymptotic
formula for the fermion-induced effective energy in 3+1 dimensions
in the presence of a cylindrically symmetric inhomogeneous strong
magnetic field of finite magnetic flux . However, the proof
of the formula was presented in a condensed form and there are
some points which were not clearly explained. The aim of this work
is to present the complete proof in detail.

Introduction 

Many authors have dealt with the numerical study of the
fermion-induced effective energy, in the presence of magnetic
fields of the form of a flux tube, see Refs..

A similar topic, is the study of the gluon-induced effective
energy in the presence of a colored magnetic flux tube
. However, in this case there is an essential
difference: the effective energy has nonzero imaginary part and so
the system is unstable.

It is worth to mention the recently developed method in Refs.
, which is applicable even for magnetic fields which
do not exhibit a special kind of symmetry. For example, this
method can be applied to a system of two separated magnetic flux
tubes.

In Ref. we presented an asymptotic formula (Eq. (49)) for
the effective energy when the characteristic magnetic field
strength  (or
the magnetic flux ) tends to infinity and the spatial size
 of the magnetic flux tube is kept fixed. However, the proof of
the formula was presented in a condensed form and there are some
points which were not clearly explained. The aim of this work is
to present the complete proof in detail.

In addition, in Sec. 4 we check if the derivative expansion
 gives the correct asymptotic behaviour for the
effective energy (Eq. (23) below), when 
(the mass of the fermions  and the range of the magnetic
flux tube  are kept fixed).

Effective energy in the presence of a magnetic flux tube 

The 3+1 dimensional fermion-induced effective energy in the
presence of a magnetic field is given by the equation:
 
where    and
. The gamma matrices satisfy the
relationship  and 
is the total length of time.

We have shown in Ref. that a magnetic field with strength
independent of  coordinate, directed towards -axis, has
renormalized effective energy equal to (For the case of
massless fermions () the renormalized effective energy is
given in appendix A of Ref..) 
 
where  are the eigenvalues of the planar operator
 , and  is a set of quantum
numbers. Note that  since the operator
 is positive definite as the square of a
hermitian operator. For the sake of simplicity we will drop the
index  in the rest of this paper.

If the magnetic field is cylindrically symmetric with finite
magnetic flux, the spectrum of the operator
 is continuous  (Besides
continuous spectrum, zero modes may exist according to the
Aharonov-Casher theorem.) . Thus we can set
.

In order to perform the summation over  that appears in Eq.
(2), we need a density of states, given by the equation:
 
where  is the density of states
for free space, and  is the phase shift which
corresponds to  partial wave with momentum  and spin
. The function  is defined by the equation:
 
From Eqs. (2) and (3), if we drop the field independent term
 and integrate by parts, we
obtain
 
where . Our numerical
study, in Ref., shows that  (
). This means that  is independent of the special
form of the magnetic field we examine and depends only on the
total magnetic flux of the field . Also, in Ref.,
we see that the function , when ,
tends to  fairly rapidly, and thus, the integral over  in
Eq. (5) is convergent.

Eq. (5) is suitable for the numerical computation of the 3+1
dimensional fermion-induced effective energy in the presence of a
magnetic flux tube. The calculation of the phase shifts is
performed by solving an ordinary differential equation. For
details see Refs..

The asymptotic behaviour for the effective
 energy when  and  and  are kept fixed 

The function  depends on three quantities: ,
 and . From these we construct the following
two dimensionless quantities(We have assumed the
rescaling .) :  and
 (=). For dimensional reasons the function
 can be put into the form
. Setting
 and making the
change of variable  in Eq. (5) we obtain
 

In the strong magnetic field case () we
obtain:
 
There are many ways to achieve a large ratio  by
changing the three independent variables ,  and .
However, the most interesting case is when 
 and  and  are kept fixed (see also Refs.
). This means that we keep the spatial size of the
magnetic field configuration fixed and we increase the
characteristic magnetic field strength  or the magnetic
flux .

From Eq. (8) we see that the asymptotic behaviour of the effective
energy when  ( and  are kept
fixed) depends on the asymptotic behaviour of the integrals:
 
In the case of the integral of Eq. (9) it was possible to find an
analytical expression:
 
In order to give a proof for the above equation we will use Eq.
(13) in Ref. 
By using Eq. (3) for the density of states we obtain
 
If we drop the field independent term
 and set again
 and
 we find
 
Eq. (11) is a straightforward result of Eqs. (14) and (12).

For convenience we write
 
where the magnetic field  has a characteristic
magnetic field strength  and range , Eq.
(11) can then be written in the form
 
From the above relationship it is obvious that the integral
 is proportional to
.

I could not find an analytical expression, like that of Eq. (16),
for the integral  of Eq. (10). However, a
numerical study of this integral shows that its asymptotic
behaviour, for  ,is the same with that
of integral ,
independently of the particular shape of the magnetic field. Thus
 
where the constant  is independent of , and its
value depends only on the special form of the magnetic field
configuration.

 
 
 as a function of  for the
magnetic fields , , , .  
In Fig.  we present our numerical calculations for four
magnetic field configurations with quite different kinds of
inhomogeneity.
 
We expect that our numerical work, presented in Fig. ,
convinces the reader that the asymptotic behaviour of
, as given by Eq. (17), does not depend on the
kind of inhomogeneity of the magnetic flux tube.

Thus, when  and  and  are kept
fixed, from Eqs. (8),(16) and (17) we obtain
 
We see that the logarithmic term dominates, so we can write
 
If, instead of the characteristic magnetic field strength
 we use the parameter  we
see that the fermion-induced effective energy, for 
, is proportional to .
 
This asymptotic behaviour is true, independently of the particular
shape of the magnetic flux tube, as it was shown in the above
numerical study (See Fig. ).

Note that the above asymptotic formula, of Eq. (23), is the
correct and for other cases of large ratio . For
example we note two: a) for  when  and
 are kept fixed and b) for  when  and
 are kept fixed. For these two cases, the
asymptotic formula, of Eq. (23), is obtained straightforwardly
from Eqs. (8) and (16), and thus knowledge of the asymptotic
behaviour of the integral  is not necessary.

Derivative expansion for  when  and  are kept fixed 

An approximate way for the computation of the fermion-induced
effective energy is the derivative expansion.
This method gives accurate results for smooth magnetic field
configurations. Note that the derivative expansion fails for the
magnetic fields of Eqs. (20) and (21), as the magnetic field of
Eq. (20) is discontinuous and the magnetic field of Eq. (21) has
discontinuous first derivative.

Our aim is to check if the derivative expansion succeeds in giving
the correct asymptotic behaviour for the effective energy in the
strong magnetic field regime (,  and
 are kept fixed).

If we keep the first two terms of the derivative expansion, the
effective energy, in the case of 3+1 dimensions, is given by the
equation
 
where
 
 

For  from Eqs. (26) and (27) we obtain
 
 
Eq. (29) can be derived straight from Eq. (27) if we assume that
 (for details see Ref.). In order to
derive Eq. (28) from Eq. (26) we have used a similar way with that
presented in Ref..

Thus Eq. (28), which gives the asymptotic behaviour of the
derivative expansion for large , is in agreement with our
asymptotic formula of Eq. (23). This means, that the derivative
expansion is a good approximation for the effective energy, when
 ( and  are kept fixed)

Conclusions 

We emphasize that a step in the derivation of the asymptotic
behavior of integral , of Eq. (10), was
obtained by performing numerical calculations and not with an
analytic method. We computed numerically  for
four magnetic field configurations with quite different kinds of
inhomogeneity (see Eqs. (18), (19), (20) and (21)). As we see in
Fig. ,  is proportional to 
(for ) independently of the specific form of the
magnetic field configurations. Consequence of this result is that
and the final formula, which states that 
 for , is valid
independently of the specific form of the magnetic field.

Finally we showed, comparing with our asymptotic formula of Eq.
(23), that the leading term of the derivative expansion gives the
correct asymptotic behaviour for the fermion-induced effective
energy in the strong magnetic field regime even in case (like that
of the magnetic fields of Eqs. (20) and ) when the
derivative expansion is invalid mainly where the next to the
leading term diverges.

Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to Professor G. Tiktopoulos for numerous valuable
discussions, as well as Professors K. Farakos and G. Koutsoumbas
for useful comments and suggestions.

 99 

 M. Bordag and K. Kirsten, The ground state
energy of a spinor field in the background of finite radius flux
tube , Phys. Rev. D 60, 105019 (1999).

 M. Scandura, Vacuum energy in the
presence of a magnetic string with delta function profile ,
Phys.Rev. D 62, 085024 (2000).

 P. Pasipoularides, Fermion-induced effective action in
 the presence of a static inhomogeneous magnetic field , Phys. Rev.
 D 64, 105011 (2001).

  K. Langfeld, L. Moyaerts,  H. Gies, Fermion-indused quantum action of vortex
system , Nucl.Phys., B646:158-180 (2002).

 I. Drozdov, Vacuum polarization by a magnetic flux of special rectangular
form , hep-th/0210282.

 M. P. Fry, Fermion determinant for general background gauge
fields , hep-th/0301097

 H. Gies, K. Langfeld, Loops and loop clouds-A numerical approach
to the worldline formalism in QED , Int.J.Mod.Phys., A17:966-978
(2002).

 H. Gies, K. Langfeld, Quantum diffusion of magnetic fields in numerical worldline
approach , Nucl.Phys., B613:353-365 (2001) .

 D. Diakonov, M. Maul, Center-vortex solutions of the Yang-Mills
 effective action in three and four dimensions , hep-lat/0204012.

  M. Bordag, On the vacuum energy of a color magnetic
vortex , hep-th/0211080.

 E. Farhy, N. Graham, P. Haagensen                                                                                                                                                                                                      and
R.L. Jaffe, Finite Quantum Fluctuations About Static Field
Configurations , Phys.Lett. 427B, 334 (1998).

 G. Dunne, An all-orders Derivative Expansion , Intern. Journ. of Mod. Phys. A, Vol 12, No
6 1143 (1997).

 V.P. Gusynin and I.A. Shovkovy, Derivative
Expansion of the Effective Action for QED in  and 
dimensions , J. Math. Phys. 40, 5406 (1999).

  Y. Aharonov and A. Casher, Ground state of a spin- charged particle in a two-dimensional magnetic
field , Phys. Rev. A 19, 2461 (1979).


 W. Dittrich, W. Tsai, K. H. Zimmermann, Evaluation of the effective potential
 in quantum electrodynamics , Phys. Rev. D19, 2929 (1979).




