1
26truemm

PEIERLS BRACKETS IN FIELD THEORY 
Giuseppe Bimonte, Giampiero Esposito, Giuseppe Marmo,
Cosimo Stornaiolo 
Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universita Federico II,
Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia, Edificio N',
80126 Napoli, Italy
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Napoli,
Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia, Edificio N',
80126 Napoli, Italy
Abstract . Peierls brackets are part of the space-time approach to
quantum field theory, and provide a Poisson bracket which, being
defined for pairs of observables which are group invariant, is
group invariant by construction. It is therefore well suited for
combining the use of Poisson brackets and the full diffeomorphism
group in general relativity. The present paper provides an
introduction to the topic, with applications to gauge field theory.
1. Introduction 
Although the Hamiltonian formalism
provides a powerful tool for
studying general relativity,
its initial-value problem and
the approach to canonical quantization, it suffers from
severe drawbacks: the space  time split of  disagrees
with the aims of general relativity, and the space-time topology
is taken to be , so that the full diffeomorphism
group of  is lost.

However, as was shown by DeWitt in the sixties, it remains
possible to use a Poisson-bracket formalism which preserves the
full invariance properties of the original theory, by relying upon
the work of Peierls. In our paper, whose aims are pedagogical,
we begin by describing the general framework, assuming that the
reader has been introduced to the DeWitt covariant approach
to quantum field theory.
Let us therefore consider a gauge field theory with classical
action functional  and generators of infinitesimal gauge
transformations denoted by . The small
disturbances  are ruled by the invertible
differential operator





where  is a local and symmetric matrix which is
taken to transform like  under group transformations,
and  is a local, non-singular,
symmetric matrix which transforms according to the adjoint
representation of the infinite-dimensional invariance group
(hence one gets 
and 
, respectively). We are interested in advanced and
retarded Green functions  which are left inverses of
, i.e.




Furthermore, the form of  and arbitrariness of Cauchy data
imply that  are right inverses as well, i.e.




If symmetry of  is required, one also finds




because in general




Thus, the supercommutator function  defined as




is antisymmetric in that 
.
These properties show that, on defining
,
one has, on relabelling dummy indices,







These are the reciprocity relations , which express the idea
that the retarded (resp. advanced) effect of
 on  equals the advanced (resp. retarded) effect of 
on . Another cornerstone of the formalism is a relation
involving the Green function  of the operator
, having set 
; this is








This holds because, for background fields satisfying the field
equations , one finds that





On multiplying this equation on the left by  and on the
right by  one gets





i.e. the desired formula (8) is proved. Moreover, by virtue of
(4), the transposed equations





also hold.
We are now in a position to define the Peierls bracket of any two
observables  and . First, we consider the operation





with  obtained by interchanging  with  in (12).
The Peierls bracket  of  and  is then defined by







where we have used (7) and (12) to obtain the last expression.
Following DeWitt, it should be stressed that the Peierls
bracket depends only on the behaviour of infinitesimal disturbances.

In classical mechanics, following Peierls, we may arrive at the
derivatives in (12) and (13) starting from the action functional
 and considering the extremals of  and
those of , where  is an infinitesimal
parameter and  any function of the path . Next we
consider solutions of the modified equations as expansions in powers
of , and hence the new set of solutions to first order
reads




This modified solution is required to obey the condition
that, in the distant past, it should be identical with the original
one, i.e.





Similarly to the construction of the above "retarded" solution,
we may define an "advanced" solution




such that





>From these modified solutions one can now find 
along the solutions of the un-modified action and therefore,
to first order,
the changes in any other function  of the field variables, and
these are denoted by  and , respectively.
2. Mathematical Properties of Peierls Brackets 
We are now aiming to prove that
 satisfies all properties of a Poisson bracket. The first
two, anti-symmetry and bilinearity, are indeed obvious:








whereas the proof of the Jacobi identity is not obvious and is
therefore presented in detail. First, by repeated application of
(13) one finds



















Now the antisymmetry property of , jointly with commutation
of functional derivatives:  for all ,
implies that the first three terms on the last equality in (20)
vanish. For example one finds









and an entirely analogous procedure can be applied to the terms
containing the second functional derivatives  and
. The last term in (20) requires new calculations
because it contains functional derivatives of .
These can be dealt with after taking infinitesimal variations of
Eq. (3), so that




and hence





i.e.




Thus, the desired functional derivatives of advanced and retarded
Green functions read










In this formula the contractions 
and  can be re-expressed with the help of
Eqs. (10) and (11), and eventually one gets








By virtue of the group invariance property satisfied by all
physical observables, the second and third term on the right-hand
side of Eq. (26) give vanishing contribution to (20). One is
therefore left with the contributions involving third functional
derivatives of the action. Bearing in mind that 
, one can relabel indices summed over, finding
eventually (upon using (4))













This sum vanishes because it involves six pairs of triple products of
Green functions with opposite signs.
The Jacobi identity is therefore fulfilled. Moreover, the fourth
fundamental property of Poisson brackets, i.e.




is also satisfied, because






Thus, the Peierls bracket defined in (13) is indeed a Poisson
bracket of physical observables. Equation (28) can be regarded
as a compatibility condition of the Peierls bracket with the product
of physical observables.

It should be stressed that the idea of Peierls was to introduce
a bracket related directly to the action principle without making
any reference to the Hamiltonian. This implies that even classical
mechanics should be considered as a "field theory" in a
zero-dimensional space, having only the time dimension. This means
that one deals with an infinite-dimensional space of paths
, therefore we are dealing with
functional derivatives and distributions even in this situation
where modern standard treatments rely upon  manifolds
and smooth structures. Thus, the present treatment is hiding most
technicalities involving infinite-dimensional manifolds. In finite
dimensions on a smooth manifold, any bracket satisfying (19) and
(28) is associated with first-order bidifferential operators;
in this proof it is important that the commutative and associative
product  is a local product. In any case these brackets at the
classical level could be a starting point to define a
-product in the spirit of non-commutative geometry or
deformation quantization.
3. The most general Peierls bracket 
The Peierls bracket is a group invariant by construction, being
defined for pairs of observables which are group invariant, and
is invariant under both infinitesimal and finite changes in the
matrices  and .
DeWitt [5] went on to prove that, even if
independent differential operators  and
 are introduced such that







are all non-singular, with unique advanced and retarded Green
functions, the reciprocity theorem expressed by (7) still
holds, and the resulting Peierls bracket is invariant under changes
in the  and , by virtue of
the identities










This is proved as follows. The composition of  with the
infinitesimal generators of gauge transformations yields




and hence





which implies






i.e. Eq. (32) is obtained. Similarly,




and hence





which implies






i.e. Eq. (31) is obtained. Now we use the first line of Eq. (7)
for , jointly with Eq. (5), so that








Since  is an observable by hypothesis, the first term on the right-hand
side of (39) vanishes. Moreover one finds, from (32)





and hence also the second term on the right-hand side of (39) vanishes
( being an observable, for which ), yielding
eventually the reciprocity relation (7). Moreover, the invariance of the
Peierls bracket under variations of  and 
holds because















where Eqs. (31) and (32) have been exploited once more.
4. Concluding Remarks 
The Peierls-bracket formalism is
equivalent to the conventional canonical formalism when the
latter exists. The proof can be given starting from
point Lagrangians, as is shown in Ref. 5. Current
applications of Peierls brackets deal with string theory,
path integration and decoherence, supersymmetric
proof of the index theorem, classical dynamical systems
involving parafermionic and parabosonic dynamical variables,
while for recent literature on covariant approaches to a
canonical formulation of field theories we refer the reader to
the work in Refs. 17-24.

In the infinite-dimensional setting which, strictly, applies also
to classical mechanics, as we stressed at the end of Sec. 2,
we hope to elucidate the relation between a covariant description
of dynamics as obtained from the kernel of the symplectic form,
and a parametrized description of dynamics as obtained from any
Poisson bracket, including the Peierls bracket.
Acknowledgements 
The work of the authors has been partially supported
by PRIN 2000 and PRIN 2002 Sintesi .
References 
1. 
P. A. M. Dirac, Phys. Rev.  114 , 924 (1959).
2. 
B. S. DeWitt, Phys. Rev.  160 , 1113 (1967).
3. 
C. J. Isham and K. Kuchar, Ann. Phys.  164 , 288 (1985).
4. 
C. J. Isham and K. Kuchar, Ann. Phys.  164 , 316 (1985).
5. 
B. S. DeWitt, Dynamical Theory of Groups and Fields 
(Gordon  Breach, New York, 1965).
6 
R. E. Peierls, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 
A214 , 143 (1952).
7. 
B. S. DeWitt, Phys. Rev.  162 , 1195 (1967).
8. 
J. Grabowski and G. Marmo, J. Phys.  A34 , 3803 (2001).
9. 
J. Grabowski and G. Marmo, "Binary Operations in
Classical and Quantum Mechanics" (MATH-DG 0201089).
10. 
A. Connes, J. Math. Phys.  41 , 3832 (2000).
11. 
J. M. Gracia-Bondia, F. Lizzi, G. Marmo and P. Vitale,
JHEP 0204 , 026 (2002).
12. 
S. R. Das, C. R. Ordonez and M. A. Rubin, Phys. Lett. 
B195 , 139 (1987).
13. 
C. R. Ordonez and M. A. Rubin, Phys. Lett.  B216 ,
117 (1989).
14. 
D. M. Marolf, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)  236 , 392 (1994).
15. 
A. Mostafazadeh, J. Math. Phys.  35 , 1095 (1994).
16. 
A. Mostafazadeh, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A11 , 2941 (1996).
17. 
G. Marmo, N. Mukunda and J. Samuel, Riv. Nuovo Cimento 
6 , 1 (1983).
18. 
G. Barnich, M. Henneaux and C. Schomblond, Phys. Rev. 
D44 , R939 (1991).
19. 
B. A. Dubrovin, M. Giordano, G. Marmo and A. Simoni,
Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A8 , 3747 (1993).
20. 
G. Esposito, G. Gionti and C. Stornaiolo, Nuovo Cimento 
B110 , 1137 (1995).
21. 
H. Ozaki, HEP-TH 0010273.
22. 
I. V. Kanatchikov, Int. J. Theor. Phys.  40 , 1121 (2001).
23. 
I. V. Kanatchikov, GR-QC 0012038.
24. 
C. Rovelli, GR-QC 0111037;
C. Rovelli, GR-QC 0202079; C. Rovelli, GR-QC 0207043.

