1.1 
 


M   













0pt
by -by -8.9in
0in
0.5in
6.5in
by -3mm  
by  8mm  
 to0pt0.40height0.90 0  
 to0pt0.40height0.90 0  
 to0pt0.40height0.90 0  
 to0pt0.40height0.90 0    



section 

Ricci-flat
Metrics with  Action and the Dirichlet
Boundary-value Problem in Riemannian Quantum Gravity and Isoperimetric
Inequalities   
M M Akbar(E-mail:M.M.Akbar@damtp.cam.ac.uk) 
 
G W Gibbons(E-mail:G.W.Gibbons@damtp.cam.ac.uk)   




Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,

 Centre for Mathematical Sciences,

 University of Cambridge, 

 Wilberforce Road,

 Cambridge CB3 0WA, U.K. 

 
DAMTP-2002-149 
 
The Dirichlet boundary-value problem and isoperimetric inequalities
for positive definite regular solutions of the vacuum Einstein
equations are studied in arbitrary dimensions for the class of metrics
with boundaries admitting a  action.  In the case of trivial
bundles, apart from the flat space solution with periodic
identification, such solutions include the Euclideanised Schwarzschild
metrics with an arbitrary compact Einstein-manifold as the base,
whereas for non-trivial bundles the regular solutions include the
Taub-Nut metric with a  base and the Taub-Bolt and the
Euguchi-Hanson metrics with an arbitrary Einstein-Kahler base.  We
show that in the case of non-trivial bundles Taub-Bolt infillings are
double-valued whereas Taub-Nut and Eguchi-Hanson infillings are
unique. In the case of trivial bundles, there are two Schwarzschild
infillings in arbitrary dimensions. The condition of whether a
particular type of filling in is possible can be expressed as a
limitation on squashing through a functional dependence on dimension
in each case. The case of the Eguchi-Hanson metric is solved in
arbitrary dimension. The Taub-Nut and the Taub-Bolt are solved in four
dimensions and methods for arbitrary dimension are delineated. For the
case of Schwarzschild, analytic formulae for the two infilling black
hole masses in arbitrary dimension have been obtained. This should
facilitate the study of black hole dynamics/thermodynamics in higher
dimensions. We found that all infilling solutions are convex. Thus
convexity of the boundary does not guarantee uniqueness of the
infilling. Isoperimetric inequalities involving the volume of the
boundary and the volume of the infilling solutions are then
investigated. In particular, the analogues of Minkowski's celebrated
inequality in flat space are found and discussed providing insight
into the geometric nature of these Ricci-flat spaces.
Introduction 
In Riemannian quantum gravity and in the search for holographic
dualities relating the bulk gravitational physics to boundary gauge
theories one often encounters the Dirichlet problem of finding one or
more compact -dimensional Riemannian manifolds
 with a given -dimensional closed manifold
 as the boundary such that  satisfies the
Einstein equation with a cosmological constant term or appropriate
matter fields and such that the metric  is induced on 
. A classical solution 
is then referred to as an infilling geometry for the boundary
. Such solutions provide semi-classical approximations to the
path integral and are the starting point for quantum computations.

For a given boundary with a metric finding all infilling solutions,
however, is a formidably complex task even in the case of pure
gravity. However, certain simplifying features usually arise from
physical principles which make the problem more tractable. One often
assumes  to have a high degree of symmetry and invariant under
the action of some Lie group  and/or to have other simplifying
features. Also, possible infilling geometries are often restricted to
the class of cohomogeneity one manifolds under the proper action of
, i.e., dim(. The principal orbits of such a
solution will then share the topology and symmetry of
. However, one can consider metric which are cohomogeneity one
under the group action of  provided  expands to
 on . For example one can fill in an 
-invariant  boundary with biaxial Bianchi-IX merics whose
principal orbits are in general -invariant. With
only a cosmological constant term and in the absence of matter fields
the assumption of cohomogeneity in either case reduces the Dirichlet
problem to a set of ordinary differential equations arising from the
Einstein equation to be solved subject to the boundary data given by
the specification of  and the condition of
regularity in the interior.  In many cases (for example, when  or
 has a sufficient degree of symmetry) the general solution of the
set of ordinary differential equations and the manifolds over which
they can be extended, completely or partially, are known in
advance. The problem is then equivalent to the problem of the
isometric embedding of a given manifold  into known manifolds
subject to the condition of regularity for the part(s) of the
manifolds enclosed by .

In this paper we study the Dirichlet problem for boundaries which are
-bundles over some compact manifolds. In general relativity
such boundaries often arise in gravitational thermodynamics. The
classic example is that of the trivial bundle 
. Manifolds with complete Ricci-flat metrics admitting such
boundaries are known; they are the Euclideanised Schwarzschild metric
and the flat metric with periodic identification.  It is known from
the work of York that there are in general two or no
Schwarzschild solutions depending on whether the squashing (the ratio
of the radius of the -fibre to that of the -base) is below
or above a critical value. When such solutions exist, the solution of
the boundary-value problem is given by finding the -geometries by
solving for the masses of the two black holes as functions of the two
radii. Among other results presented in this paper, we
will show that it is possible to find analytic solutions of the
infilling Schwarzschild geometries in arbitrary dimension by using
methods not very well-known in the physics community. York's results
in 4-dimension extend readily to higher dimensions.

In the case of non-trivial bundles, the simplest example arises in
quantum cosmology in which the boundary is a compact , i.e., a
non-trivial  bundle over . In the case of zero
cosmological constant, regular 4-metrics admitting such an 
boundary are the Taub-Nut and Taub-Boltmetrics having zero and two-dimensional (regular) fixed point sets of
the  action respectively. These metrics are therefore
topologically distinct although their principal orbits share the same
topology and symmetry.  As we will see later in the paper such an
-boundary can be filled in with a unique Taub-Nut solution and
two Taub-Bolt solutions in general. However, in either case the
boundary has to satisfy certain inequalities. Another regular metric
with non-trivial -bundle boundaries (which are not
topologically ) is the Eguchi-Hanson metric in which case the
periodicity of the -fibre is half of that in the case of an 
boundary (hence the boundary is topologically 
). This metric also has a singular orbit, i.e., an 
bolt. As we will see below such a boundary can be filled in with a
unique (or no) Eguchi-Hanson solution depending on its geometric data.

Regular cohomogeneity one Ricci-flat metrics in higher dimensions with
principal orbits that admit circle actions, i.e., metrics which provide
the generalisations to the four dimensional metrics above, are known
. We will discuss them and the conditions for their
regularity in detail in Section  after describing the four
dimensional cases first. As we will see, possibilities proliferate as
one goes higher in dimension. Naturally to know how the 4-dimensional
picture changes in higher dimensions one seeks a method which avoids
details coming from dimensionality.  The existence and non-existence
of infilling solutions and, more importantly, the number of infilling
solutions as the boundary data is varied will be discussed in Section
3. As will be shown, despite the form of the metrics being rather
complicated functions of the radial coordinate (i.e., the coordinate
parametrizing the orbit spaces), it is possible to treat the Taub-Nut
and the Taub-Bolt metrics generically. In the case of trivial bundles
we have been able to solve for the infilling Schwarzschild geometries
in arbitrary dimension. This is described in Section 4. It is possible
to find the infilling Eguchi-Hanson metrics as well. However, the
explicit solutions for the Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt infilling metrics
can only be found in lower dimensions using ordinary algebraic
methods. The higher dimensional solutions are discussed in Section 5
and can be solved using insights provided by the 4-dimensional
solutions.

Two classic issues in Riemannian geometry which the Dirichlet
boundary-value problem above connects us to are discussed in Section
. One of them is the question of convexity (i.e., whether the
second fundamental form of the boundary which is determined by the
infilling geometry has positive eigenvalues or not) of the boundary
and its possible ramifications for quantum gravity. The other issue is
given by Minkowski's celebrated isoperimetric inequality which in
ordinary language tells us that in flat space for a given surface area
the greatest volume enclosed is that of a sphere. We find analogues of
Minkowski's inequalities for all of the above spaces and discuss them
in detail.

Ricci-flat metrics admitting boundaries with  action 
Four Dimensions 
In four dimensions, all Ricci-flat metrics that admit circle actions
can be obtained as special cases of the Taub-NUT metric. The Taub-NUT
metric is a two-parameter Ricci-flat metric and is invariant under the
group action of , i.e., biaxial Bianchi-IX
type. The Euclidean metric is usually written in the following
coordinates:
   
where  and  and  are
two parameters.  and  are the usual coordinates on
 and , , is the coordinate
parametrizing the  fibre. For  the period of  is
 and hence the surfaces of constant  are topologically
.

The general form of the metric (), however, is only valid for
a coordinate patch for which . In general,  will
have two roots:
  
At the roots the metric degenerates to that of a round , and
each such root therefore corresponds to a two-dimensional set of fixed
points of the Killing vector field  and
hence are singular orbits. However, for  the roots coincide,
i.e.,  in which case the fixed-point set is
zero-dimensional as the two-sphere then collapses to a point. Such two- and zero-dimensional
fixed point sets have been given the names "bolts" and "nuts"
respectively.

For a bolt to be a regular point of the metric, the metric has to
"close" smoothly near it, such that the subspace of  has
the metric of . This can happen provided one gives
 the appropriate period which is equivalent to imposing the
following condition:
 
For a nut the metric () is regular for  and approaches
the 4-dimensional flat metric near it (see below).  The coordinate 
ranges continuously from the nut or bolt till, in principle, another
root of  or to infinity. In the latter case the metric can be
defined over a complete manifold 
often called an instanton.
Self-dual Taub-NUT 
Setting  in (), one obtains Hawking's Taub-NUT instanton
 :
 
The Riemann curvature tensor of the metric is self-dual - 

.





As already mentioned, the metric has a nut at  and is regular for
, i.e., if  has a period of ; the level-surfaces of
the regular metric are therefore topologically  with a biaxial
Bianchi-IX metric on it - a property that makes the metric
interesting for cosmology. Another interesting property of the metric
is that it is Ka hler. In the mathematical literature, because of
its many special properties, this metric appears in many different
contexts. The metric is asymptotically flat and the complete metric,
, i.e., the self-dual Taub-NUT or Taub-Nut instanton
has the topology of . To avoid confusion due to
divergent conventions in the literature, we will refer to this metric
(and its higher dimensional generalisations to be described in the
next section) as Taub-Nut metrics to distinguish them from the
Taub-Bolt metrics that have two-dimensional regular fixed-point sets
and will reserve the word Taub-NUT for the whole two-parameter family
which includes other regular and singular metrics.
Taub-Bolt Metric 
The Taub-Bolt metric is the only other regular metric for
, i.e., has level surfaces that are squashed spheres:
 
Here  ranges from  to infinity. The two-dimensional fixed-point
set of the Killing vector  is a regular bolt
as one can check from (). This is not self-dual unlike
the Taub-Nut metric although it is also asymptotically flat. Due to
the bolt, the complete metric has a different topology and is defined
over a manifold of topology , i.e., of 
 with its nut removed.
: the Schwarzschild Solution 
As first observed by Page, for the degenerate case ,
one can obtain the Schwarzschild metric by taking the limit 
 and  while keeping  fixed
:
 
Here  and replaces the  coordinate in the
previous two examples. The metric has a bolt singularity at 
which can be made regular by identifying the coordinate  with a
period of . The radial coordinate  has the range 
 and constant  slices of the regular metric have the
trivial product topology of . The four-metric
therefore has the topology of .
: the Eguchi-Hanson Metric 
The only other regular metric in this family is the Eguchi-Hanson
metric. It is obtained by defining  and
then taking the limit  while keeping
 constant:
 
The metric is self-dual. However, since  has period , the
level surfaces are , i.e., 
and hence the metric is asymptotically locally Euclidean and
asymptotically looks like . The complete
metric has the topology of .

Higher Dimensional Generalisations 
In this section we briefly review the possible generalisations of the
four-dimensional metrics discussed above. All of the above metrics are
radial extensions of  bundles fibred over  - a compact
Einstein manifold. The bundles are non-trivial except in the case of
Schwarzschild. In higher dimensions we therefore seek Ricci-flat
metrics with similar Hopf bundle structure that would reduce to the
above metrics in four dimensions.  The case of four dimensions is
special in that all such metrics are obtained as special cases of the
Taub-NUT metric as we have seen in the previous section. However, this
fortuitous situation cannot exist in principle in higher dimensions as
cohomogeneity one metrics with principal orbits that are the
non-trivial  bundles (i.e., the proposed generalisation of the
Taub-NUT family) and satisfying the vacuum Einstein equation can only
exist in even dimensions whereas the Schwarzschild metric can be
generalised in arbitrary dimensions (see below). The higher
dimensional generalisation of the Taub-NUT family requires the base
manifold to be Ka hler (complex projective space for Taub-Nut
solutions, see below) and hence none of the metrics will be
asymptotically flat or Euclidean, locally or globally. With
Schwarzschild in higher dimensions we have more choices for the base
manifold than a sphere with the usual round metric on it due to the
proliferation of compact Einstein manifolds/metrics in dimensions
greater than two. Any compact Einstein manifold would suffice as the
base space in this case with regularity at the bolt being achieved
only through imposing correct periodicity on the
fibre-coordinate. Therefore the Schwarzschild metrics obtained as
special cases of higher dimensional Taub-NUT metrics form a subclass
of all the possible Schwarzschild metrics in that dimension. Since
 is the only compact Einstein manifold in two dimensions and is
isomorphic to , in four dimensions such a coincidence is
possible.
Schwarzschild metric 
For the Schwarzschild metric in  dimensions, one simply
replaces the trivial bundle  by 
:
 
where  gives the black hole mass  which for 
 is 
The bolt singularity at  can be removed by periodically
identifying the coordinate  with a period
 
The coordinate  then takes values from  to
infinity and defines a complete metric over a manifold with 
 topology possessing an
-dimensional fixed point set of the Killing vector , i.e., a
bolt. For  the metric is
asymptotically Euclidean and in general for other choices of base
manifolds are asymptotically conical with the special case , where  is a discrete
subgroup of , for which it is asymptotically locally
Euclidean. For a recent discussion on various possibilities of base
spaces for Schwarzschild metrics in various dimensions and their
ramifications, see.
The Taub-NUT Family 
The generalised Ricci-flat metrics with principal orbits which are
non-trivial  bundles were constructed in and
independently in. Recently they have been discussed in
 and in. Such a metric is obtained by adding
a radial coordinate to the metric on the  bundle over a compact
homogeneous Ka hler manifold  of  complex dimensions endowed
with an Einstein-Ka hler metric 
 and subjecting the -dimensional metric to
Ricci-flatness. The metric on the bundle is
 
where
 
is a connection on the bundle such that  is the the Ka hler
form on  with  parametrizing the  fibre. The quantity
 is some function on . The bundle is invariant under
the group action  where  is the symmetry of the
base. However, this is not necessarily the maximal symmetry, as we
will discuss later.

The general Ansatz for the  dimensional space is then taken by
adding a radial coordinate :
 
The Ka hlerian choice of  renders the vacuum Einstein equations
in the simple form:
 
 
 
Adding the first two equations and choosing the coordinate gauge in
the form
 
one finds
 
With this explicit form of ,  is given by the 
integral:
 
where  is an integration constant. Note that the gauge () is slightly
superfluous. Looking at (), it is easy to see that 
appears as an overall multiplicative factor. We could therefore have
absorbed  into . However, writing the gauge in this form would
help us recover the Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt metrics in their familiar
forms by just setting  to a constant value and setting the correct
value for  without having to redefine , as we will see
below.

The above considerations are local and do not prescribe any
periodicity on . As shown in, to extend the above
metric globally over a manifold, as we do next,  is required to
have a period of
 
where  is a positive integer unrestricted as yet, and  is a
non-negative integer such that the first Chern class of the tangent
bundle on  is divisible by . One can now obtain
complete positive definite metrics provided one removes the possible
singularities arising from the fixed-points of the Killing vector
.
Taub-Nut 
The fixed point set of the Killing vector  would
be zero dimensional if both  and  goes to zero at
. This requires setting  and  in
(). As discussed in, this will be a regular nut
provided the metric near the nut approaches the flat metric. This is
only possible if one choose the base manifold to be  with
the Fubini-Study metric on it. The principal orbits are then spheres
via the standard Hopf fibration of  and hence near  the
metric approaches the flat metric on , i.e.,
. Note that for any other choice of
compact Ka hler base space the nut-singularity cannot be removed.
The period of  is  as  for 
.

By setting  and , note that the four dimensional
self-dual Taub-Nut metric Eq.() can be
reproduced.(Note that with this choice, the Fubini-Study
metric on  is
)   
In higher dimensions the solutions are higher order polynomials in
:

 
 
 
 
One can integrate 
 
to obtain
 
However, this expression, while exact, consists of two terms coming
from the two limits of the integral (in which the value of the
integral at the lower limit has been simplified using Gamma functions)
and hence is not very useful or illuminating for practical
purposes. However, it is possible to express  as a single
expression which captures the simple product form of
Eqs.()- (). For this we will have to wait until
the next section where its utility will also be demonstrated.
Taub-Bolt 
For  the integral
 is a monotonically
increasing function of  starting from zero. Any positive value of
 can therefore be
matched with a unique 
. Therefore, for , we can replace Eq.() with 
 
This automatically guarantees that .

The  dimensional set of fixed point of  at
 forms a bolt - a singular orbit. However, this will be a
regular point of the metric provided the  sub-plane looks
like an  at .  We now expand () in
powers of :
 
Recalling that  should have a period , the
sub-space of  would be flat if the bolt is located at
 
Obviously this requires  to be less than
. Therefore there are  bolt type solutions for any given
Einstein-Ka hler base.

For  (therefore )
 
Note that only for  is the asymptotic behaviour of the solution
similar to that of the Taub-Nut solution. Other  bolt
solutions, which do not have any analogues in 4-dimensions, though
regular, do not have the same asymptotic behaviour.  For , the
bolt appears at  in four dimensions,  in six
dimensions, i.e., at  in  dimensions. We here
mention explicit solutions for , with subscripts indicating the
dimensions as before:
 
 
 
In the rest of the paper, unless otherwise stated, we will use
Taub-Bolt to mean any solution for arbitrary value of  (which is,
however, less than ). Also, it is important to note that for the
Taub-Nut solutions we require the total -dimensional space to
approach flatness at the nut which is only possible if  is
the base. However, in the case of bolt-type solutions, at a bolt the
metric is the product of flat  and an Einstein manifold of
constant radius and hence are regular Ricci-flat solutions for any
choice of Einstein-Ka hler base. The periodicity of the
fibre-coordinate has to be adjusted in this case depending on the
value of  which in turn will determine the locations of the bolt
in each of the  bolt solutions. In general the periodicities
are different for different choices of base manifolds and the explicit
form of  will be different in each case and for each
possible value of . However, Taub-Bolt would be used for all of
them in the same way Schwarzschild is used generically irrespective of
the choice of base.

Apart from the  regular bolt solutions, another regular
solution exists for the degenerate case of  by taking limits in the
same way we have obtained the Eguchi-Hanson metric in the case of four
dimensions (see below). Also at the limit  one obtains
the Schwarzschild metric. However, these are only a subset of
Schwarzschild metrics in even dimensions. The Taub-NUT family being
even dimensional cannot offer any Schwarzschild metric in odd
dimensions. Therefore one obtains only the sub-class of Schwarzschild
metrics with Einstein-Ka hler base in any even dimension from the
Taub-NUT family and any odd dimensional Schwarzschild metric is
precluded automatically.
Eguchi-Hanson 
For the degenerate case of , the -fibre has a period of
. Metrics obtained by taking limits identical to
four dimensional case, as described in Sec. 2 (i.e., by defining the
coordinate  and taking  and  both to
infinity while keeping  a finite constant)
are regular and give the generalisations to the Eguchi-Hanson
metric. They can
most conveniently be written by choosing . The
-dimensional metric then has the succinct form:
 
The bolt at  is regular with  having a period of
 for which the principal orbits are 
 if one chooses  with the Fubini-Study metric as
the base. The metric () is then Einstein-Ka hler and was
first found by Calabi by abstract geometric methods and
was later found by directly solving the Monge-Ampe re equation in
. However,  can be any Einstein-Ka hler manifold
(see and).
The Dirichlet Problem: Uniqueness and Non-uniqueness 
In the Dirichlet problem one seeks to obtain non-singular solutions
 which fill in a given boundary
 such that  and
. In our case a boundary is an
 bundle over a compact Einstein manifold with  having
the form
 
where  and  - the radii of the base manifold and the
-fibre respectively - are known quantities and constitute what
we will be referring to as the boundary data. The boundary  is
invariant under the group  where  is the
symmetry group of the base manifold . However,  is not
necessarily the maximal symmetry of . For example when the
boundary is an  bundle over ,  may enlarge from 
 to  depending on the
values of  and  and the periodicity of the
fibre-coordinate. The same is true for the higher dimensional metrics
discussed above.

In the Dirichlet problem we seek to find infilling metrics as
functions of  and . Since we know the Ricci-flat
metrics that have principal orbits sharing the topology and symmetry
of , our problem is equivalent to the isometric embedding
problem of  into known manifolds
. When such an embedding is possible,
compact part(s) of  cut by the
hypersurface  constitute a solution to the Dirichlet
problem.
Schwarzschild Metrics 
For a boundary , the pair
 constitutes the canonical boundary data with the
interpretation that  represents the radius of a spherical
cavity immersed in a thermal bath with temperature 
. It is known from the work of York and others
 that for such canonical boundary data, apart from
the obvious infilling flat-space solution with proper identification,
there are in general two black hole solutions distinguished by their
masses which become degenerate at a certain value of the squashing,
i.e., the ratio of the two radii . This can be
seen in the following way.  First rewrite the Schwarzschild metric
() in the following form:
 
where  such that  has unit period. With this
definition one can simply read off the proper length - alternatively
the radius - of the  fibre and that of the  base. They
are:
 
and
 
It is easy to see that for a given ,  is uniquely
determined whereas  is given by the positive solutions of the
following equation:
 
By solving this equation for , the two Schwarzschild infilling
geometries are found(Note that the boundary data  is
the radius of the  fibre and not   the proper length
, though they are related: 
) . There are in general two positive roots of Eq.()
provided . When the
equality holds the two solutions become degenerate and beyond this
value of squashing they turn complex. The remaining root of
Eq.() is always negative. Therefore the two infilling
solutions appear and disappear in pairs as the boundary data is
varied. The explicit solutions are mentioned in.

Higher Dimensions 
It is not difficult to see that in arbitrary dimensions for 
, there will in general be two Schwarzschild
solutions or no solution. Simply note that the ratio of the two radii
as a function of 
is:
 
For any  the general behaviour is the following:
 starts from zero and grows
monotonically to a maximum value and then decreases and approaches
zero asymptotically at infinity, as in Figure . The maximal
value of the squashing depends on the number of dimensions only and
can be found by differentiating Eq.( ). The condition on
the admissible boundary data in  dimensions therefore reads:
 
Any squashing satisfying the inequality will occur for two values of
 corresponding to two distinct values of . If the squashing
of a given data  exceeds this value, there will be no
positive solution for  and hence no real infilling Schwarzschild
solution can be found with positive mass. At the equality of
(), the two solutions are degenerate as in four dimensions.
 [!ht]
   
        
             
    Schwarzschild solutions: below a critical-value
    of the squashing ()
    there are always two distinct infilling Schwarzschild solutions
     which become
    degenerate at the critical value. The critical value and the exact
    shape of the curve depend on dimension.  
      Eguchi-Hanson in Arbitrary Dimension 
For the Eguchi-Hanson metric () in  dimensions, it is
fairly straightforward to check that the infilling solutions are
unique. The squashing
 
as a function of , increases
monotonically from zero and approaches unity as 
. For a given boundary data , the infilling
solution is given trivially by
 
and 
 
Solutions will exist for any data  provided
 which is apparent from the form of the metric
().
Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt metrics 
Four Dimensions 
For a boundary  which is a twisted  bundle over 
and endowed with the metric
 
where  has a period , a Taub-Nut infilling would be
possible if the following system of equations admits real solutions
for  and :
 
and
 
This has been solved in detail in as a special case of
self-dual Taub-NUT-(anti)de Sitter solutions. The important
observation is that this system admits the discrete symmetry 
, which inspires one to make the following
substitution:
 
Eqs.()-() then transform into the following
two bivariate equations (for  and ):
 
and 
 
The discrete symmetry,  is now
preserved in . Substituting for 
() one can obtain a univariate equation in  ():
 
This is quadratic in . The four solutions for  therefore
will appear in pairs with opposite signs. Since  is
positive, this implies that the four corresponding solutions of
 are of the form ,  and
, .  Since the set of solutions have
the symmetry , by applying
the transformation , we would obtain no new
solutions for  (hence for ) and would reproduce the same
set. Therefore there are four points in the  plane where
the two polynomials ()-() meet, i.e., four solutions
for  which are related by the reflection symmetry 
.

For convenience, let us rewrite . Then the solutions are
 
If  then  is negative which means that  will
be imaginary and so will  by virtue of equation Eq.(). For
either of  or  to give a real solution, we must have
. For this to happen, one can show trivially, using
Eq.(), that one requires
 
This can only be satisfied by . Therefore for any boundary data
, one can fill in with a unique Taub-Nut metric.

For the same boundary, , Taub-Bolt infilling
solutions are possible if the following system can admit real
solutions for  and  such that :
 
and
 
However, in this case the solution is not unique. This can be seen by
noting the behaviour of the squashing as a function of the variable
:
 
At , this is zero and as  is increased it increases to
reach a maximum and then decreases to reach zero at infinity. The
maximum value of  is

and occurs approximately at . For any boundary
data  for which squashing is below this limit, the
 can be filled in with two Taub-Bolt solutions. Note that
Eq.( ) can be solved exactly for  giving exact
infilling geometries as functions of the boundary data
. We do not, however, write the solutions here as they
are unwieldy and not particularly illuminating.

One must have noted a fundamental difference between the
Taub-Nut/Bolt, Eguchi-Hanson cases and the Schwarzschild case. In the
Taub-Nut/Bolt and Eguchi-Hanson cases the  fibre of the boundary
 is required to have a prescribed period in order to afford
regular infilling solutions. Any boundary with a different periodicity
of the fibre-coordinate hence cannot be filled in with regular  
Taub-Nut/Bolt solutions irrespective of the value of boundary data. In
the case of Schwarzschild, however, the periodicity of the -fibre
is determined by the masses of the infilling black holes. Because of
the product topology of the boundary, the periodicity of the
-fibre of the boundary in this case is "arbitrary" in the sense
that one can always redefine the coordinate parametrizing the fibre as
we did in Section 3.1 and it is meaningful to talk about its
periodicity only after the solutions have been found.

Higher Dimensions 
One can similarly treat the filling in problem in higher dimensions
with Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt metrics and try to solve them
algebraically for  and  using the explicit forms of 
and  mentioned in Section . It is possible to reduce
the problem to a one-variable one by treating the squashing as a
function of the variable  as we have done for the
Taub-Bolt and Schwarzschild solutions (which equally could have been
adopted for the Taub-Nut in Section 3.3.1). However, the corresponding
equations soon become too difficult to tackle algebraically with
ordinary methods. We will return to the issue of explicit solutions
later in Section 5. For the present purpose, i.e., to see whether
infilling solutions are unique or non-unique and for what ranges of
the boundary data they exist, we need to take a more general approach
and avoid a case-by-case study as below. This enables us to make the
following statement for Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt infilling geometries in
arbitrary dimensions.  

 
Theorem:   For a non-trivial -bundle over a compact
Ka hler manifold of  complex dimensions with metric
(), possible Taub-Nut and Eguchi-Hanson infillings are
unique and possible Taub-Bolt infilling, irrespective of the
periodicity of coordinate parametrizing the -fibre, is
double-valued. 
 

Proof:   We have already shown that the Eguchi-Hanson infilling
is unique and exists for any boundary data  provided
.

For the case of Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt, perhaps the most
straightforward way is to use a combination of polynomials and
differential equations. Denote the ratio
 by :
 

where we have set  without any loss of generality (see
Comment 2 below). Recall that  for Taub-Nut in arbitrary
dimension and that  for regular Taub-Bolt solutions where
 is an integer and less than .

Rescaling  by , one obtains 
 
where  and . We now obtain a first
order differential equation for  from ():
  
where prime denotes differentiation with respect to . Note that
this equation is inhomogeneous, first order and linear and its
solution is unique for any boundary data 
. More importantly, it is non-autonomous  , unlike the
Einstein equations we started with. This latter property, though not
desirable in most cases, will greatly facilitate our understanding of
the boundary-value problem under consideration.

The apparent singular point  of Eq.( ) is a regular
singular point as one can guess. We will discuss it further when we
deal with the nut-case. For the purpose of exposition we start with
the Bolt case.
Bolt case 
At a bolt, i.e, at  (where ),  is zero trivially as  ( is
nonzero). (The integral  
 
has a factor  for arbitrary , as can be checked by
expanding and factoring the (finite) hypergeometric series making the
squashing zero at the bolt.)

Since  is zero at , Eq.( ) implies
immediately that  and hence  will grow. It will
continue to grow monotonically till it reaches the value where
 - which is an
extremum. The second derivative at the extremum (or at any extremum),
 
is negative. So  starts decreasing and we have a "hump".

Since the second derivative at any extremum is negative for any
 irrespective of the initial data, a minimum can never occur
and hence  will decrease monotonically, i.e.,  will
always be negative after the maximum. This in turn implies that
 can never be negative, i.e., the curve cannot cross the
-axis because that would violate Eq.( ). (This
physically corresponds to the obvious fact that  and
 are positive.)
 [!ht]
   
        
             
    Taub-Bolt solutions: below a critical-value
    of the squashing ()
    there are always two distinct infilling Taub-Bolt solutions
     which become
    degenerate at the critical value.  
       [!h]
    
       Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt solutions: any boundary 
    which can be filled in with Taub-Bolt solutions can necessarily be
    filled in with a Taub-Nut solution (assuming  and
    ). This is comparable to the case of Schwarzschild and hot
    flat space in the case  is a . 
    
As , the only possibility for  is
therefore to be asymptotic to some constant value. For  large
Eq.( ) can be approximated by:
 
giving 
 
For all  and any value of  (which depends on the initial data)
this approaches zero asymptotically, i.e.,  is an asymptote
to the -axis. Therefore for any boundary data 
for which 
 there will be precisely two
infilling Taub-Bolt metrics. Physically, as ,
 stabilizes to a constant value while  continues to
grow linearly. Their ratio therefore approaches zero asymptotically at
infinity.
Nut case 
Physically  and  have similar power law behaviour near
the nut and hence  approaches a constant value. This can be
seen by redefining  and evaluating the integral for 
. One finds that 
precisely. In fact, using this substitution one can show:
 
where  is the Appell hypergeometric function
 of two variables, here  and , and
is equal to unity for . Therefore, for the nut case in general
one has
 
which clearly has the value  at the nut.

At the nut () one therefore has
 
One can verify by direct differentiation of Eq.( ) that
 has a factor  in the denominator and the
numerator vanishes smoothly rendering the quantity
 smooth at the nut and that it is
negative in general near the nut. In fact it is easier to see it in
the following way: at , where  is an
arbitrarily small positive quantity,
 cannot be positive (implying
that  cannot be positive) because this would then mean an
increase in  which is not possible since this would make the
left hand side of Eq.( ) negative definite. Therefore
 has to be negative at  and  must decrease.
Employing the same argument used for the bolt case  cannot
have a minimum and will decrease monotonically to approach zero
asymptotically. Therefore for any
 there will be an unique
infilling Taub-Nut metric. 

Note that, for the Taub-Nut solution, . For the bolt
solutions, no assumption has been made about the periodicity of 
as the lower limit  of the integral (i.e., the initial value
of ) has been kept arbitrary. The only property used was that
 which is a necessary condition for the existence of
bolts. The infilling bolts solutions will therefore be regular
solutions if the fibre-coordinate has a period 
.  The periodicity of the  coordinate and the
base manifold is determined by specifying the boundary
. If the periodicity of the fibre-coordinate is such
that , but ,  can still be filled in
with two positive definite bolt solutions although they will be
singular at the bolt. Our analysis above applies to such possibilities
as well. Also note that we do not require the base manifold to be
 for the Taub-Nut case, although otherwise the solutions
will be singular at the nut.  
 
 Note 1   The flow of
Eq.() is similar for all values of  though they
correspond to different geometries. Even when , the
pattern is unchanged as long as , though the corresponding
solutions are singular at their bolt. However, as one varies 
 and hits  the flow-pattern changes abruptly. This
singular, sudden shift in the flow of Eq.() at 
encodes the change in the topological   character of the
infilling solutions.  
 
 Note 2   We have found a new closed
form expression for  for the Taub-Nut through the Appell
hypergeometric functions (cf Eq.( )):
 
Note that this form explicitly shows how the ratio of  and
 is non-zero at the nut, though they are separately zero.




To our knowledge, the above form () 

has not been found before. In terms of ordinary hypergeometric
functions the closed form expression for  consists
of two terms, i.e., the difference of the function at the two limits
of the integral () and hence is not particularly
illuminating.  
 
 
Comment 1   Note that the boundary data for which there is an
infilling Taub-Nut solution is restricted by the squashing being less
than or equal to ; beyond this there will be no
nut solution.  By setting  the upper bound on the
squashing  and the value of  at which it occurs in the
case of Taub-Bolt can be found by solving Eq.() and
Eq.() simultaneously. Eliminating , for example,
one needs to solve the following equation for :
  
which, unfortunately, does not provide a simple expression for 
and consequently for . However, following the previous
discussions, we know that there will be a unique positive solution to
Eq.() which one can find for specific  and 
numerically.  
 

Comment 2   For a given boundary metric one can choose the
cosmological constant  for the base manifold arbitrarily. The
above calculations were carried out for . The statements on
the limits on squashing for the Taub-Nut and the Taub-Bolt are to be
understood in this light. Obviously the choice of  does not
affect the above arguments and one can always convert quantities from
one choice of  to another by basic algebraic
manipulations. The limits of squashing for , for example,
are obtained from those for  by multiplying by
.
On-shell action 
Before closing this section note that the on-shell action for any
infilling solution  is:
 
where  is the trace of the second fundamental form
 and  is
the metric of the boundary and  is the outward unit
normal(Note that in this convention the outward normal on
the boundary is positive.) . The bulk contribution vanishes so only the
boundary term contributes. Thus the boundary term plays a vital role
in the Euclidean approach to quantum gravity as was noted in
. An analogous boundary term first appeared in the 
formulation in and also in. For
a detailed discussion of the structure of the boundary term see
. 
Black Holes in a Cavity of Arbitrary Dimension 
In this section we discuss finding solutions to the infilling
geometries for Schwarzschild in arbitrary dimension for arbitrary
boundary data . As mentioned earlier, the periodic
boundary conditions have the natural thermodynamic interpretation of a
spherical cavity immersed in a heat bath with temperature proportional
to the inverse of the radius of the fibre. As we will see below, it is
possible to find exact solutions for the two infilling Schwarzschild
geometries as analytic functions of the boundary data, or their
squashing to be more specific, in all dimensions.
 
To find the infilling geometries in  dimensions, we need to
solve the analogue of Eq.() obtained via the method used for
four dimensions:
 
where  has been replaced by  for notational convenience.
As this is an equation in  in odd dimensions, exact
Schwarzschild infilling solutions can be found immediately for
dimension five:
 
giving the two masses
 
The condition on squashing is then
 
and is in agreement with Eq.(). 

Similarly, explicit solutions can be found in seven and nine
dimensions as functions of the boundary data by means of ordinary
methods. In the case of four dimensions, we already know the solutions
from the work of York. In dimensions other than these,
the degree of () is five and above. Explicit solutions are
therefore not obtainable in general in terms of radicals, as we know
from Galois theory. However, as will be shown below, exact analytic   solutions are still possible. They involve techniques less
well-known to the physics community and hence probably were not found
before.

For convenience, we rewrite Eq.() in the following form:
 
where  and 
. Note that
 can be positive only for . This is because  here is just the inverse of  in
Eq.(). 

By the fundamental theorem of algebra, Eq.() will always
admit  complex solutions. As we have seen, two of these will be
positive as long as the squashing does not exceed the value given by
Eq.() which translates into the following requirement for
Eq.():
 
The existence of two positive roots can be reproduced from purely
algebraic arguments. For  odd, there will be at least one real root
which will be negative as the product of all roots, , is
negative. Remembering Descartes rule of changes of sign (see, for
example,), there will be either two other positive roots
(double roots counted twice) or no positive roots - meaning all other
roots are complex. For  even there can be up to two positive and
two negative roots while the rest are complex; the positivity of
 in this case excludes the possibility of having one
positive root and one negative root. So there will be either two
positive solutions or no positive solutions for  depending on the
value of .
Solutions 
The problem at hand is to find the  solutions of Eq.()
and identify the two positive roots which are bound to exist for 
obeying (). Things are much simpler than the general -th
degree equations as Eq.() belongs to the class of equations
 
known commonly as trinomial equations. Trinomial equations have a long
history, and was studied by mathematicians starting from Lambert to
Ramanujan in both their general and restricted forms in parallel with
the general equation of degree . An elaborate historical account
can be found in. A major success came with the work of
Birkeland in  which showed that the -roots of the general
equation of degree  can be expressed as linear combinations of
higher order hypergeometric functions of several variables
. As a special case to the general equation of degree
, he showed that the general trinomial equation of degree  with
arbitrary complex coefficients can be solved exactly in terms of
hypergeometric functions of order  of one   variable. We have
discussed the general solutions in detail in the Appendix. As far as
we know, there is no substantial reference to the general solutions of
trinomial equations in the literature available in English.

As in the Appendix, the general solutions of () are given
 in terms of the variable
 
The solutions fall into two separate sectors corresponding to
 and . The two sectors have different analytic
forms of solutions in terms of hypergeometric functions.  In our case,
, ,  and hence
 
Since ,  is
a quadratic function of squashing.

Recalling that we are interested only in the positive   roots of
Eq.(), which exist only for values of  given by
(), we need not consider  corresponding to values
exceeding the bound of (). Now , as a function of
, increases monotonically from zero (for ) to its maximal
value corresponding to the equality of (). It is
straightforward to check that this maximal value of  is
identically unity. We therefore do not   need to consider the set
of solutions corresponding to  to find the two positive
roots at all. Each of the positive roots of () (and other
roots within this bound) can therefore be given by a single analytic
expression. This is not specific to Eq.(), however, as
 will be equal to unity when the general trinomial equation
 has equal roots. The condition for this reads
 
In our case, the two positive roots become equal at 

which is precisely the condition above as one can check comparing it
with ().

Analytic Solutions 
The  roots 's of Eq.() are found from
Eq.() by setting  and  and  :
 
in which 
 
The remaining two roots are found from Eq.():
 
The arguments of the function
 
are given by
 
where
 
The arguments of the function
 
are given by
 
and  is given through .
The two masses 
It is not difficult to single out the two positive roots from
() and (). They are simply the -th and
-th roots. The masses of the two black hole solutions are therefore
given by the following simple expressions:
) 
and
 
The expressions (-) converge for . For the  case,
corresponding to 
, the double-root is much simpler:
 
The solutions () and () gives us the masses of the two
infilling black hole solutions as analytic functions of the boundary
data. This enables us to find the corresponding Euclidean actions and
other thermodynamics quantities as analytic functions of the boundary
data and sets the ground for any future study in higher dimensional
black holes in a thermal cavity. Note that, the smaller mass
() will be less than the value of  given by ( )
for which the specific heat capacity
 
is negative and hence the black hole solution is thermodynamically
unstable. The corresponding negative mode was found numerically in
. This solution is therefore an instanton. However, the
larger mass black hole solution is locally thermodynamically
stable. 
Action and Free energy 
Note that Eq.() gives the critical temperature  - above
which the two black hole solutions exist - to be inversely proportional to
the cavity-radius:
 
Recall that any cavity can be filled in with a unique hot flat
space 
 
for any temperature  by giving  the period . For
, the only classical solution within the cavity is hot flat
space whereas for temperature equal or above  the two black
hole solutions add to the list. For either of the two black hole
solutions the Euclidean action () in the 'background' of
the periodically identified flat space is given by:
 
The flat space action has been subtracted so as to make the action
zero for zero mass. The actions for the two black holes can be found
by direct substitution of the two positive roots of Eq.()
in Eq.(). The action is zero for  (by virtue of the
above subtraction) and it increases monotonically to reach a maximum
and then decreases monotonically to the minimum value
 
corresponding to . This is strictly negative and hence the action
passes through zero for some non-zero value of . It is fairly
straightforward to work out that this zero occurs for
 
Therefore for 
 
the action will always be negative. Note that the values of  within
this range is always greater than the value of  given by
() and hence the action will be negative only for the
larger mass black hole and for a restricted range, i.e., if the
temperature is sufficiently high enough. Since the free energy is
, the larger-mass black hole nucleated spontaneously
from hot flat space for any temperature above this will be globally
thermodynamically stable. For a given cavity of radius , this
temperature can be found using Eq.():
 
Series Expansions 
The expressions () and () are exact and can be used
for precise calculation using the known properties of the higher order
hypergeometric functions (see, for example,
). However, in many situations, approximations via series
expansions in powers of the parameter are useful along with the exact
solutions. Obtaining such series for () and () is
nontrivial through their direct expansions. However, such series can
be obtained directly from () by use of Lagrange
expansion. If
 
where  a is function of , the expansion of any function
 of  is given by
 
There are three fundamental power series for all roots of a general
trinomial equations, each of them precisely corresponding
to the three analytic expressions described in the Appendix, two for
, and one for . Since our solutions lie within the
bound , only two of them will be of relevance.  We will
not discuss the general expansion for the general trinomial equation
() - interested readers are referred to
. However, the method discussed below is the same for any
trinomial equation.

Note that for very small , Eq.() has two roots
approximately lying on a circle of radius  and the other
 roots approximately on a circle of radius  in the
-plane. Following, we rewrite Eq.() as
 
wherein . The Lagrange expansion () of the
function  then gives us the required series
for ():
 
Similarly defining  and rewriting Eq.() as
 
the Lagrange expansion of  gives us the
series for ():
 
The other complex/negative roots are obtained by multiplying
() by the  roots of  and multiplying
() by the other root of , i.e., by 
respectively.

Note that as one takes the boundary to infinity keeping the
temperature finite, the stable solution disappears and the instanton
solution  survives thus making hot space unstable to the
nucleation of a black hole with negative specific heat as was seen in
. This happens for any non-zero temperature. Because this
solution has a negative specific heat it will be in unstable
equilibrium with its thermal environment. Only within a finite cavity
is it therefore possible to have a black hole which is
thermodynamically stable. However, the situation is different in the
presence of a negative cosmological constant as was shown in
 for four dimensions. Work on higher dimensions are under
progress and will be reported in a forthcoming publication.
Solving Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt in Arbitrary Dimension 
In this section, we briefly discuss possible analytic solutions for
Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt infilling geometries in higher dimensions. (We
have already mentioned the explicit solutions in the case of
Eguchi-Hanson metric in arbitrary dimension in the course of proving
uniqueness.) We have found solutions for the Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt
solutions in four dimensions although in the case of the latter we did
not write down the explicit form as it is not particularly
illuminating. Note that higher dimensional Taub-Nut metrics all have
the same symmetry . With the same
substitutions used in four dimensions, namely,
 
one can reduce the problem to the study of a univariate equation - a
cubic in six dimensions, quartic in eight dimensions, i.e., an
equation of degree  in  dimensions. The boundary-value
problem for Taub-Nut therefore can be solved exactly in up to eight
dimensions using radicals. We do not, however, write them here for
lack of space. For dimensions ten and above the relevant equations
will be quintic and above, and, as already mentioned, solutions in
terms of radicals are not possible in general. As discussed in the
previous section, one can solve the general equation of degree  in
terms of the higher order hypergeometric functions(Recently
this has been done using -hypergeometric functions
.) . However, unlike the case of Schwarzschild, where we had
a trinomial equation, these will be higher order hypergeometric
functions of several variables.  Although it is possible in principle
to work them out explicitly, the solutions would not be illuminating
as in the case of Schwarzschild solutions and therefore we do not
attempt to do it here. Rather it is much easier to treat them
numerically. A numerical treatment is rather straightforward as we can
treat everything as a function of squashing only - a simplification
resulting from the vanishing of the cosmological constant term.
Convexity of the Solutions and Isoperimetric Inequalities 
Often the condition of convexity is applied to eliminate degenerate
infilling solutions for a given boundary. For example, an  of
3-radius  embedded in an  of 4-radius greater than 
divides the  into two unequal hemispheres both of which are
infilling solutions a priori  .  However, the smaller
hemisphere is the one which is convex, i.e., the eigenvalues of the
second fundamental form 
 are positive (using the convention that the
outward normal  is positive) whereas for the larger hemisphere it
is the opposite. Discarding the latter leaves us with one unique
infilling solution.

It is fairly straightforward to check explicitly that  has
positive eigenvalues for both of the Schwarzschild solutions and for
the unique Eguchi-Hanson solution.  For the Taub-Nut or Taub-Bolt, the
second fundamental form can easily be computed in the orthonormal
frame:
 
where . Since the scale factors,  and 
both increase monotonically (for any value of ) with , both
 and  are strictly
positive. Therefore the unique infilling Taub-Nut solution and the two
Taub-Bolt infilling solutions are all convex without imposing any
further restrictions on the boundary data than those needed for the
solutions to exist.
Lower Bound to the Action 
Since all the solutions are convex, it follows immediately from a
theorem by Reilly that the following inequality holds
 
where  and  are the volume and the volume element of the
boundary  and  is the volume of the -dimensional
manifold with the boundary . Since the boundaries above are
convex for any infillings the right hand side of () is
positive for all infilling solutions above. Note that this term is
proportional to the Euclidean action () with a negative
proportionality constant and hence the action is negative for all
infillings. The inequality () therefore provides a lower
bound for the action of any infilling solution.
Minkowski's Inequality 
For a -dimensional closed surface  in ,
one has the following inequality due to Minkowski (see, for example,
):
 
where  is the -volume of , often referred to as
"area", and  is the volume of the  enclosed by it.
This states that for a closed surface of constant area the greatest
volume enclosed is that of a sphere (for which the equality holds). In
three dimensions, this gives the celebrated formula
 












Naturally, one therefore seeks the Ricci-flat counterparts to this
flat-space inequality. This is what we do in the following section
with our Ricci-flat metrics which admit a  action. It is not
obvious whether such inequalities would obey the bound ()
in general or under special conditions. As we will see, the machinery
we developed in the preceding sections for finding uniqueness or
non-uniqueness of the infilling solutions has already set the ground
for such an investigation. As before, we deal with four dimensions
first before going to higher dimensions. For the sake of convenience
we adopt the terminology of the flat space by denoting the
codimension-one volume of  as  and often refer to it as the
"area". The term volume and  will be reserved for the infilling
solutions.
Schwarzschild Solutions 
Four Dimension 
For the Euclidean Schwarzschild metric Eq.() the area of the
3-surface  at radius  is
 
The volume  of the Euclidean Schwarzschild metric bounded by
 is:
 
The dimensionless ratio is therefore
 
Rewriting , as we did in Section , we obtain
 
Recall that for a given hypersurface , there are in general
two Euclidean Schwarzschild infilling metrics which are given by the
two positive solutions for  satisfying the following algebraic
equation
 
where . This gives two black
hole solutions for a given  which determines the area
 of . As we have shown, for the smaller-mass black hole,
which is an instanton,  and for the
larger-mass black hole which is thermodynamically/dynamically stable
.

It is easy to check that  is a monotonically increasing function
of  in the interval  and blows up at . Therefore the
isoperimetric inequality for the lower-mass unstable Schwarzschild
infilling solution is
 
i.e.,
 
For the larger mass, stable infilling solution this is
 
i.e.,
 
Arbitrary Dimension 
For convenience rewrite the Euclidean Schwarzschild metric in 
dimensions as
 
This metric is regular provided  has a period of
. The area of a constant -slice  is
given by
 
and the volume enclosed by it is 
 
giving the ratio  which is therefore
 
where  as before. Recall that in 
dimensions  is the two positive roots of the trinomial equation
 
where . We found that for the
smaller-mass solution

 and for the larger-mass stable
solution . 

It can easily be seen from () that  increases
monotonically for  within  and blows up at . Therefore
the isoperimetric inequalities for the two infilling Schwarzschild
black holes in  dimensions are:
 
for the smaller-mass unstable solution and 
 
for the larger mass stable solution.  Note that in the convention used
here the metric on the  dimensional base manifold satisfies the
Einstein equation with a cosmological constant term of  and
hence for , with the canonical round
metric on it, the volume is that of the "unit" -dimensional
sphere and is equal to . With
this choice of base manifold it is easy to see that Minkowski's
inequality () is always true for the stable larger-mass
Schwarzschild solution in any dimension. However, it does not hold in
general for the lower-mass, unstable (instanton) solution.

Taub-Nut 
Four dimension 
For the Taub-Nut metric () the area  of a constant
-slice is
 
and the volume enclosed within it is
 
Therefore
 
Rewriting  we obtain
 
This is a monotonically decreasing function of . Therefore
for the Taub-Nut space the isoperimetric inequality is
 
Obviously this does not obey Minkowski's inequality. In fact this is
exactly the opposite   of Minkowski's inequality.
Arbitrary dimension 
The higher dimensional Taub-Nut metric has the form
 
In  dimensions the area of the hypersurface  at  is
 
Following the conventions adopted in Section , here 
 and . Recall that  has period
 (as  for Taub-Nut), where
 is the cosmological constant of the base . This
gives
 
in which  is a function of
.  The volume bounded by  is
 
The ratio is therefore
 
It is easy to evaluate the integral in the denominator above
 
This gives
 
Recalling
 
we obtain after simplification
 
It is easy to check that the fraction involving the two hypergeometric
functions is equal to unity at  and monotonically decreases
with .  It falls faster than  and
falls more sharply with increasing (integer) values of .  The
isoperimetric inequality is therefore
 
The volume of  with the Fubini-Study metric satisfying
the Einstein equations with cosmological constant  is 
 and hence
 
which is exactly the opposite of Minkowski's inequality ()
in  dimensions:
 
Therefore for the Taub-Nut metric in arbitrary dimension the analogue
of the Minkowski's inequality is exactly the opposite of the
Minkowski's inequality in flat space. Since the Taub-Nut metrics
approach flatness near the nut, the equality of ()
coincides with that of () in flat space.
Taub-Bolt 
Four dimension 
For the Taub-Bolt metric in four dimensions ()  has a
period of  and hence
 
and
 
giving
 
where  as before. At ,  is zero and
increases monotonically to a maximum and then decreases monotonically
to zero. The maximum value is approximately  and
occurs at .

Recall that the two infilling Taub-Bolt solutions are separated at
, i.e, for a given boundary data below a
certain squashing there will be a solutions with 
 and another solution with 
. For a given boundary, therefore, the
smaller- solution (corresponding to larger ) will satisfy the
following inequality
 
However, for the larger- (corresponding to smaller value of )
solution the inequality is
 
Minkowski's inequality,
 
is not satisfied by either of the solutions under any circumstances.
Arbitrary dimension 
For the -dimensional Taub-Bolt solution
 
the area of a hypersurface  at constant  is
 
in which  is a function of
. Since  (), the volume
enclosed within  is
 
Here, as in the case of Taub-Nut, we are using the conventions of
Section 2.2.:  and .  The
ratio is therefore
 
The integral in the denominator above can be evaluated. However,
unlike Eq.() the resulting form is not very
illuminating. Following the example of the 4-dimensional Taub-Bolt
above, we know that a closed form expression does not exist. This is
because the equality of the isoperimetric inequality in this case does
not lie at the bolt. However, note that the behaviour does not change
in higher dimensions. 



At the bolt,  is zero while others are non-zero and
therefore  is zero unlike in the nut
case. 






As  is increased  will increase to a
certain value and then will start decreasing and approach zero
monotonically. The value of  at which the hump of
 occurs is greater than
the value of
 for which the hump of  occurs. This has been shown explicitly above
for four dimensions leading to two different inequalities for the two
solutions. Note that compared to the Minkowski's inequality these two inequalities are opposite in
type. This happens also for Schwarzschild which also
possesses bolts - however, in that case explicit inequalities are obtainable. Finally, note that for different Taub-Bolt solutions
(corresponding to values of ) the corresponding
inequalities are not   the ones obtained by dividing the
inequalities corresponding to  by . This is because the locations of
the bolts are different for different 's. They need to be treated
separately should one look for the isoperimetric inequalities of a
certain type albeit they can only be found numerically.
Eguchi-Hanson 
Four dimension 
For the Eguchi-Hanson metric () the 3-volume of a
constant -slice hypersurface is
 
and the 4-volume enclosed within it 
 
giving
 
The isoperimetric inequality is then
 
This sits precisely in the middle of the extremes of flat space and
Taub-Nut. Note that all three spaces are self-dual. It would be
interesting to investigate the isoperimetric inequalities in other
self-dual spaces in four dimensions which, however, is beyond the scope of this
paper.
Arbitrary dimension 
Recall that the Eguchi-Hanson metric () was written using the
convention that  and hence  has a period of
.  The area of the constant- hypersurface and
the volume enclosed by it are respectively
 
and
 
and hence
 
giving the isoperimetric inequality for the Eguchi-Hanson metric to be
 
For  which in this convention has the volume of
the unit sphere  divided by , the isoperimetric
inequality ( ) reads
 
This is just  times the  dimensional
Minkowski's inequality () in flat space. This is therefore
always somewhere in the middle of flat space and Taub-Nut. Note that
this inequality illustrates another fundamental difference between the
Eguchi-Hanson case and the Schwarzschild and Taub-Bolt cases than
found in terms of number of infilling solutions. In the latter two
cases  is zero at the bolt whereas in this case 
blows up at the bolt. The lower bound of () comes from
. This explains () immediately
via the periodicity of the fibre.
Conclusion 
In this paper we studied the Dirichlet problem for cohomogeneity one
Ricci-flat metrics whose principal orbits are  bundles over
compact Einstein spaces. We then investigated the subsequent
isoperimetric inequalities. In the case of trivial bundles the
Ricci-flat solutions are the Schwarzschild metrics for arbitrary
choices of the compact Einstein base. In the case of non-trivial
bundles the base spaces are required to be Einstein-Kahler and
solutions exist only in even dimensions. The resulting Ricci-flat
solutions can be classified using their 4-dimensional analogues: the
Eguchi-Hanson, the Taub-Nut and the Taub-Bolts. All of these metrics
can be topologically classified according to the presence and absence
of singular orbits, i.e., bolts or nuts. With the correct periodicity
of the -fibre, bolts and nuts can be made regular and hence can
be included into the complete metric. In the case of Taub-Nut one
further requires the Einstein-Ka hler base to be complex projective
space.

When the boundary  is a non-trivial bundle of dimension three,
it is possible to find explicit 4-dimensional Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt
solutions exactly by treating the problem as a system of two bivariate
equations. However, these equations become rather complicated as one
goes higher in the ladder of dimensionality making a case-by-case
study rather difficult and impossible analytically. This problem can
be circumvented by using a general approach involving differential
equations and polynomials which together provide a unified way of
treating the Taub-Nut and all Taub-Bolts (including those for which
) in arbitrary dimension. This method also makes their
topologically different characters rather distinct. Such an approach
is possible because Ricci-flatness effectively reduce the problem to
the one-variable problem of squashing, i.e., involving the ratio of
the two radii of  rather than their separate absolute values.
The Taub-Nut infilling solution is unique and the Taub-Bolt infilling
solution is double-valued in all dimensions and do not depend on
details like the choice of base and the periodicity of the 
fibre. The upper limit on the squashing for the boundary  to
admit a Taub-Nut infilling is given by a simple function of
dimension. In the case of Taub-Bolts, however, we are not so
lucky. Upper limits on squashing, although a function of dimension
only need be worked out for each dimension (and for each possible
values of ) separately which is a straightforward task however. In
the case that  is a trivial bundle the infilling Schwarzschild
geometry is double-valued in arbitrary dimension and does not depend
on the choice of the base manifold. The upper limit on the squashing
for  to admit Schwarzschild solutions is a simple function of
dimension. One may therefore guess that the origin of non-uniqueness
is geometric and is related to the presence of a singular orbit of the
group action, i.e., a bolt. This is indeed the case. However, the
presence of a bolt acts as a necessary condition only. It is not a
sufficient condition as we found that the possible Eguchi-Hanson
infilling geometry in arbitrary dimension is unique despite the
presence of a bolt. It is worth recalling that the Eguchi-Hanson
metric in four dimensions has a self-dual Riemann tensor. Hence the
set of ordinary differential equations arising from the Einstein
equations is reduced to a first order set and the various scale
factors (here the two radii of the evolving hypersurface) fix the
values of their derivatives uniquely. They, however, are required to
satisfy the constraint equation. The Einstein equation then guarantees
a unique evolution (whether it is regular or non-regular at the origin
is an a posteriori  issue). This is also true for the Taub-Nut in
four dimensions which is self-dual as well. In the presence of a
cosmological constant the Taub-Nut in four dimensions becomes
Taub-Nut-(anti)de Sitter which obviously does not have a self-dual
Riemann tensor. However, it has a self-dual Weyl tensor which reduces
the system to first order and thus the above comments apply. The
condition on the boundary data to have a self-dual Taub-Nut-AdS
solution has been discussed in detail in. The infilling
geometries were found as exact analytic functions of the boundary data
despite the presence of a cosmological constant which involves the two
radii rather than their squashing. In the case of Taub-Bolt-AdS the
number of solutions can be as high as ten which has been shown in
.

In the case of trivial bundles, infilling Schwarzschild solutions were
obtained by finding the two masses of the black holes as analytic
functions of the two radii (effectively their squashing). To our
knowledge this is the first study of this kind of higher dimensional
Schwarzschild. With the relatively recent work on the negative mode of
higher dimensional Schwarzschild in a finite cavity, this
provides a straightforward generalisation of the results obtained in
four dimensions. Since we have obtained the two masses of the black
holes as exact, analytic functions of the cavity radius and
temperature, our study provides a basis for further exact
semi-classical computations of black hole thermodynamics and dynamics
as all classical quantities can be evaluated from the geometry exactly
as functions of the cavity radius and its temperature. As one would
expect, the introduction of a cosmological constant would also make
the problem rather non-trivial. It is indeed the case. However, it has
been shown in that in four dimensions there are two
infilling Schwarzschild-AdS solutions in a finite isothermal cavity
with positive and negative specific heats. It remains to see how this
picture changes in higher dimensions and whether explicit solutions
for infilling geometries are possible. These will be reported
elsewhere.

We show that for all infilling solutions above, including those
occurring in pairs, the boundary is necessarily convex. This answers
the question posed by one of the authors at the Samos Meeting on
Cosmology, Geometry and Relativity, 1998 of whether
convexity can be applied as a criteria for selecting solutions if the
boundary admits more than one infilling geometry (of the same
type). We show that convexity cannot play such a role for Ricci-flat
spaces admitting  actions in general.  Using a relatively recent
theorem by Reilly, we find that convexity gives a lower
bound of the Euclidean action for each infilling solution through the
-volume of  and the -volume of the infilling
solutions .

Finally we have discussed the analogues of Minkowski's inequality and
found some interesting results. They can be grouped into two
classes. In one class we have the Taub-Nut and the Eguchi-Hanson
spaces. We found that the analogue of (flat-space's) Minkowski's
inequality for the Taub-Nut in arbitrary dimension is just the
opposite of Minkowski's inequality in that dimension. The
Eguchi-Hanson is found to lie in the middle in that its inequality has
the same sense   as that of flat-space Minkowski and is
 times the latter in  dimensions. We have
explained why this happens. The other class consists of the
Schwarzschild and the Taub-Bolt. In either case, the two infilling
geometries, although topologically equivalent, are strikingly
dissimilar in their isoperimetric inequalities. We have been able to
find the inequalities explicitly in the case of the Schwarzschild
solutions. The two inequalities are "connected" in that one is given
by being equal or greater than some value and the other by the
opposite of this inequality. Interestingly the isoperimetric
inequality for the larger mass stable black hole solution which has a
positive specific heat is always within Minkowski's bound. In
gravitational thermodynamics hot flat space is taken as the background
for the Schwarzschild calculations and hence this observation may have
some important thermodynamic consequences. For the Taub-Bolt the
nature of the polynomials involved prohibits one to obtain the
inequalities exactly, and also the two inequalities are not
"connected". They both, however, have the same sense   in that
they are given by being equal or less than some values. We have
obtained analytic expressions in a form from which it is
straightforward to find the approximate inequalities (for any choice
of base manifold  and for any value of the periodicity )
numerically should one need to know them. Note that both of the
inequalities obey the bound provided by their nut counterpart, i.e.,
by the Taub-Nut. Therefore the above comments about the flat space and
the Schwarzschild equally apply for the Taub-Nut and Taub-Bolt
solutions.



Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank John Barrow, Don Page, Simon Ross, Marika
Taylor and James York for useful remarks. Special thanks belong to
Christoph Galfard and Sakura Schafer-Nameki for translation. MMA was
supported by awards from the Cambridge Commonwealth Trust, the
Overseas Research Scheme and DAMTP.

Trinomial Equations 
In this appendix we describe the solution to the general trinomial
equation following Birkeland. We write the generic
trinomial equation in the form
 
where  and  are coefficients, in general complex, and
. Define
 
Two possibilities can occur depending on whether  or
.
 
Define
 
The  roots are given by
 
 
where  is an arbitrary constant and
 
and
 
are the higher order hypergeometric functions of order  in
general(When , 's reduce to
hypergeometric functions of order .) :
 
in which the Pochhammer symbol has been used:  stands for
. Also here
 
and 
 
Now define 
 
Under the condition , the remaining  roots are
 
 
where
 
and
 
in which
 
and  is the same as before.

The expansions () and () converge for 
. They will diverge for  and hence the letter is
treated separately.
 
The roots
for  are given by higher order hypergeometric function of
the variable . Defining
 
all of the  roots are given by
 
in which
 
and  is an arbitrary constant as before.

The 's here are hypergeometric functions of order  with the
explicit form:
 
in which
 
where  is the same as before.
 99 
M. M. Akbar
"Classical Boundary-value Problem in Riemannian Quantum Gravity and
Taub-Bolt-anti de Sitter Geometries,"
[arXiv:gr-qc/0301007].
M. M. Akbar and P. D. D'Eath,
"Classical Boundary-value Problem in Riemannian Quantum Gravity and
Self-dual Taub-NUT-(anti)de Sitter Geometries," 
Nucl. Phys. B 648  (2003) 397
[arXiv:gr-qc/0202073].

A. Awad and A. Chamblin,
"A Bestiary of Higher Dimensional Taub-NUT-AdS Spacetimes,"
Class. Quant. Grav.  19  (2002) 2051
[arXiv:hep-th/0012240].

W. N. Bailey (1935). Generalised Hypergeometric Series 
(Cambridge University Press, UK).

F. A. Bais and P. Batenburg,
"A New Class of Higher-Dimensional Kaluza-Klein Monopoles and
Instanton Solutions,"
Nucl. Phys. B 253  (1985) 162.


 S. Barnard, and J. M. Child (1936). Higher Algebra 
(Macmillan, India).

 L. Be rard-Bergery,
"Sur de nouvelles varie te s riemanniennes d'Einstein",
Institut E lie Cartan  , 6  , 1-60.

J. D. Brown, J. Creighton and R. B. Mann,
"Temperature, Energy And Heat Capacity Of Asymptotically Anti-De Sitter Black Holes,"
Phys. Rev. D 50  (1994) 6394
[arXiv:gr-qc/9405007].

 G. Belardinelli (1960). Fonctions
Hyperge ome triques de Plusieurs Variables et
Re solution Analytique des E quations
 Alge briques Ge ne rales  (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).


 R. Birkeland,
"U ber die Auflo sung algebraischer Gleichungen durch
hypergeometrische Funktionen,"
Math. Zeitschrift 26 (1927) 565-578.

H. W. Braden, B. F. Whiting and J. W. York,
"Density of States for the Gravitational Field in Black Hole Topologies,"
Phys. Rev. D 36  (1987) 3614.

E. Calabi,
" Me triques ka hle riennes et fibre s holomorphes,"

Ann. Sci. E cole Norm. Sup. (4)  12   (1979), no. 2 269-294.
S. Cotsakis and G. W. Gibbons,
"Mathematical And Quantum Aspects Of Relativity And Cosmology. Proceedings, 2nd Samos Meeting On Cosmology, Geometry And Relativity,
Pythagoreon, Samos, Greece, August 31-September 4, 1998,"
Berlin, Germany: Springer (2000) 251 p .

J. M. Charap and J. E. Nelson,
"Surface Integrals And The Gravitational Action,"
J. Phys. A 16  (1983) 1661.

A. Eagle
"Series for All the Roots of a Trinomial Equation," 
Amer. Math. Monthly  46  (1939) 422.

T. Eguchi and A. J. Hanson,
"Self-dual Solutions to Euclidean Gravity,"
Annals Phys.  120  (1979) 82.

   
D. Z. Freedman and G. W. Gibbons, "Remarks on Supersymmetry and
Ka hler Geometry", Superspace and Supergravity  
eds. S. W. Hawking and M. Rocek (Cambridge University Press) 449-450
(1981).

G. Gibbons and S. A. Hartnoll,
"A gravitational instability in higher dimensions,"
Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 064024
[arXiv:hep-th/0206202].

G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking,
"Classification of Gravitational Instanton Symmetries,"
Commun. Math. Phys.  66  (1979) 291.


G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking,

Phys. Rev. D 15  (1977) 2752.


J. P. Gregory and S. F. Ross,
"Stability and the Negative Mode for Schwarzschild in a Finite Cavity,"
Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 124006
[arXiv:hep-th/0106220].


D. J. Gross, M. J. Perry and L. G. Yaffe,
"Instability of Flat Space at Finite Temperature,"
Phys. Rev. D 25  (1982) 330.

S. W. Hawking,
"Gravitational Instantons,"
Phys. Lett. A 60  (1977) 81.


D. Hilbert and S. Cohn-Vossen (1952). Geometry and the Imagination 
(Chelsea Publishing Company, New York).

D. N. Page,
"Taub-Nut Instanton with an Horizon,"
Phys. Lett. B 78  (1978) 249.


D. N. Page and C. N. Pope,
"Inhomogeneous Einstein Metrics on Complex Line Bundles,"
Class. Quant. Grav.  4  (1987) 213.

R. C. Myers and M. J. Perry,
"Black Holes in Higher Dimensional Space-Times,"
Annals Phys.  172  (1986) 304.

 
T. Regge and C. Teitelboim, "Role Of Surface Integrals In The
Hamiltonian Formulation Of General Relativity," Annals Phys. 88  (1974) 286.

T. Regge and C. Teitelboim,
"Improved Hamiltonian for General Relativity,"
Phys. Lett. B 53  (1974) 101.

R. C. Reilly,
"Geometric Applications of the Solvability of Neumann Problems on a
Riemannian Manifold," Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 75 (1980), no. 1, 23-29.
M. M. Taylor-Robinson,
"Higher Dimensional Taub-Bolt Solutions and the Entropy of Noncompact  Manifolds," arXiv:hep-th/9809041.

L. J. Slater,
(1966). Generalised Hypergeometric Functions 
(Cambridge).

B. Sturmfels,
"Solving Algebraic Equations in Terms of -hypergeometric
Series,"
Discrete Mathematics 210 (2000) 171-181.

J. W. York,
"Black Hole Thermodynamics and the Euclidean Einstein Action,"
Phys. Rev. D 33  (1986) 2092.

J. W. York,
"Role Of Conformal Three Geometry In The Dynamics Of Gravitation,"
Phys. Rev. Lett.  28  (1972) 1082.






