
 
F  
  
 
R  
Z  
C_(0)  
g  

N. Couchoud 

Laboratoire de Physique Theorique et Hautes Energies
Unite mixte du CNRS et des Universites de Paris VI et Paris VII,
UMR 7589.  

Universite Pierre et Marie Curie,  Paris VI 

4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris CEDEX 05, France 

couchoud@lpthe.jussieu.fr 



Laboratoire de Physique Theorique de l'Ecole Normale Superieure
Unite mixte du CNRS et de l'Ecole Normale Superieure,
UMR 8549.  

24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris CEDEX 05, France 

couchoud@lpt.ens.fr 
 


We review some facts about  branes in 
 with a Neveu-Schwarz background, and consider the case of Ramond-Ramond
backgrounds. We compute the spectrum of quadratic fluctuations in the
low-energy approximation and discuss the open-string geometry.
 
Anti-de Sitter branes with Neveu-Schwarz and Ramond-Ramond backgrounds 
 LPTHE-?? 
 LPTENS-03/03 
 0301195   

Introduction 
It was argued in that a "compactification" a la
Randall-Sundrum can be implemented in string theory by D5-branes in
the near-horizon geometry of D3-branes. One thus obtains generically
an  brane in . As 
has a nonzero Ramond-Ramond (RR) background field, one is led to
consider, more generally,  geometries with nonzero RR
fluxes.

A simple case is the  brane in ,
because the setup with RR backgrounds is S-dual to the well-known
setup with Neveu-Schwarz backgrounds, so we will consider that case
here. After computing the SLSU(2) content of the
spectrum, we study the open string geometry of the brane. One reason
to study it is the fact, first noticed in, and conjectured
to be general at least in the probe brane limit, that the
anti-de-Sitter and sphere radii are the same, which, in the case of
the Karch-Randall setup, would make difficult the
construction of a realistic model from it. So, we compute the
effective radii of the D-brane. We find that:
 
The SLSU(2) content of the spectrum is the same in
the NS and RR cases, which is expected from S-duality.
As in the NS case, the two radii are equal.
Contrary to the NS case, where the common radius is equal to the
  radius of the bulk , the common radius in the RR
  case can take any value.

The fact that the radii are equal can be shown to be a consequence of
supersymmetry (cf). More precisely, this seems to be linked
with extended supersymmetry, where the R-symmetry group is the
isometry group of a sphere. So one can hope to obtain realistic brane
worlds from Randall-Sundrum only from 
supersymmetry.

This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we recall some facts
about the Neveu-Schwarz case. The novel results of this article are in
section 3. For the reader's convenience, we include the proof of the
SL symmetry of the low-energy action of the D3-brane in the
appendix, with the transformations of the fields.

A reminder of  D-branes in 
with pure Neveu-Schwarz background 
Notations 
We parametrize  with coordinates such that the metric
and the NS two-form read:
 
and the dilaton is a constant .

Symmetric D-branes in this geometry are hypersurfaces with
 and , so their geometry is 
 with induced radii  and . They can be
stabilized by an appropriate electromagnetic field:
 

Their low-energy effective action is given by the Dirac-Born-Infeld
plus Wess-Zumino (DBI-WZ) action, which in the most general case reads
 
where . (As  will be zero in
this whole article, it will not be mentioned again.)

Quantized charges 
There are two quantized charges:
 


is an integer because of Dirac quantization. It can be interpreted as
the D-string charge of the D3-brane.
The F-string charge should, of course, also be an integer; since
F-strings couple with the NS two-form, this charge reads
 
the explicit form of  is given in the appendix.
Notice that these facts are for any D3-brane with topology .

In our case, one has  and
.
(Notice that the quantization condition given in is
true only in the small  limit.)  The fact that these quantities
are quantized means two things:
 
The set of possible positions for the branes is discrete; in
particular, the  parameter can have only a finite number of
values.
The fluctuations of the branes must be compatible with these
quantization conditions; this implies the stability of the branes (see
) and some restrictions on the spectrum.
It also implies a restriction of the SL symmetry group of the
DBI-WZ action to the S-duality group SL, which is precisely
the subgroup of SL which preserves the quantization. This
SL is conjectured to be an exact symmetry of the full string
theory.

Quadratic fluctuations 
The spectrum of quadratic fluctuations was computed in.
They are obtained by taking
 
and expanding the action up to quadratic terms in ,
 and . The expansion begins with two linear terms that
are proportional to , which is
zero because of the quantization condition, and 
, which is zero if the electromagnetic
potential behaves well at infinity because  is topologically
trivial.

The quadratic terms read:
 
where  is the  metric with radii 1, and
indices are raised with it.

It is then easy to find the SLSU(2) content of the
spectrum, which is explicitly given in, where it is also
shown that it agrees with the results of conformal field theory
(except for the brane-dependent cut-off on the allowed angular
momenta).

 D-branes in 
with RR background 
The background 
The RR background is obtained from the NS background by the following
S-duality transformation: ; ; 
and , where  (this corresponds to
 in equation S-transf ). It is shown in
the appendix that  is then transformed into . Thus,
the quantum numbers  become , which means that D-string
and F-string charge are exchanged.

The fields obtained this way are
 

The string metric is also changed by this transformation: since the
Einstein metric  is invariant, the string metric
becomes . In what follows, we redefine
.

Quadratic fluctuations 
Since the S-duality transformation is a symmetry of the equations of
motion deduced from the low-energy action, it is expected that the
SLSU(2) content of the spectrum be the same as in the
previous section. Anyway, it is useful to check explicitely that
S-duality works properly in that case.

To do this, we expand the action action  in the fluctuations as
in section . As in the NS case, the linear terms disappear.

At the first look, the quadratic terms look messy, since ,
,  and  are coupled in all
possible ways, contrary to the NS case. However, by taking
 
the quadratic terms read
 
The similarity with equation quadNS  implies that the
SLSU(2) content of the spectrum is the same, as
expected.

As is well-known, in the NS case, the exact spectrum, as determined
from CFT, has a brane-dependent cut-off: the maximal allowed spin is
half of the magnetic charge . If S-duality is true, we expect that
in the RR case the maximal allowed spin is half of the electric
charge. Such a result could not be found directly, since we have no
sigma-model for the world-sheet of strings with a nonzero RR
background.

The effective metric 
As is well-known, for any D-brane without RR backgrounds, the
fields on the brane can be considered as coupled to an effective
metric (open string metric) given by the formula
 
where the index  means symmetrizing the matrix. In the case of the
 D-brane in , it was noticed in
 that both radii are equal to  independently of the
position of the brane, although the induced radii depend on it and can
be very different of each other.

It is interesting to see whether there is, in the RR case, a notion of
effective metric with such properties. From the fluctuations found in
the previous section, it is clear that the effective geometry is
 with equal radii. The absolute normalization of
these radii cannot be deduced from the previous calculations only.

A way to find it is to T-dualize our setup along a dimension
orthogonal to  to obtain an 
 D-brane in . The nonzero resulting
background fields are the following (with  the additional dimension):
 
the dilaton is, as previously, a constant, and the electromagnetic
field is the same. It is then easy to see that the WZ term of the
action is left unchanged (except for the fact that  is
replaced by ), so that all additional terms come from the
determinant in the DBI term. 

After some straightforward calculation, one finds that the quadratic
terms of the action are essentially the same as in eq. quadR ,
except for the following facts:
 
 is replaced by .
 is replaced by .
More importantly, new terms are added inside the bracket:
 
From these new terms, one immediately obtains that the absolute
normalization of the  effective radius is
 
It is easy to check that this is what one finds from the formula
effmet  without any correction.

So, the situation is different from the NS case, since the radius
depends on the position of the brane, and can take any value, which
seems to contradict S-duality. However, as S-duality is a symmetry of
the equations of motion, and not of the action, this is not
surprising.

In particular, in the limit , one obtains an
infinite radius, i.e.  flat space. The question whether this
could lead to a realistic brane universe would certainly be
interesting to investigate.

I thank C. Bachas for long discussions and carefully reading the
manuscript. I also thank S. Ribault and P. Windey for useful
discussions.

SL symmetry of the D3-brane 
We include here, for the reader's convenience, the proof of the
SL symmetry of the low-energy effective action of the
D3-brane. We essentially follow the lines of.

For the antisymmetric symbol, we use the convention
. (With this convention,  is
not  a tensor.)

The Born-Infeld and Wess-Zumino terms of the action read:
 
where  and  is the
Einstein metric. The equation of motion can be written ,
where
 
 

We want to show that there is an SL symmetry acting as:
 
To do this, we consider the infinitesimal transformations
 
and we want to show that
 

The  term is trivial.

Noticing that
 
it is easy to show that the  term is what we expect.

After a straightforward calculation, the  term reads
 
Using the commutativity of the partial derivatives and the symmetry
properties of the  symbol, we obtain
 
The antisymmetric part of  reads
 
and one has, for any matrix ,
 
so that
 
and finally , which is what we want.

 999 
A. Karch and L. Randall, Localized gravity in string theory ,
87 2001 061601  [0105108 ].

C. Bachas and M. Petropoulos, Anti-de-Sitter D-branes ,
02 2001 025  [0001199 ].

C. Bachas, M. Douglas and C. Schweigert, Flux stabilization of
D-branes , 05 2000 048  [0003037 ].

M. Petropoulos and S. Ribault, Some remarks on anti-de Sitter
D-branes , 07 2001 036  [0105252 ].

G.W. Gibbons and D.A. Rasheed, Electric-magnetic duality
rotations in non-linear electrodynamics , 454 1995 185 
[9506035 ].

G.W. Gibbons and D.A. Rasheed, SL(2,) invariance of non-linear
electrodynamics coupled to an axion and a dilaton ,
365 1996 46 , [9509141 ].

M.B. Green, M. Gutperle, Comments on three-branes ,
377 1996 28 , [9602077 ].



