



Primordial fluctuations in bulk inflaton model 
Kazuya Koyama, Keitaro Takahashi 

Department of Physics, University of Tokyo 

7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan 


 

An inflationary brane model driven by a bulk inflaton with exponential 
potential is proposed. We find a family of exact solutions that describe
power-law inflation on the brane. These solutions enable us to derive  
exact solutions for metric perturbations analytically. By calculating 
scalar and tensor perturbations, we obtain a spectrum of primordial 
fluctuations at 
the end of the inflation. The amplitudes of scalar and tensor 
perturbations are enhanced in the same way if
the energy scale of the inflation is sufficiently higher than the 
tension of the brane. Then the relative amplitude of scalar and 
tensor perturbations is not suppressed even for high-energy inflation. 
This is a distinguishable feature from the inflation model driven by 
inflaton on the brane where tensor perturbations are suppressed for 
high-energy inflation.  We also point out that massive Kaluza-Klein 
modes are not negligible at high-frequencies on 3-space of our 
brane. 





Introduction 


Higher dimensional formulation is necessary for theories such as 
superstring and M theory. All these theories are confronted
with a problem that our universe seems to be four-dimensional, which
is conventionally coped with compactifications of the extra dimensions.
Braneworld model where our universe is a four-dimensional 
subspace in a higher dimensional spacetime, is an epoch-making scenario because
it broke the conventional idea that the extra dimensions must be compact and small. 
In this scenario, ordinary matter fields are confined on the brane, while graviton 
can propagate through the extra dimensions. Thus higher-dimensional feature of 
spacetime must emerge in the nature of gravity.

In the early universe, inflation can amplify vacuum fluctuation of Kalzua Klein modes 
as well as a massless mode. Thus inflation is a powerful tool to probe the extra dimensions.
Inflation can occur by the dynamics of inflaton either on the 
brane or in the bulk. The former model has been investigated by many authors
and it has been known that inflation occurs basically in the same way as the
ordinary four-dimensional universe. On the other hand, there have been rather few
study of the latter model. One of the difficulties is that one should treat the dynamics
of the bulk inflaton including the back-reaction to the bulk geometry.
Kobayashi et al. dealed with
a bulk inflaton by using slow-roll approximation, which corresponds to increasing
bulk cosmological constant effectively. 
Himemoto et al. included the dynamics of
an inflaton in the bulk perturbatively in terms of  and  
where  is the Hubble scale on the brane,  is the inflaton mass and  is the 
curvature radius of the Anti-de Sitter bulk, respectively. They showed that 
the inflaton in the bulk can mimic the 4D inflaton dynamics at low energies.
However, the dynamics of the inflaton at high energies is still unsolved. 
Another difficulty is the analysis of the
perturbations in this model. In order to calculate the 
curvature perturbation generated in the inflation, we should consistently 
take into account metric perturbations. In the 5D spacetime with 
scalar field, it is quite a complicated issue. Hence only the perturbation
of the inflaton was considered by neglecting metric perturbations. 
So far, to our knowledge, there has been no progress on this issue. 

In this paper we propose a new model where dynamics of inflaton can be 
exactly solved including the back-reaction to the bulk spacetime even at high-energies. 
We deal with a bulk scalar field with exponential potential.
This type of scalar field arises from a sphere reduction in M theory or string
theory. Cosmological solutions in this model were investigated in
Ref. In Ref.,
it was pointed out that various inflationary scenarios can be realized in this 
model. In this paper, we consider a inflation model driven by bulk 
potential energy. A remarkable thing is that the metric perturbations in this 
model can be exactly solved. Then we can consistently 
calculate the primordial fluctuations 
and examine a feature of bulk inflaton model 
which should be compared with conventional 4D models or inflation models driven by
inflaton on the brane. 
Because the calculation of the perturbations
involves rather lengthy derivations, we do not present detailed analysis
here. Complete treatment of cosmological perturbations is presented in an 
accompanied paper.  

This paper is organized as follows. In section  we
give a family of background solution. Based on this, we calculate cosmological 
perturbations and show that both scalar and tensor perturbations are described
by 5D massless scalar field in section .
In section , we investigate the quantum fluctuations of 5D massless 
field. A spectrum of primordial fluctuations at the end of the inflation 
is presented in section . Section is devoted to discussions.




Background spacetime 


We start from the five-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action with
a bulk scalar field,
 
where  is five-dimensional gravitational constant. 
The potential of the scalar field in the bulk and on the brane are taken to be exponential:
 
Here  is the energy scale of the potential,  is the dilaton coupling 
and we defined 
 
We assume the  symmetry across the brane.

For , the static brane solution was found. 
The existence of the static brane requires tunning between bulk potential
and brane tension known as Randall-Sunrum tunning.
It has been shown that for , we can avoid the presence of the naked 
singularity in the bulk and also ensure the trapping of the gravity. The reality of the dilaton
coupling requires . For , we recover Randall-Sundrum
soltuion. 
The value of , which is not necessarily small, represents a deviation from the 
Randall-Sundrum tuning. This deviation yields an inflation on the brane.

We assume a solution of the form;
 
Then five-dimensional Einstein equations and the equation of motion for the scalar field 
give the equation for  and ;
 
 
 
where prime denotes the derivative with respect to .
Thanks to the Bianchi identity, one of the above three equations
are not independent. 
Equation for  and  are also obtained as 
 
 
 
where dot denotes the derivative with respect to . 
Again one of three equations are not independent. 

The solution for  and  can be easily found as 
 
where 
 
and a conformal time  is defined as 
 
We should notice that power-law inflation occurs on the brane for .
Thus in the rest of the paper we shall assume .

The solutions for  and  can be written as 
 
where the form of  depends on the sign of .
According to the sign of
, solutions for  are obtained as follows:

(1)
 

(2)
 

(3)
 
At the location of the brane 
the solutions should satisfy junction conditions;
 
Then the location of the brane is determined by .
In the following sections, we assume
 for which the potential energy in the bulk 
is negative or zero.


Cosmological perturbations  


In this section we consider perturbations in this background.
The perturbations can be decomposed into scalar, vector and tensor 
perturbations in terms of their properties on the 3-space
at fixed  and  coordinate. 
Taking appropriate gauge fixing conditions, the perturbed metric
and scalar field is give by
 
for scalar perturbations and
 
for vector perturbations and 
 
for tensor perturbations.
Here  and  are transverse vector 
( and ) and 
 is transverse and traceless tensor(
) 
where  is the derivative operator on 3-space .
Although 5D Einstein equations for these perturbations are
rather complicated, the solutions for these perturbations
can be analytically obtained. Because the derivation is very long, 
the detailed analysis will be presented in an accompanied paper 
and we only present important results here.

Introducing canonical variable for scalar perturbations 
 
the second-order perturbed 5D action for gravity plus scalar field
for scalar perturbations can be written as 
 
The junction condition for canonical variable  is 
given by
 
In a similar way, the canonical variables for tensor perturbation is given by
 
Then the second-order perturbed 5D action for tensor perturbations is obtained as
 
The junction condition is given by 
 
These actions are nothing but the action for 5D massless scalar field
where tensor perturbation has two degrees of freedom due to polarization.
Hence both scalar perturbation and tensor perturbation are described by 
5D massless scalar field with Neunmann boundary condition at the barne. 
As in a conventional 4D inflationary cosmology, these perturbations are quantum 
mechanically generated during inflation. Then in the next section, we will 
investigate the quantum fluctuations of the 5D massless scalar field in this 
background spacetime. 

Finally we comment on vector perturbations. In conventional 4D Einstein 
gravity, vector perturbation  is constrained to vanish for vanishing matter
vorticity. In the brane world, the bulk vector perturbation  can support
the vector perturbations on the brane even for vanishing matter vorticity
.  
However, in this background, we can show that the vector perturbations have no 
normalizable zero-mode and do not affect the perturbations at large scales. 
Thus we do not consider the vector perturbations in this paper. 


Quantization of massless scalar field  

In the previous section, the metric perturbations were shown to be described
by a 5D massless scalar field. Thus, we shall investigate the quantum 
fluctuation of the massless scalar field in this background spacetime.
The calculations are essentially the same as those in Ref.where they considered the case for  (see also Ref.).
 
The equation of motion for massless field   is
 
We can use the separation of variables to solve this equation and expand  as,
 
Here  is the annihilation operator and satisfies the following
commutation relation,
 
On the other hand,  and  satisfy the following equations,
 
where  corresponds to the Kaluza-Klein mass.
 In the following subsections, we discuss the solutions for
Eq. () and Eq. () and their properties.



Mode function  z-direction  

Because of  symmetry along the z-direction, the junction condition for
 is
 
With this condition and the commutation relation for , the solution for
Eq. () is completely determined.
In order to know the behavior of the solutions, it is convenient to define
 
Then, Eq. () gives the Schro dinger-like equation for

 
The effective potential is given by
 
where we used the solutions for . The term proportional to 
 arises from the negative potential energy in the bulk.
The explicit form of the potential is determined by the background spacetime but
it can be seen that there is zero mode confined on the brane irrespective of the
background spacetime. We consider the following two cases:


volcano.eps  
Effective potential . (1) and (2) correspond to
the case that  is negative and zero respectively. 



(1)

From (), the effective potential  is
obtained as
 
and is shown in Fig. . 

The equation for  becomes
 
There are zero mode and continuum massive modes with 
.
Massive modes with  are not normalizable and
are not investigated here. The solutions for zero mode and normalizable massive modes are
 
where  and  are associated Legendre functions and
 



(2)

From (), the effective potential  is
obtained as
 
and is shown in Fig. .
The equation for  becomes
 
Again, massive modes with  are not normalizable. 
The solutions for zero mode and normalizable massive modes are
 
where  is the same as Eq. () and  
 
In this case, we can easily calculate the ratio of  
to  on the brane;
 


Mode function  time-direction  

From Eq. () and Eq. (), 
Eq. () becomes
 
We choose the Bunch-Davis vacuum, which coincides with the Minkowski vacuum at high 
frequencies. With this condition and the commutation relation, the solution to
Eq. () is completely determined.
The solutions for zero mode and normalizable massive modes with 
 are
 
where
 


Vacuum expectation value of fluctuations 

Both zero mode and massive mode contribute to the spectrum and 
the vacuum expectation value of massless scalar field will be,
 
But this naive formula is not correct because in the large  and  limit 
 behaves
 
and the -integral diverges logarithmically. This ultra-violet divergence appears
in the five-dimensional field theory even in Minkowski spacetime. Thus we have to
subtract this divergence as following:
 
Then the correct expectation value is,
 
where  and  are
contribution from zero mode and massive mode, respectively.
In the small  limit, each contribution can be written as,
 
 

In order to interpret the results, it should be noted that 
bulk curvature scale and Hubble constant on the brane are 
determined by the bulk potential and the deviation from the RS tuning, respectively.
Thus their ratio,
 
determines the behavior of . For small , we expect
4D physics is recovered because the horizon scale is larger
than the scale of the extra-dimension. On the other hand for large , 
the effects of the bulk could be large. In addition,  determines 
the effective size of the extra dimension defined by
 
where we used Eq. () and ().
For small , the location of the brane  is small, then  is large. For
large ,  is large, then  is small.  

First let us examine the spectrum of the zero mode. 
Fig.2 shows the amplitude of the zero-mode  for . 
The amplitude is enhanced for large . This results can be 
understood as follows. The effective 4D Planck 
scale  on the brane is given by
 
where  and  is the Planck scale for static brane 
.
On the other hand, the Hubble scale at time  is given by
.
Then the vacuum expectation value of the 4D scalar field fluctuations 
 at the horizon might be
 
Now let us consider a mode with 3-wavenumber . This mode crosses the 
horizon at  where .
Then  is given by  
Thus amplitude of fluctuations with  at the horizon is   
 
For a massless mode, this amplitude is frozen at super-horizon
scales. Indeed this is nothing but the dimension-less 
quantity defined by
 
For small ,  becomes unity, then .
Thus the standard 4D theory is recovered. On the other hand,
for large ,  becomes large , then  becomes
small. Then the amplitude of the quantum fluctuations is enhanced.
Hence we conclude that the enhancement of the 0-mode amplitude for large 
 is the result of the smallness of the effective 4D Planck scale at the inflation 
due to the small effective size of the extra-dimension .



massless.eps  
A factor  in the zero mode amplitude () as a
function of  (). Here . 


ratio.eps  
The ratio of the massive mode amplitude to the zero mode amplitude 
().
Here . 

Fig.  is the ratio  as a function of 
for  as an example. 
As is expected, the contribution of massive modes increases with  but 
this ratio is at most. This is due to the existence of the 
mass gap. For large ,  becomes large. In the effective 
potential (), the term proportional to 
which arises from the curvature of the bulk spacetime becomes irrelevant. 
The contribution of the massive modes are determined only 
by the mass gap which is independent of . Indeed, for 
large ,  approaches 
to Eq. () which is the result for no potential term
proportional to  ().
The massive modes are too heavy to be excited by quantum fluctuations
thus the amplitude of the massive modes are suppressed. In addition,
the amplitudes of massive modes do not freeze out at super-horizon scales
and oscillate with decreasing amplitude. Then the spectrum 
becomes blue because the modes with small  stay at super-horizon
scales longer times than the modes with large . This decreasing 
of the amplitude does not depend on the mass for , 
thus all massive modes have the same spectrum. 



Primordial fluctuations in bulk inflaton model  


Now we can compute the spectrum of primordial fluctuations generated
in the bulk inflaton model.
The amplitude of the CMB anisotopy caused by scalar perturbations 
is determined by the curvature perturbations  defined by 
 
The amplitude of the scalar perturbation is then given by
 
On the other hand, the amplitude of the tensor perturbations is given by
 
from Eq. (). Here we take into account the polarization.
At large scales, the zero mode contribution is dominant. Thus we concentrate 
our attention on the zero mode contribution. Because the amplitude of the 
zero-mode is frozen at super-horizon scales, we expect that the amplitude
evaluated at horizon during inflation is directly related to the 
large scale CMB anisotropy.
The zero-mode contribution to the perturbations is written as 
 
where Eq. () and ,  were
used.
The scalar field  can be regarded as a 4D scalar field
if we define  and 
. Then using these effective 4D scalar field, the 
relative amplitude of the scalar and tensor perturbations is written as
 
It would be interesting to compare our model with an inflation model driven 
by inflaton  on the brane with potential . 
We assume that 
the bulk is AdS spacetime. Then it was shown that relative amplitude
of the scalar and tensor perturbations is given by
 
for  where  is the tension of the brane.
Thus for a given potential, the relative amplitude is suppressed for 
.
This is because the enhancement of the scalar perturbations due to 
the rapid expansion  is stronger than the enhancement 
of tensor perturbations due to the normalization in the bulk . 
However in our model, the enhancement of the scalar perturbation 
is not caused by the unconventional expansion law but is caused by 
the normalization in the bulk . Thus such a suppression is absent. 

Let us consider possible constraints on model parameters in our model. 
In our model there are three parameters; dilaton coupling , 
tension of the brane  which determines the effective size 
of the extra-dimension at late times and  which determines 
the energy scale of the inflation. Note that the scale of the
5D Planck scale  is determined by  by 
 with Gev. The dilaton 
coupling determines the spectrum index and relative amplitude
of the scalar and tensor perturbations. 
These quantities will be strongly tested in future observations
and these two observations give consistency check of our model. 
The COBE normalization of the amplitude gives one constraint on
the parameters  and . Thus one free parameter 
is left, which can be taken as . The parameter  determines the 
cut-off frequency of the gravitational waves and the contribution
of the massive modes at high frequencies. It is quite challenging 
problems to observe stochastic gravitational waves at such high 
frequencies. Furthermore, the detailed spectrum of the gravitational 
waves may depend on the way to end the inflation and 
the subsequent evolution of the universe after inflation. 
Yet, it is certainly interesting issues to determine  by the 
observations of gravitational waves. 



Discussions  

In this paper we proposed an inflationary brane model driven by a bulk 
inflaton with exponential potential. A family of exact solutions that describe
power-law inflation on the brane was obtained. We calculated the primordial fluctuations in this model.
Tensor and scalar perturbations were shown to be described by
5D massless scalar field. Then the quantization of the 5D massless field
in this background was done. Using this result, the specturm of the 
primordial fluctuations were calculated. 

We should mention several open questions in our model. First, we need
some mechanism to end the inflation and stabilize the dilaton. 
Although we expect the large scale perturbations are insensitive to the 
details of these mechanism and our results will not be changed, 
they are important problems to be solved. Secondly, 
in order to connect our result with observations accurately, we should
know the subsequent evolution of the perturbations 
. 
It has been shown that at large scales  remains constant
if we can neglect the dark radiation. 
The tensor perturbation  also remains constant at large scales.
Thus the evolutions of  and 
are very simple and our results can be directly used at the horizon re-enter.
However, in order to know the CMB anisotropy, we should know not only
the curvature perturbations  but also the anisotropic stress
induced by bulk gravitational fields which is measured by the difference
between  and . The evolution of this anisotropic stress is still 
uncertain. The evolution of the gravitational waves inside the horizon is also 
unknown. These issues deserve further investigations. 


Acknowledgments 


We would like to thank Daisuke Ida, Tetsuya Shiromizu and Takashi Torii
for fruitful discussions. To complete this work, the discussions during 
the YITP workshop on Extra dimension and Braneworld was useful. 
KK's work and KT's work are supported by Grant-in-Aid 
for JSPS Fellows.


 99 

P. Hor ava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 460  (1996) 506; 475  (1996) 94.

L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83  (1999) 3370. 

L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83  (1999) 4690. 

N. Kaloper,  Phys. Rev. D 60 , 123506 (1999). 

T. Nihei, Phys. Lett. B 465 , 81 (1999).

H.B. Kim, H.D. Kim,  Phys. Rev. D 61 , 064003 (2000).

K. Koyama and J. Soda, Phys. Lett. B 483  (2000) 432.

J. Garriga and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 043523.

S. W. Hawking, T. Hertog and H. S. Reall, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 043501.

S. Nojiri and D. Odintsov, Phys. Lett. B484 , 119 (2000).

R. Maartens, D. Wands, B. A. Bassett and I. Heard, Phys. Rev 
D62 , 041301 (2000).

D. Langlois, R. Maartens and D. Wands, Phys. Lett. B 489  (2000) 259.

S. Mizuno, K. Maeda and K. Yamamoto , hep-ph/0205292.

S. Kobayashi, K. Koyama and J. Soda, Phys. Lett. B 501  (2001) 157.

Y. Himemoto and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 044015.

J. Yokoyama and Y. Himemoto, Phys. Rev. D 64  (2001) 083511.

N. Sago, Y. Himemoto and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002) 024014.

Y. Himemoto, T. Tanaka and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002) 104020.

Y. Himemoto and T. Tanaka, gr-qc/0212114; T. Tanaka and Y. Himemoto, gr-qc/0301010.


M. Cvetic , H. Lu  and C. N. Pope, Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 086004.

A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Phys. Rev. D 60  (1999) 086001.

O. Seto and H. Kodama, Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 123506.

H. Ochiai and K. Sato, Phys. Lett. B 503  (2001) 404.

S. Kobayashi and K. Koyama, JHEP 12  (2002) 056.

K. Takahashi and K. Koyama, in preparation.

H. A. Bridgman, K. A. Malik, D. Wands 
Phys. Rev. D 63  (2001) 084012.

G. F. Giudice, E. W. Kolb, J. Lesgourgues and A. Riotto,
Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 083512.

A. V. Frolov and L. Kofman, hep-th/0209133. 

S. Mukohyama, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 084015.

H. Kodama, A. Ishibashi and O. Seto, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 064022 .

R. Maartens, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 084023.

D. Langlois, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 126012.

C. van de Bruck, M. Dorca, R. H. Brandenberger and 
A. Lukas, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 123515.

K. Koyama and J. Soda, Phys. Rev. D 62  (2000) 123502;
K. Koyama and J. Soda, Phys. Rev. D 65  (2002) 023514; 
K. Koyama, Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 084003; and references therein.

D Langlois, R Maartens, M Sasaki, D Wands,
Phys. Rev. D 63 , (2001) 084009.





