


 
& 

 

() 
Eq. () 
Eqs. () 
tr  
Tr  
STr  
 
   
#1 #2  
fig. () 
() 
Eq. () 
 
 
ad  



 
& 
  
*  
 
#1 #1 

() 
Eq. () 


12  
p  
P  
PPS 
d  
tr  
Tr  
STr  
T  
1l  
/  
 



op   
 
 
 
^  
 
 
^+^- 
p  
K^0 
K^0  
 
  
  
  
CP /   


im  

1 4  
M  
^+ 
^- 
A  
 
d_z 
 
 
E  
 
B  
F  
 
 
G 
 
  
M^ 
  ^-1  
V   
 
T   
R   


Z   
H   
C   
N   
L_0 2  
i   






 





 
 
 
1.5 







0 in
0 in
0.75 in
6.5 true in
8.7 true in



 
INLO-PUB-02/03

FAU-TP3-03-02


.5 truecm
Doubly Periodic Instantons and their Constituents 


0.5 truecm
 
C. Ford   and
J. M. Pawlowski  


0.5 truecm

Instituut-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics

Niels Bohrweg 2, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
 
ford@lorentz.leidenuniv.nl 

 
                                            
0.5 truecm
Institut fur Theoretische Physik III,
Universitat Erlangen

Staudtstrasse 7,
D-91058 Erlangen, Germany 

jmp@theorie3.physik.uni-erlangen.de 
 




0.5 true cm


.7 truecm  
  Using the Nahm transform we investigate doubly periodic charge one
   instantons with radial symmetry. Two special points where
  the Nahm zero modes have softer singularities are identified as the
  locations of instanton core constituents. For a square torus this
  constituent picture is closely reflected in the action density.  In
  rectangular tori with large aspect ratios the cores merge to form
  monopole-like objects. For particular values of the parameters the
  torus can be cut in half yielding two copies of a twisted charge
   instanton.  These findings are illustrated with plots of
  the action density within a two-dimensional slice containing the
  constituents.



Introduction 

Monopoles are at the heart of various kinds of electric-magnetic
duality in extended super Yang-Mills theory, which have led to an
impressive body of quantitative results.  The role of monopoles and
other topological constructs in non-supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory
is less clear.  Using such objects, particularly monopoles and
vortices, models of confinement and chiral symmetry breaking have been
advanced.  A weakness of these models is that classical Yang-Mills
does not possess monopole solutions, rather they have instanton
solutions.  However, in recent years it has become clear that periodic instantons have a substructure that can be identified
with monopoles and other extended objects.  In particular, charge one
 calorons (finite temperature instantons) can be viewed as
bound states of  monopole constituents
.  Provided the 'size' of the instanton
is larger than the period (or inverse temperature) tubes of action
density form. These can be identified with the worldlines of the
constituent monopoles.  It would be interesting to extend these
results to higher charge sectors and higher tori, i.e.  more than one
period so that we are considering instantons on ,
.  Indeed, lattice based numerical studies indicate that doubly
periodic instantons () have remarkable properties including
fractionally charged solutions, vortex-like objects and an
exponentially decaying action density.
None of these attributes are shared by the calorons. Nevertheless, it
would be desirable to have a unified description of calorons and
multiply-periodic instantons and their constituents.

The calorons are best understood within a formalism due to Nahm
.  This is an extension of the ADHM
construction.  Nahm's approach was generalised to other four
manifolds, notably the four-torus, .  Here
it becomes a duality, mapping  charge  instantons on the four
torus to  charge  instantons on the dual torus, 
(defined by inverting the four periods).  The caloron construction and
even ADHM can be understood as a limiting case of the four torus
duality.  One therefore expects that doubly periodic instantons can be
treated in a similar fashion.  In doubly periodic
charge one instantons with radial symmetry in the non-compact 
directions were considered. Under the Nahm transformation they are
mapped to abelian potentials on the dual torus .  Starting
with these rather simple Nahm potentials the original instantons can
be 'recovered' via the inverse Nahm transform.  Technically, this
involves solving certain Weyl-Dirac equations; for each
 one has a different Weyl equation on
. The Weyl zero modes were determined explicitly for a two
dimensional subspace (corresponding to the origin of ).

In a recent letter we used these zero modes to
compute the action density, analytically and numerically, within the
subspace.  We found that there are points in  where
the solution of the Weyl equations have softer singularities.  These
are obvious candidates for constituent locations.  We interpreted
these constituents as overlapping instanton cores. For square
tori our constituent picture correlates closely to the action density.
In this paper more details of the calculations are provided and action
density plots for rectangular tori are presented.  Starting with a
square torus we stretch one of the sides to see how this affects the
cores.  At first they become stretched with the torus.  On further
stretching the cores begin to overlap with periodic copies of
themselves in the short direction to form monopole-like objects much
as in the caloron solutions.  Some of the charge one solutions we
considered can be cut in half yielding two copies of a charge
 instanton.  This procedure is only consistent if the
gauge potential has specific asymptotic boundary conditions which are
analogous to a four torus twist.  Here we argue that the gauge
potential has suitable asymptotics and show that the field strength
decays exponentially.

The paper is organised as follows.  In section 2 the basics of the
Nahm transform are briefly reviewed, and its application to doubly
periodic instantons is discussed.  Sections 3 to 5 deal with the Nahm
potentials, zero modes and constituents corresponding to charge one
instantons with gauge group . Section 6 describes some
technical results regarding Green's function that crop up in field
strength calculations.  Our numerical action density computations are
detailed in section 7.  Section 8 considers charge 
solutions and the asymptotics of the gauge field and field strength
are discussed in chapter 9.



 Nahm Transform for Doubly Periodic Instantons 

Before we specialise to  let us briefly recall how the
Nahm transform is formulated on the four torus(for a string-theoretic approach see).  Start with
a self dual anti-hermitian  potential, , on a
euclidean four-torus with topological charge .  A gauge field on
 is understood to be an  potential which is periodic
(modulo gauge transformations) with respect to 
, the  being the four periods
of the torus. Self-duality is the requirement that
,
and we have taken the convention .  The next step
is to turn the  instanton into a  instanton by adding a
constant  potential, ,
where the  are real numbers.  We can regard the  as
coordinates of the dual torus , , since the shifts
 can be effected via periodic
 gauge transformations.

Now consider the  Weyl operator
 
with  where the  are Pauli
matrices.  Provided certain mathematical technicalities are met
 has 
square-integrable zero modes  with . The
Nahm potential is defined as
 
Here the zero modes are taken to be orthonormal.  Remarkably, 
 is a  instanton on the dual torus with topological charge
.  The associated field strength can be written as follows
) 
The self-duality of  implies 
.  Accordingly,  commutes with
all , from which the self-duality of  follows.
The 'original' gauge potential, , can be recovered by Nahm
transforming 
 
where the
,  are an orthonormal set of zero
modes of

with
.
In other words the four torus Nahm transform is involutive.

Formally, one can obtain the  Nahm transform by taking
two of the periods, say  and , to be infinite.  Given an
 instanton periodic with respect to ,
 its Nahm transform is
 
where the  with  are orthonormal zero modes of
.  Note that we may gauge  and  to zero.  By
assumption the zero modes  are square integrable.  This
does not guarantee that the integrals in () exist.
However, the integrals only diverge at special  values where
the zero modes do not decay exponentially.  The number of these points
turns out to be , i.e. it is determined by the gauge group of the
instanton.  To summarise, the Nahm transform maps doubly periodic
 instantons with topological charge  to self dual 
potentials on the dual torus, , with  singularities.

The dimensionally reduced self-duality equations (or Hitchin
equations) take a particularly simple form in complex coordinates
  
with derivatives ,
.  Combine 
 and  into a complex gauge potential, 
 and 
, and form a 'Higgs' field
out of the remaining components, 
.  The self-duality equations read
 
The reader should be aware that we will occasionally use both the
cartesian  and complex  coordinates in the same equation. The
Nahm transform () is a straightforward limit of the 
version.  The inverse transform is a different matter.  That is, given
a (singular) solution of the Hitchin equations on the dual torus,
, how does one recover the corresponding doubly periodic
instanton?  To our knowledge there is not a mathematically rigorous
treatment of this issue in the literature.  Our approach will be to
study specific simple solutions of the Hitchin equations and
investigate whether the number of normalisable zero modes of
 matches the number of singularities of 
.  When this is the case we can then ask whether the natural
analogue of (), namely
 
provides doubly periodic instantons.




Charge One 

In the one-instanton case the Nahm potential is abelian and the
Hitchin equations reduce to
 
so that  is anti-holomorphic in .  As we shall see,  can
be taken as holomorphic.  Since  is periodic it is an elliptic
function.  It is well known that they have at least two singularities.
We expect the number of singularities to correspond to .  Let us
stick to the simplest case . Thus  will have two simple
poles (The Weyl equations for Nahm potentials with higher
  poles do not admit normalisable zero modes.) .  Consider the ansatz
 
which gives .  It
follows from abhitchin  that  must be harmonic except at two
singularities.  A suitable  satisfies
 
where  is a constant and  are the positions of the
two singularities (we have used translational invariance to shift the
'centre of gravity' of the singularities to the origin).  The delta
functions should be read as periodic (with respect to 
 and ).  Physically, the
Nahm potential describes two Aharonov-Bohm fluxes of strength 
and  threading the dual torus.  They must have equal and
opposite strength to ensure a periodic .  We may assume that
 lies between  and  since it is possible via a
(singular) gauge transformation to shift  by an integer amount
(under such a transformation the total flux through
 remains zero). One can write  explicitly in terms
of Jacobi theta functions (see for example )
 
where  and  are the complex coordinates introduced in
complex .  The theta function is defined as
 
and has the periodicity properties

 and

.
In each cell  has a single zero
located at the centre of the torus ().
We have chosen the constant term in () so that
the integral of  over the dual torus is zero.
This renders  an odd function, .
It is easy to see that inserting () into
() yields a holomorphic  with simple poles
at the fluxes.


What about the Higgs field?  Since we are aiming for an 
instanton it must, like , have two singularities. The
singularities must be at the same two positions as in  or
else we have a total of four singularities which means we are
considering a (rather special)  instanton.  The simplest way to
arrange for  and the Higgs to have singularities at the
same points is to choose them to be proportional
 
where  is a complex constant.  Not all possibilities are
exhausted, since while the poles must coincide the zeroes need not.
This remaining ambiguity corresponds to the freedom to add to  a
complex constant.  However when we insert our Nahm potential into the
Weyl equation such a shift is equivalent to a translation of  and
.  This Nahm potential was derived in via the
ADHM construction.  Here the parameters  and  are
related to the 'size', , of an instanton centred at ,
 
Although we do not directly use the ADHM construction in the present
paper this relation proves useful in interpreting our results.  The
Nahm potential we have described has five parameters; ,
 fixing the flux separations,  the flux strength and
the complex parameter  specifying the Higgs field. Then, with
the four translations in , the corresponding doubly
periodic instanton has a total of nine parameters.

To reconstruct the charge one  instantons corresponding to our
simple Nahm potential we require the two zero modes of the Weyl
operator
 
In addition to the complex coordinates ,  on 
we have introduced two sets of complex coordinates for
; in the 'parallel' directions ,
, and in the 'transverse' non-compact directions
, .  In this paper we shall
concentrate on the special case , i.e. zero Higgs.  This
means that the corresponding instanton will be radially symmetric: the
action density depends on ,  and  only. These
radially symmetric solutions are a seven parameter subset of the
doubly periodic  one-instantons.





Nahm Zero Modes 

From now on we stick to the zero Higgs case (i.e. ).  Even
with this specialisation the Weyl equations are still rather
forbidding.  However, there is one special case which is immediately
tractable: when  the Weyl equation decouples and the two
zero modes have a simple form 
where  are periodic Green's functions satisfying
 
Here we have used both the  and  coordinates in the same
equation; this possibly confusing usage will continue until the end of
section .   has a theta function representation
 
with .  The corresponding
result for  can be obtained via .  The zero
modes have square-integrable singularities at both fluxes: near
 we have
 and
.  Near the other
flux the singularity profiles of the two modes are exchanged in that
 and
.  By virtue
of the second theta function in the numerator of ()
 has a single zero in  at
 (see also
).  Similarly,  has a zero at 
.




Soft zero modes 
When  the Green's functions  do not exist.  This does
not mean there are no zero modes, indeed one can see that
 
are solutions of the  Weyl equation.   has the
expected square-integrable singularity at , but for
,  is zero.  On the other hand
 diverges at  but not at . By
choosing  we have effectively moved the zeroes of the zero
modes to flux locations.  There is another way of doing this; choosing
 brings the zero of 
to the other flux (and similarly for ).  Thus there are two
 values where each Nahm zero mode diverges at only one flux.
We wish to investigate whether these 'soft' points can be interpreted
as the locations of some kind of constituent.


The singularity profiles of  and  are exchanged under
the replacement  suggesting that the
constituents are exchanged under this mapping. That is, if there are
indeed lumps at the two points, then 
swaps the two lumps.  The following result formalises this idea
 
where  is some  gauge transformation.  The proof of
duality  goes as follows: make the change of variables
 in (). The zero mode 
satisfies the same Weyl equation as  except that the
signs of  and the  are flipped.  However, 
does not lie between  and .  Under periodic gauge
transformations  and  are
equivalent up to a constant potential
 
where  and .
Explicitly
 
In the Weyl equation  can be absorbed into  and .
Thus 
 satisfies the same Weyl equation as
.

 

Green's Function Approach 
For the  transform, the original field strength can be written
 
and as with the corresponding expression for 
, equation associateF , the self-duality of 
is manifest because the Green's function 
commutes with all .
Starting directly from the inverse Nahm transform () we have
 
where . To get from
() to () we require the derivative of the
Nahm zero modes with respect to the coordinates of 
 
for some  matrix valued
vector field on the four torus, .
This clearly satisfies the equation obtained
by differentiating the Weyl equation, ,
with respect to .
Multiplying modederivative  from the left with  and 
integrating over the dual torus yields
 
which together with equations () and 
() give ().

Our analysis of doubly periodic instantons has been based on the Weyl
equation and the inverse Nahm transform ().  These are
the exact counterparts of four torus equations.  Therefore one might
expect all the results quoted above to carry over directly to
.  There are, however, a number of important
differences between the two cases.  With regard to the
 construction, the Green's function 
 does not commute with the 
matrices.  Away from the  singularities of ,
 commutes with the .  At
the singularities it has source terms which are not proportional to
.  For the  Nahm potential considered in section 3 (as
usual we set )
 
indicating that  does not commute with
 and .

We will show that the naive  limit of
() does not apply, so that 
not being proportional to  does not signal a breakdown of
the inverse Nahm transform.  Starting with the inverse transform
(), the field strength can be written in exactly the
same way as in () except that the integral is over 
 rather than .  The derivative formula
() also applies without modification to the
 zero modes.  What does not carry through is equation
().  Much as in the four torus analysis  can be
determined by multiplying the  analogue of
modederivative  by  and integrating over 
.
 
Naively one would expect the integral on the right hand side to vanish
as  is a (left) zero mode of . However,
this property only leads to vanishing 
 for sufficiently smooth functions
.  In t2R   and the Green's function
 have coincident singularities.

Retaining the integral yields a modified field strength formula
 
with
 
This object does commute with the  consistent with
self-duality.  The field strength formula fF  is similar to those
one can derive for  instantons and calorons via the ADHM
formalism.

To make these considerations more concrete we see how they apply to
our simple  Nahm potential. In this case
 
When  this is invertible. The inverse has the form
 
where the  are finite for all  and 
(unless ).
Because of the exponentials
  is singular if  or 
equals .
In the  slice the  have simple integral representations
 
where  are the Green's functions defined in section 4. The
 zero modes of section 4 can be rewritten as follows
 
In fact, these are also valid for .  The modes are
orthogonal and can be normalised by dividing them by ,
where
 
Inserting the zero modes into () enables us to prove that 
 commutes with . This is detailed in 
appendix . One can also show that , 
unlike ,
is well behaved at . As  or  approaches ,
 tends to zero.

We have seen that it is possible to construct the Nahm zero modes out
of objects, , entering the inverse of . The
gauge potential can also be computed from these zero modes. The final
result is very simple
 
where
 
Note that  is dimensionless, real and periodic (with respect to
, ), while  is
dimensionless, complex and periodic up to constant phases.
fullpot  can be checked component-wise (see
appendix ).

We have given closed forms for the  in the special case
. An explicit construct valid beyond this two-dimensional
slice would immediately provide the exact Nahm zero modes and gauge
potential. Note that the Green's functions  are radially
symmetric.  Therefore the functions  and  are as well.
They can be expressed as power series
 




 Field Strength Components 

In section 5 we saw that the Nahm transform singled out two points in
the  slice. This suggests that they may be the locations of
some kind of constituent. As they are isolated points in 
 rather than lines it appears that we are not dealing
with monopole constituents.  Indeed if we take () at face
value the constituents appear to be BPST instantons, one with size
 at , the other
with size  at the second soft
point.  This description shares some features with early attempts to
describe  instantons in terms of  'instanton quarks'
.

To see if this is realised we must compute the field strengths.  This
can be done explicitly in the  slice.  Inserting the power
series () into the ansatz () it is
straightforward to compute  and 

 
The other components are fixed by self-duality, i.e. 
 and .  Both
 and  diverge at , but the field strengths
should not.  A careful analysis of  and  in the
neighbourhood of  shows that the field strengths are well
defined at this point.  Alternatively, one can just note that 
and  are well behaved at the second soft point and invoke
().  Using these results the action density can be
computed
 
From () one can derive integral representations of
 and  where the integrands are expressible in terms of
standard functions.  These representations allow us to plot the action
density within the  slice for different values of the
parameters ,  and . The two periods 
and  can also be varied. However, the physically important
quantity is the ratio of the lengths
 
since scaling identically both lengths equates to a trivial scaling of
the action density:
 
In plots for different  in the equal length
case, , were presented.  There we found that the action density
has either one or two peaks.  A single peak is observed when the two
soft points are quite close or when one size is somewhat larger than
the other. In the latter case the smaller sized instanton dominates.
Even when two peaks are resolved there is quite a strong overlap. In
fact such an overlap is 'necessary' since otherwise the instanton
would have charge two rather than one.  The constituent locations then
correspond to the 'cores' of the overlapping instantons.

Here we also consider rectangular tori with . Without loss of
generality we set  and .  To begin with consider
 where the two constituents are identical. Now
choose .
This means that there is a core at the centre of the torus and another
of equal size at the corners.  Starting with  increase the value
of  thereby stretching the torus in the  direction.

In fig.  the action density is plotted for some values of
 ranging from  to .  The first plot () is just the equal
length case clearly showing two instanton-like peaks exactly at the
expected locations.  The second plot () shows that as
the torus is stretched the two cores become stretched as well; they no
longer have the approximate spherical symmetry of the  case.  On
stretching the torus further the now deformed cores seek to overlap
with the periodic copies of themselves.  This has already started to
happen in the third plot where ; the soft point locations are no
longer maxima of the action density.  Finally, at  the
self-overlap has generated two monopole like objects; the solution has
a very weak dependence on  and there are peaks at two values of
.  Note that the two monopole 'worldlines' do not cross the soft
points.  Increasing  more weakens further the dependence on .
In the limit  a periodic monopole (i.e. a self
dual solution on ) will form.  However, this is a
singular limit.


 
action density  for ,  
  and  for 
. 

What is happening is that the doubly periodic instantons are becoming
more caloron-like (caloron-like objects have been observed recently in
lattice-based approaches ).
It is helpful to recall some of the basic features of the simplest
caloron solutions. An SU(2) caloron with charge one comprises two
monopole constituents separated by a distance 
(taking  to be the compact coordinate).  Here  (there
is no ) determines the mass ratio of the two monopoles.  For
the  problem  suggesting
that the separation of the monopoles should be simply 
for  and  for .
In fig.  we took  and the worldlines
are indeed separated by a half-period.  In fig.  we have
taken  as above but increased  to . The
first plot is the equal length case showing a peak at the centre of
the torus. At the origin of the torus, the location of the larger
constituent, there is a broader but much shallower peak. The second
plot is for  which clearly shows two monopoles.  Moreover, the
distance between them is consistent with . Though the
dependence on  is not quite as weak as for the corresponding plot
of fig. ; away from  more stretching
is required to access the monopole regime. 



 
action density  for ,  
  and  with . 

We have argued that for  at or near to  the constituent core
picture best describes the action density while for larger (or
smaller)  almost static monopole-like objects form.  In that
respect, the instanton core and monopole constituent pictures are
complementary.  However, we have an example displaying features of
both descriptions: 



 
Plot of action density for ,  
,  and .
 
 

Above we plot the action density for , 
 and .  This configuration shows essentially no
dependence on  even though the lengths are equal.  What seems to
have occurred is that the two cores at  and
 have merged into a single monopole.
Unlike in the previous examples the monopole worldline passes through
the soft points.  That there is only one worldline is not inconsistent
with the constituent monopole picture since by virtue of 
the 'second' monopole should be massless. The monopoles observed in
figs.  and  have equal masses in accord with
the symmetric value of .


 Charge One Half 

When  the two instanton cores are identical.  This
has an interesting consequence.  If we choose the constituent
locations so that they are separated by half periods the charge one
instanton can be 'cut' to yield two copies of a charge 
instanton (see also).  This happens when
 is ,
 or ,
see fig. . After cutting we have a twist
 in the half torus.  But to produce a half integer
topological charge another (non-orthogonal) twist is required; this is
most simply achieved with .  Such a twist would have the
novel feature of being associated with the non-compact  and 
directions. Far away from  the potential it must be pure
gauge
 
where .  The non-compact twist translates into a
double valued gauge function,
.

 
When , the
choices ,
 and
,

yield constituent separations
allowing the torus to be cut (dashed line) to
yield charge  instantons.
 

The examples considered in fig.  are all 'doubled' half
instantons.  Here the cut tori are diamond shaped (see fig. 4) apart
from the first  plot, where it is square.  This case has
another interesting feature.  Compare the constituent locations with
the half instanton obtained via , ,
, .  On cutting both yield charge
 instantons on square tori with length .  By
analogy with the four torus case, for a given set of twists and
periods, charge  instantons are expected to be unique up
to translations.  Yet these two cases have different values of ,
one has  where the core picture should work while the other
() is expected to have some monopole characteristics.  As can
clearly be seen from the first plot in fig.  the action
density has maxima at the soft points.  We have computed the 
case and found maxima not  coincident with the soft points.  The
soft points correspond to saddle points of the action density.  But
allowing for translations the two half instantons are identical.  What
seems to be happening is that when  the monopoles are still not
developed, and in this intermediate state there are lumps of action
density which while not at the soft points are identical to those at
the soft points of the  case.  More precisely the two action
densities satisfy
 
The  plot is obtained by a 45 degree rotation  
of the  plot followed by a translation. This reflects the fact that 
the two Nahm potentials are also related by a  degree rotation.


 Asymptotics 

In this section we consider the large  limit of the zero
mode equations, and deduce the large  behaviour of the
gauge potential and field strength.  This allows us to check that the
charge  instantons have the expected properties.  In
particular, we see that the gauge potential has asymptotic behaviour
commensurate with a twist, .  Furthermore, the
exponential decay of the action density is derived.  In fact, all the
 solutions have both the twist and exponential
decay even if they are not 'doubled'  instantons.

When  is much larger than the two periods the zero modes of
 become strongly localised about the two flux
singularities.  In this regime we can approximate the zero modes with
 solutions.  A single flux in  corresponds to
.  The Weyl operator is then
 
When ,  has a  normalisable
zero mode. In the special cases  the normalised modes 
 take rather simple forms:
 
where . For sufficiently large 
we can take
 
and extend the integration region from  to .
For this approximation to work 
it is important that the flux separation 
is less then both dual periods,  and .
This is because we assume that the 'interference'
between the fluxes dominates
the effect of the periodicity for large . 
Note that
 
Inserting the zero modes ()
into the inverse Nahm transform () produces a 
potential; we discard the pure gauge  part.
The remaining  piece  turns out to be in a different gauge to that
implicit in section .
An explicit computation (see appendix C)
shows that the  potential has asymptotics corresponding
to a twist and the action density  has the exponential decay
 
We can apply this to the charge  case.  Consider such an
instanton in a square box of length .  This is a one instanton in
the doubled box with , . Here ,
, and so the  instanton has the fall-off
 
For a rectangular box simply replace  with the longest length.


One can repeat the analysis for .  The
corresponding  zero modes are more complicated; they can be
written in terms of modified Bessel functions.  Here the asymptotics
of the gauge potential does not correspond to a four torus twist.
More precisely,  has the power decay
 
where  is a (dimensionful) constant.  This translates into a twist
only if .



Outlook 

We have developed an instanton core picture of the simplest doubly
periodic instantons.  Numerical calculations of the action density
correlate well with this picture for square tori.  However, in
rectangular tori the solutions become caloron-like when the ratio of
the two periods is increased; the cores merge with periodic copies of
themselves in the short direction to form monopole-like tubes of
action density.  The basic properties of these monopoles, such as
their mass ratios and spatial separation, follow the pattern of the
charge one  calorons.  It would be interesting to develop this
monopole constituent description in a more direct manner.  One
approach would be to exploit the fact that the radially symmetric
solutions considered here fall into a class of axially-symmetric
multi-calorons discussed recently if one
allows for infinite topological charge.

There are a number of obvious ways to extend the results in this
paper. An explicit treatment of the  zero mode equation
is still lacking.  In the non-radially symmetric case ()
the zero mode equations have not yielded solutions for any points in
. Even in the absence of explicit zero modes it might
be possible to extract some information about possible instanton core
or monopole constituents.  A more straightforward extension would be
to generalise the results regarding radially symmetric one instantons
to .  That these solutions decay exponentially indicates they
can be compactified further to  or even .  The
latter is only possible for the  case where the
asymptotics of the gauge field correspond to
a twist.


Acknowledgements  

We thank F. Bruckmann, G. Dunne and P. van Baal for helpful
discussions.  C.F. was supported through a European
Community Marie Curie Fellowship (contract HPMF-CT-2000-00841).




Properties of   Inserting the zero modes zeromodes  into the definition of 
() yields
 
where
 
It is not obvious that  commutes with  and .
This only holds if the coefficients of the projectors 
 match, that is if
 
A proof of () for  was given in
.  It is sufficient to show that the left and right
hand sides of () have the same asymptotics at the fluxes
since when  they satisfy the same differential
equation.  Consider  in the neighbourhood of
.  It follows immediately from () that
 whereas  is non-zero.  This
does not contradict () since  diverges
() at .  A short
calculation gives
 
This is compatible with ()
if
 
To check this, note that for  both sides satisfy the
same differential equation and then examine them in the neighbourhoods
of .  From this discussion of the asymptotics of 
it should be clear that , unlike 
 is always finite. Indeed  tends to zero as
 or  approaches a flux point.




Computation of fullpot   
Here we outline the computation of ; the other components
can be dealt with in much the same way. Inserting the zero modes into
the inverse Nahm transform yields
 
Using 
 and the representation (33) of 
 
as required. For  we proceed similarly
 
The key step is to use ()
 
Now use () to write  in terms of  and the formula
 
to get the result 
.



 Exponential Decay of the Action Density 

We consider the  derived from the asymptotic zero modes
given in section 9.  A straightforward calculation gives
 
The off-diagonal components are more involved:
 
Here
 
and 
 
where  and .  As
 is increased the integral  is dominated by a small
neighbourhood about , so we may approximate  with

 
 exhibits a similar exponential decay. 
 is simply 
, and so
 
We also have
 
Now compare with the corresponding field strengths generated by the
ansatz () in section .
 
Consider
 
where  is some real number and  is a  constant. 
Neglecting sub-leading terms the expressions for 
 agree up to a phase,
,
which can be compensated for by the double-valued gauge 
transformation . Under this gauge transformation
 the diagonal part of  becomes non-trivial
 
which agrees with fullpot  if   in ().
This is exactly what is required to generate the twist .
Using the large  form of  and 
it is straightforward to obtain the decay formula
().


 99 






K. M. Lee and C. h. Lu,

Phys. Rev. D 58  (1998) 025011
[hep-th/9802108].




T. C. Kraan and P. van Baal,

Nucl. Phys. B 533  (1998) 627
[hep-th/9805168].




A. Gonzalez-Arroyo and A. Montero,

Phys. Lett. B 442  (1998) 273
[hep-th/9809037].




W. Nahm,

Phys. Lett. B 90  (1980) 413.



W. Nahm, Selfdual Monopoles And Calorons,   
BONN-HE-83-16, 1983




P. J. Braam and P. van Baal,

Commun. Math. Phys.  122  (1989) 267.






C. Ford, J. M. Pawlowski, T. Tok and A. Wipf,

Nucl. Phys. B 596  (2001) 387
[hep-th/0005221].





C. Ford and J. M. Pawlowski,

Phys. Lett. B 540  (2002) 153
[hep-th/0205116].




K. Hori,

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  3  (1999) 281
[hep-th/9902102].




 D. Mumford, Tata lectures on theta 1,
Birkhauser, 1982. 



H. Reinhardt, O. Schroder, T. Tok and V. C. Zhukovsky,

Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 085004 
[hep-th/0203012].




A. A. Belavin, V. A. Fateev, A. S. Schwarz and Y. S. Tyupkin,

Phys. Lett. B 83  (1979) 317.






C. Gattringer and S. Schaefer,


hep-lat/0212029.



E. M. Ilgenfritz, B. V. Martemyanov,
 M. Muller-Preussker, S. Shcheredin and A. I. Veselov,

Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002) 074503
[hep-lat/0206004].





A. Gonzalez-Arroyo,

Nucl. Phys. B 548  (1999) 626
[hep-th/9811041].





F. Bruckmann and P. van Baal,

Nucl. Phys. B 645  (2002) 105
[hep-th/0209010].











































