







Valeri  Frolov

      Theoretical Physics Institute, Department of Physics

      University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, T6G 2J1

      E-mail: frolov@phys.ualberta.ca 
 

Dmitri Fursaev

      Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics,
      Joint Institute for Nuclear Research

      141980 Dubna, Moscow Region, Russia

      E-mail: fursaev@thsun1.jinr.ru 
 

Andrei  Zelnikov

      Theoretical Physics Institute, Department of Physics

      University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, T6G 2J1

      and 

      Lebedev Physics Institute,
      Leninski pr. 53, Moscow  119 991, Russia

      E-mail: zelnikov@phys.ualberta.ca 
 


We present a derivation of the entropy of black holes in induced
gravity models based on conformal properties of induced gravity
constituents near the horizon. The four-dimensional (4D) theory
is first reduced to a tower of two-dimensional (2D) gravities
such that each 2D theory is induced by fields with certain momentum
 along the horizon. We demonstrate that in the vicinity of the
horizon constituents of the
2D induced gravities are described by conformal field theories (CFT)
with specific central charges depending on spin and non-minimal
couplings and with specific correlation lengths depending on the
masses of fields and on the momentum . This enables one to use CFT
methods to count partial entropies  in each 2D sector.
The sum of partial entropies correctly reproduces the
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy of the 4D induced gravity theory. Our
results indicate that earlier attempts of the derivation of the
entropy of black holes based on a near-horizon CFT may have a
microscopic realization.
 

Black Hole, Entropy, Conformal Theory
 

hep-th/0302207 

Alberta-Thy-05-03
 


CFT and Black Hole Entropy in 
Induced Gravity 




-10pt



Introduction 







S^BH 













S^BH 




c
S^BH 




S^BH 




l
l

















































_k
g_ 
g_ 
[g]



I[_k,g]k

m_Pl 
R
m^2_Pl 







G

R^2












S^BH 




l










p


G^-1 G_2(p)
p








1-6


p
s(p)
s(p)S^BH 


























N_s_s
m_s

_sN_d
_dm_d



























G


G







A





G
G



S



Q

Q











Q

H

E
T_ 

H

H
S
E

S^BH 
E



T_H
EH







Q





E
Q
EH


M

E

Q




















y_j









_ 

M _2






y






p
p y =p_i y^i

y^i

-a/2y^i a/2
A a^2
















R 

M _2



_d,p  

m_d+^j p_j

m_d^2(p )=m_d^2+p ^2
m^2_k(p )k=sd

m_kp 









[g]






_2[,p]

p=p 

a
pp
a^2 /(4)
p^2
p^2
a^-2 

A =a^2a


R []
m_k^2(p)




G_2(p)_2(p)













G_2(p)_2(p)

G




R[g]=R []


a^2=dy_1 dy_2
G














p









p




p

G_2(p)




G(p)G(p)



p


m_Pl 
R m^2_Pl +p^2

p

G(p)
p

G(p)



p
p


G(p)
p

G(p)G_2(p)




G_2(p)
G(p)










_2(p)
G_2(p)p>0










_s,p  _d,p  
_s,p  





M _2




i












m
p









 








02/0_+
_+
z=x_1+ix_2
x_1=x_2=





dz^2=dx_1dx_2z= 12(_1-i_2)
 =/z 












^T =(b _1,a_1,b _2,a_2)
 =(b_1,a _1,b_2,a _2)
b _j,a _jb_j, a_j




^^)and 's are the Pauli matrices. 
 
It is invariant under conformal transformations
of coordinates () when the spinor components transform as
 
 
where .
Let us consider now the holomorphic components of the
stress-energy
tensor(The commonly used definition of  differs from
our definition by the factor .) ,
, for scalars and spinors, respectively,
 
 
(The anti-holomorphic components are defined analogously).
It is well-known that in quantum theory the renormalized
components transform as (see, e.g.,)
 
 
 
An anomalous term  appears in the transformation law
because renormalization procedure requires subtracting
divergent terms which are
not conformally invariant. As follows from (), (),
the conformal algebra in quantum theory has a central extension.
The corresponding central charge  for each scalar field and
each -th component of the spinor field equals unity (thus the total
central charge corresponding to a dimensionally reduced Dirac spinor
is ).

Let us now discuss what happens when fields are massive.
Consider first a scalar field with a mass . Consider the correlation
function which determines the theory. In two dimensions
 
where  and  is the Bessel function.
At small  the Bessel function has the following asymptotics
 
while at large 
 
Therefore, if the points  and 
are entirely inside the circle of the radius 
the correlator is determined by the leading term in
(),
 
and it coincides up to an irrelevant constant with the correlator of
the massless field. On the other hand, if one of the points is
inside of the circle and the other is far outside, or the two points
are outside and far apart from each other the correlator
is exponentially small, see ().

This analysis shows that if we are interested in the behavior
of the  system inside the circle with radius  we can consider
it as a massless theory. In general, the mass breaks conformal
invariance explicitly, but inside this circle the effect of the mass is
small and theory is conformal. The conformal properties
improve when one shrinks the circle toward its center.
The only feature related to the fact that our theory is obtained
as a result of the dimensional reduction is that mass is a function
of the transverse momentum .
Thus, the radius is 
and the larger the momentum  the smaller
the region where theory is conformal.

Let us now discuss the case of spinor fields. If we keep mass and
momentum terms the reduced action for a spinor with a momentum 
has the form(We put 
(where  is the unit matrix) and
.) 
 
where ,
. In conformal theory ()
the only nonzero correlators are 
and .
In theory () new correlators appear. All of them are
easy to calculate. For instance, for the field
 there are three non-trivial correlators:
 
 
 
where .
Suppose now that
both points are inside the circle with radius
. Then the correlator
can be approximated by that of the conformal theory,
see (). In this case  is the
correlator of conformal fermions. Other correlators (),
() are not zero in this limit. However, they are smaller
compared to . Indeed, one can see that
, while
,
. Thus, the new
correlators can be neglected once the points are inside the circle
and in this region fermions are well described by a conformal theory.


Rindler entropy in 2D theory 

Let us discuss the entropy  of a massless scalar field in
a two-dimensional Rindler space-time (see ())
 
We define   as the entropy
of Rindler quanta in some range of coordinate ,
. For quanta at the temperature
 the entropy is known to be
 
If we have  fields
 
Formula () also holds for an arbitrary  CFT if constant 
in it is identified with the corresponding central charge.
Such a result can be  obtained
by using conformal properties of the free energy and
pointing out that  is related to the conformal anomaly
.


The entropy of Rindler particles can be also interpreted as the
entropy of entanglement between quantum
states inside and outside the horizon.
It is important to note that this entropy can be derived
using the well-known Cardy formula,
in a way which is parallel to the derivation of black hole entropy
in Carlip's approach
-. If the central charge  is fixed,
 determines the degeneracy of
operators ,  (which generate translations along coordinates
, ) in the state which corresponds to the Minkowski
vacuum.  We do not dwell here on how the Cardy formula can be used
to obtain (), the details can be found, e.g., in
.


It follows from discussion of the preceding section that
result () should not change if the field has a
non-zero mass 
provided that  is smaller than the corresponding correlation length,
. This is easy to see by examining the equation
for a Rindler mode
 with
frequency ,
 
 
The operator  is a single-particle Hamiltonian.
According to (), the closer
particle to the Rindler horizon 
the smaller the effect of its mass. The mass becomes important
when .

By taking into account that the normalized single-particle mode
is expressed in terms of the Bessel function,
 
the free energy of the field in the region 
can be written in the form
 
 
The quantity  is the number
of energy levels in the interval .
If  and 
the spectral density () coincides with the
spectral density of the massless theory in the same region
.
However, for  the contribution
from the domain
 to the
integral in () is exponentially suppressed
due to the behavior of the Bessel function.
This means that for  in the leading asymptotic
the free energy coincides with the free energy of massless theory
in the region .
Such a conclusion is supported by the direct calculation
which shows that for

 
 
where  denotes complex conjugated function and  is
the logarithmic derivative of the  function .
In the limit  the first term in the r.h.s.
in () dominates over the last two ones. Thus, leaving in
the spectral density only the logarithmic term one gets from
()
 
The corresponding entropy computed at
the Hawking temperature  is
 
as was expected.


Effects related to non-minimal couplings 


So far we discussed the effects of massive terms.
In addition to them there are other terms which break conformal
invariance. In our theory these are non-minimal couplings
in the scalar action (). These terms modify the
scalar field stress-energy tensor and its transformation
properties. Instead of (), () in case
of non-minimal couplings one has (see, e.g.,)
 
 
where we neglected by mass terms.
Without the last term
in r.h.s. of () this transformation law corresponds to a
conformal theory with an effective central charge .

Let us discuss conditions when the last term can be ignored.
It is easy to see that this can be done if the conformal
transformations are infinitesimal,
 
In this case variation of the stress-energy tensor
under transformation () in the leading order in
 is
 
The last term in () gives contribution proportional
to  which is not important
at  this order.

Note that it is the linear order of the variations
of the conformal stress-energy tensor which is
needed to infer the structure of the Virasoro algebra.
Therefore, when infinitesimal conformal
transformations are considered, a 2D scalar field 
with a non-minimal coupling 
is equivalent to a conformal theory with the effective
central charge . The concrete realization of this
effective conformal theory in terms of the initial field 
may be non-trivial(It should be noted that the
generator of the conformal transformation  in
() is not the operator  itself but only its part
which does not depend on the parameter .) 
but it is not important for the computation of the entropy.
What really matters is the value of the central charge which
enables one to fix uniquely the form of the free energy
by using conformal properties of the effective action
 and use formula () for the entropy.



The relevance of infinitesimal conformal transformations
for computation of the entropy can be also seen
from the following reasonings.
In the Euclidean theory the entropy
can be derived in a geometrical way by using the conical singularity
method. To this aim one has to consider
the transformation  with
. Then in -plane
there is a conical
singularity with the deficit angle . The parameter 
corresponds to an inverse temperature and the limit
 corresponds to the Hawking temperature, or to a Minkowski
vacuum in case of the Rindler space-time. To derive the
entropy one has to take the Euclidean action off-shell,
find its derivative over  and after that
go to limit . It is easy to see that at small angle
deficits  and the corresponding term
in ()
is related to contribution to the entropy proportional to
the effective central charge . As for the last
term, its contribution
vanishes because .


Negative central charge contributions 



The constraints of induced gravity models require that at least
some of effective central charges  were negative.
For  formula () results in a negative entropy.
Typically CFT's with negative central charges correspond to ghosts.
The ghosts appear in gauge theories when the
Hilbert space is enlarged during the
quantization. The ghosts  do have negative entropy because it
should
compensate contribution of the extra degrees of freedom in the
enlarged Hilbert space. However, if the system  is unitary its
total entropy is always positive.

There is some similarity between induced gravity models and gauge
theories in the following sense. As we discussed in
section 2.1, the non-minimal couplings result in modification of the
energy of the system  (adding a surface term  at the
horizon) but do not change the canonical energy , see ().
In quantum theory the value of  is determined by the soft modes,
i.e., modes with vanishing frequencies. The soft modes are analogous
to pure gauge degrees of freedom because one can add an arbitrary
number of these modes without changing the canonical energy .
However, it is the energy  which is the physically observable
quantity and, if  is fixed, then for given   the number of the
soft modes cannot be arbitrary.

In what follows we interpret negative contributions of some of
the non-minimally coupled constituents to the entropy as the effect
of such ghost-like degrees of freedom. We adopt computations of
conformal field theories with central charges  in
order to obtain the distribution over the physical energies 
instead of the canonical distribution. Note that, like gauge
theories, the induced gravity models are unitary theories. The
difference between  and  appears only if a Cauchy surface is
divided by the horizon into "observable" and "non-observable"
regions. This difference is so important in the entropy problem
since the entropy of the black hole itself is connected with the
entanglement generated by the existence of the horizon. On the
entire Cauchy surface,  and  coincide.



Counting the black hole entropy 








)^-1 p=p 

c_d=2c_s=1-6_s



















C
p




c_s


p




G_2(p)


G_2(p)
s(p)>0









A =a^2













S_k








p ^2
















L_0L _0


p

c_k






_H^-1 =/(2)





















S^BH 
S^BH 
























s(p)S^BH 








p

s(p)









c
l
lclc

l








s(p)

















c






m



and the other point
at some nonzero value . We have two regimes: if 
the correlator behaves as in massless theory, if   it is
exponentially suppressed by the mass. One can interpret the evolution
along the Rindler radius  as a renormalization group flow
 between the two fixed points, the ultraviolet point (UV),
, and infrared point (IR), .
These asymptotic limits of the massive theory are described by UV
and IR scale-invariant theories which lie at the end points of
renormalization group trajectory, see, e.g., .
The UV central charge is  and it coincides with the central
charge of 2D massless scalar field theory, while the IR central
charge  vanishes.

Zamlodochikov's -theorem enables one to construct
a -function  which is a combination of local correlators
of components of the renormalized stress-energy tensor of the
field ,
such that  is non-increasing along renormalization
group trajectory, , see the details
in,. At the fixed points the -function
coincides with the corresponding central charges. The mass of the
field can be interpreted as a coupling constant while the mass term
in the action near the fixed point  can be
considered as a perturbation.
Zamolodchikov's theorem  indicates that there should
exist some kind of entropy which measures the loss of information
about the degrees of freedom of the theory whose wave length
is smaller than the cutoff .

In section 4 we defined a partial entropy 
of constituents in 2D induced
gravity as a sum of contributions from different fields.
Because some fields correspond to CFT's with negative
central charge
the application of the -theorem to each individual field
is not justified because there is a problem with unitarity.
The 2D fields at a given  should be considered only as a whole system.
Such system is well-defined (free
of ultraviolet divergences) and
can be unitary. Note that transformations changing the length scale
of the theory are equivalent to
redefinition of transverse energies of fields .
This is easy to see by examining correlators of massive
fields (). However, if one considers trivial transformations

the partial entropy  and 2D gravitational coupling 
do not change, see ().

To have an analog of a renormalization flow in the
induced gravity models one can choose another option. Let us
consider the momentum  as a renormalization parameter. This makes
sense for several reasons. First, decreasing  means decreasing
transverse energies and is equivalent to going to larger length
scales of the theory. Second, by changing  one moves from one 2D
induced gravity to another in a consistent way without violating the
induced gravity constraints. Third, as we discussed in the end of
section 2.2, the parameter  becomes a real ultraviolet cutoff when
the induced gravity theory is considered on space-times (),
() with 2D curvature  larger than .

Identification of  with the renormalization parameter has
interesting consequences. In the ultraviolet limit, when ,
4D and 2D running gravitational couplings, ,
, are large. On the other hand, the partial entropy 
and the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy vanish, in accord with the fact that
no information is lost in UV limit. In the infrared limit,
,
the couplings are finite and the value of  approaches
the value of the Newton constant for 4D induced gravity
given by ().
The loss of the information in the IR limit is maximal
and it can be measured by the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy.
The coupling  can be related
to the -function of the theory, see ().
If  the 4D running coupling 
is monotonically increasing when one moves
for UV to IR points. Therefore, the parameter 
behaves as a -function.



 To summarize, using the induced gravity as a toy model one can
obtain an interesting information concerning the mechanism of the
entropy generation in black holes. The entanglement of the
constituents in the presence of the horizon plays a fundamental role
in this mechanism. The universality of the Bekenstein-Hawking
entropy, that is its independence of the detailed structure of the
background microscopic theory of constituents which induce the
gravitational field, is a natural property of the induced gravity
models. In this paper we demonstrated that the induced gravity
models  allow one to exploit the results of the CFT for the
explanation of  black hole entropy. This can be used to check
different ideas proposed in this area by the string theory.  We are
fully aware of the remaining difficulties which indicate that even in
such simplified models the statistical-mechanical calculation of the
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy is a very non-trivial task.




 Acknowledgements : 

This work was partially supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors would like to
thank the Killam trust for its support.




Examples of induced gravity models with steady RG flow 













) in such a theory
are satisfied and the induced cosmological constant vanishes.
Relations (), () can be written in the
form
 
where .
One can consider () as a system of equations
which defines parameters  at given masses  and a given
value . The system is linear and allows solutions for
.

The solution is easy to find for  and to
get explicit expressions for 2D gravitational
coupling  and the running 4D
coupling , see (), ().
After some algebra the results can be represented
in  a simple form
 
 
 
 
 
where  and , , 
are the masses of the three multiplets. The 2D coupling is
defined as
 
It can be shown that if  than both functions
,  are positive and monotonically
increasing as parameter  increases.








Black hole entropy in 2+1 dimensions 









, allows statistical-mechanical representation
by methods of conformal theory.

Induced gravity models in three dimensions were discussed
in. For the model consisting of spinor and
non-minimally coupled scalar  constituents the constraints
which ensure finiteness of the induced Newton constant
can be written in the form (). Central charges
of scalar fields are , while charges
of spinor fields are  in accord with the fact that spinors
have 2 components in . Given these constraints the induced
Newton constant is defined by the relation 
where the parameters  are chosen so that .
The horizon of a black hole in three dimensions is a circle
of some length  and the corresponding Bekenstein-Hawking
entropy is
 
We now use the same line of arguments as in four dimensions
and consider entropy of constituents in the near-horizon limit.
In the limit when  is large
the total entropy of 2D constituents at the momentum 
coincides with ()
 
The entropy of the 3D theory is
 
By performing the
integration  in () one finds
the expression
 
which is finite because of the induced gravity constraints
and coincides with the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy ().



 99 



 J.D. Bekenstein, Nuovo Cim. Lett. 4  (1972)
737.


 J.D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D7  (1973) 2333.


 S.W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys. 43  (1975)
1999.



 A. Strominger, C. Vafa, Phys. Lett. B379 
(1996) 99, hep-th/9601029.


 A.W. Peet, Class. Quantum Grav. 15  (1998) 3291,
hep-th/9712253.


 J.R. David, G. Mandal, S.R. Wadia, Phys. Rept. 369  (2002)
549, hep-th/0203048



 A. Strominger, JHEP 9802  (1998) 009,
hep-th/9712251.


 M. Banados, C. Teitelboim,
J. Zanelli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69  (1992) 1849, hep-th/9204099.


 S. Carlip, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82  (1999) 2828, hep-th/9812013.


 S. Carlip,
Phys. Lett. B508  (2001) 168,
gr-qc/0103100.



 S. Carlip, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88  (2002)
241301, gr-qc/0203001.


 S.N. Solodukhin,
Phys. Lett. B454  (1999) 213, hep-th/9812056.



 A.D. Sakharov, Sov. Phys. Doklady 12  (1968)
1040.


 M. Visser, Mod. Phys. Lett. A17  (2002)
977, gr-qc/0204062.

 L. Bombelli, R. K. Koul, J. H. Lee, and R. D. Sorkin,
Phys.Rev. D34  (1986) 373.

 V. Frolov and I. Novikov,  Phys.Rev. D48  (1993)
4545, gr-qc/9309001.




 T. Jacobson, Black Hole Entropy and Induced
Gravity , gr-qc/9404039.




 V.P. Frolov, D.V. Fursaev, A.I. Zelnikov
Nucl. Phys. B486  (1997) 339, hep-th/9607104.


 V.P. Frolov, D.V. Fursaev,
Phys. Rev. D56  (1997) 2212, hep-th/9703178


 S.W. Hawking, J.M. Maldacena, A. Strominger,
JHEP 0105  (2001) 001, hep-th/0002145.




 R.M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D48  (1993) 3427,
gr-qc/9307038.




 V. Frolov, D. Fursaev,
Phys. Rev. D58  (1998) 124009, hep-th/9806078.


 V.P. Frolov, D.V. Fursaev,
Phys. Rev. D61  (2000) 024007, gr-qc/9907046.


 V.P. Frolov, D.V. Fursaev,
Phys. Rev. D61  (2000) 064010, hep-th/9910006.



 D.V. Fursaev,
Phys. Rev. D59  (1999) 064020, hep-th/9809049.


 D.V. Fursaev, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.
88  (2000) 277, gr-qc/9911065.

 V. Frolov, P. Sutton, A. Zelnikov,
Phys. Rev. D61  (2000) 024021, hep-th/9909086.

 G. 't Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B304  (1988) 867.


 H. Verlinde, E. Verlinde, Nucl. Phys.
B371  (1992) 246, hep-th/9110017.


 K.G. Wilson, J.G. Kogut, Phys. Rep. 12C 
(1974) 75.


 M.E. Peskin, D. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum
Field Theory , Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1995.


 J.L. Cardy, in Fields, Strings, and Critical
Phenomena , (eds. E. Brezin and J. Zinn-Justin),
Les Houches, Session XLIX, 1988, p. 169.


 I. Affleck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56  (1985) 746.


 V. Frolov, D. Fursaev, J. Gegenberg, G. Kunstatter,
Phys. Rev. D60  (1999) 024016, hep-th/9901087.



 F. Larsen, F. Wilczek,
Nucl. Phys. B458  (1996) 249, hep-th/9506066.


 A.B. Zamolodchikov, JETP Lett. 43  (1986)
730.

 A. Cappelli, D. Friedan, J.I. Latorre,
Nucl. Phys. B352  (1991) 616.





