

1.5 




0mm


 #1 _#2   













 
THE FACTORIZATION METHOD, SELF-SIMILAR POTENTIALS 

  AND QUANTUM ALGEBRAS 
(
2000 Mathematical Subject Classification:  primary 33D80, 39A10;
secondary 81R30, 82B20.

Key Words and Phrases:  differential-delay equations, solitons,
Schrodinger equation, Darboux transformations, quantum algebras,
-special functions, random matrices, Coulomb gases.

Published in: "Special Functions 2000: Current Perspective and
Future Directions", Proc. NATO Advanced Study Institute
(Tempe, USA, May 29 - June 9, 2000),
edited by J. Bustoz, M.E.H. Ismail and S.K. Suslov, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 2001, pp. 335-364. 
) 





V.P. SPIRIDONOV



Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics, 

JINR, Dubna,  Moscow region 141980, Russia   


 
The factorization method is a convenient operator language
formalism for consideration of certain spectral problems.
In the simplest differential operators realization it
corresponds to the Darboux transformations technique for
linear ODE of the second order. In this particular case
the method was developed by Schrodinger and became well
known to physicists due to the connections with quantum
mechanics and supersymmetry. In the theory of orthogonal
polynomials its origins go back to the Christoffel's theory
of kernel polynomials, etc. Special functions are defined
in this formalism as the functions associated with
similarity reductions of the factorization chains.

We consider in this lecture in detail the Schrodinger
equation case and review some recent developments in this
field. In particular, a class of self-similar potentials
is described whose discrete spectrum consists of a finite
number of geometric progressions. Such spectra are
generated by particular polynomial quantum algebras which
include -analogues of the harmonic oscillator and
 algebras. Coherent states of these potentials
are described by differential-delay equations of
the pantograph type. Applications to infinite soliton
systems, Ising chains, random matrices, and lattice Coulomb gases
are briefly outlined.






Introduction 

   From the very beginning quantum mechanics served as a rich source of
good mathematical problems. It played a major role in the
development of the theory of generalized functions, functional analysis,
path integrals, to name a few. In the last two decades the "quantum"
disease became so widespread in mathematics
that it is difficult to guarantee that a
randomly chosen mathematical term will not get its cousin
with such an adjective in the foreseeable future (if it does not have already).
The influence of quantum mechanics upon the theory of special
functions is also indispensable. A bright example is given by the
angular momentum theory which has lead to the Racah polynomials.
An aim of this lecture is to outline another fruitful interplay between
these two scientific fields inspired by the factorization method.

This method was suggested by Schrodinger as a convenient operator
language tool for working with quantum mechanical spectral problems
. It was reformulated as a problem of searching of the
factorization chain solutions by Infeld.
The review became a basic reference in this field.
A fairly recent revival of the interest to this method occurred due to
the discovery of its relation to the notion of supersymmetry (see, e.g.
the review and references therein). The author himself turned to
this subject from the quantum chromodynamics due to an idea of a
generalization of the supersymmetric quantum mechanics.
Although it was clear that special functions play an important role
in this formalism, it took some time to recognize that, heuristically,
special functions are defined in this approach as the functions appearing
from similarity reductions of the factorization chain (for a more precise
formulation, see the Appendix).

   From the mathematical side, a related techniques for solving linear
ordinary differential equations of the second order was proposed by
Darboux long ago. Its various generalizations are
referred to in the modern theory of completely integrable systems
as the Laplace, Darboux, Backlund, dressing, etc
transformations; in the analysis of isomonodromic deformations
one deals with the Schlesinger transformations.
In the theory of special functions such
transformations appear as contiguity relations .
An important step in the development of the subject was performed
in a series of papers by Burchnall and Chaundy,
which contain even some parts of the operator formulation of the
approach ("the transference"). For a completeness, let us mention also
the terms "shift operator" and "transmutation", which are used in
some other variations of the formalism. For a rigorous mathematical
treatment of some aspects of the Darboux transformations technique
or the factorization method, see.

As far as the discrete recurrence relations are concerned,
actually, it is the Christoffel's theory of kernel polynomials
that provides a first constructive approach of such kind to spectral
problems. This theory is based upon the simplest discrete analogue of
the Darboux transformations. A complementary part to this Christoffel's
transformation was found by Geronimus in. First applications of
the Schrodinger's factorization method to finite-difference equations
is given in. Recent developments in this direction
are reviewed in. Let us remark that the same
techniques was rediscovered in the works on numerical
calculations of matrix eigenvalues. More precisely,
the well-known numerical -algorithms, etc provide particular
instances of the chains of discrete Darboux transformations.
The literature on the taken subject is enormous, it is not possible to
describe all its branches. The list of references given at the
end of this manuscript is not complete, it contains mainly the papers
encountered by the author during his own work (additional
lists can be found in).

Despite of a vast variety of existing constructions, part of
which was just mentioned, we limit ourselves in this lecture
to the simplest possible case based upon the stationary
one-dimensional Schrodinger equation
 
describing the motion of a non-relativistic particle on the line
 in the potential field , which is assumed to be
bounded from below. The operator  is called
the Hamiltonian or the Schrodinger operator. For convenience, the
particle's mass variable and the Planck's constant  are removed
by rescalings of the coordinate  and the energy .
The equation () describes an eigenvalue problem for 
and the eigenvalues (or the permitted bound states energies of the quantum particle)
are determined from the condition that the modulus of the wave function
 is square integrable, .

Depending on the physical situation, the real line  may be replaced
by an interval with an appropriate boundary conditions upon .
However, if one is interested not in the spectra themselves, but
in the differential operators  with some formal properties, then
it is convenient to take .

The factorization method 

Let us factorize the second order differential operator 
as a product of two first order ones up to some real constant :
 
The function  is a solution of the Riccati equation
. Substitution of the ansatz
 shows that 
, i.e.  is a solution of the original
Schrodinger equation () for .

If  is a smooth function, then  is a hermitean conjugate
of  in  and  is a self-adjoint operator.
Under these circumstances 
cannot be bigger than the smallest eigenvalue of . Suppose that
 is the smallest eigenvalue of , and let  be the
corresponding eigenfunction. It is well known that  is
nodeless and may be normalized to have the unit norm, 

Then,



where  are arbitrary constants,
is the general solution of the equation .
    For , the resulting  is singular at some point
and the operators  in () are not well defined.
Let us exclude this situation, i.e. set .

Using the lowest eigenvalue eigenfunction of , one can always
factorize  as described in () with the well-defined
operators . Vice versa, if one manages
to find the factorization () such that the zero mode 
of the operator , , belongs to 
and  is not singular, then  is the lowest eigenvalue and
 
is the corresponding normalized eigenfunction.

Let us define now a new Schrodinger operator  by
the permutation of the operator factors in ()
 
whose potential has the form .
Evidently, one has the intertwining relations
 
playing the key role in the formalism.
  From () one deduces that if  satisfies (),
then the functions  provide formal eigenfunctions
of . Indeed,
 
Actually, this gives general solutions of the
differential equation 
for all , except of the point ,
where the zero mode of  is located. This problem is curable
since one can find the general solution of the equation
 separately:
 
where  are arbitrary constants and  is the lowest eigenvalue
eigenfunction of  (note that ).

Denote as  and  
discrete eigenvalues and corresponding eigenfunctions of  and 
respectively. From () it follows that the spectra
 and  almost coincide
. The only difference that may
occur in these spectra concerns the zero mode of the operator .
In fact, the point  does not belong to the
spectrum of . Indeed, since ,
it follows that ,
and, as a result, for any  the function
() cannot be normalizable.

Thus,  is the lowest eigenvalue of 
and the point  was "deleted" from the spectrum of .
Repeating the same procedure once more, i.e. taking
 and permuting the
operator factors, one can delete the point , etc.
This procedure allows one to remove an arbitrary number of smallest
eigenvalues of . Often it is much easier to find the smallest
eigenvalue of a given operator than the other ones.
If the lowest eigenvalue of  is determined separately
by some means, then, by construction, it will coincide
with the second eigenvalue of , etc. This observation is the central
one in the factorization method since it reduces
the problem of finding complete discrete spectrum of a taken operator to
the problem of finding lowest eigenvalues of a sequence of operators
built from  by the "factorize and permute" algorithm.

One can invert the procedure of a deletion of the smallest eigenvalue.
Namely, a given  with known lowest eigenvalue
 may be factorized as ,
with . If the zero mode of  is normalizable,
then the operator  has the same spectrum as  with an
additional inserted  eigenvalue at an arbitrary  point
. If one factorizes  (or ) in such
a way that  is a non-singular function, but none of the zero modes of
the operators  are normalizable, then the discrete spectra of 
and  coincide completely (an isospectral situation).

There are more complicated possibilities for changing spectral data of a
given Schrodinger operator . E.g., if the first factorization
is "bad", in the sense that  has a singular potential
and considerations given above are not valid, then
one may demand that after a number of additional refactorizations one gets
a well defined self-adjoint Schrodinger operator. In this way
one can delete not only the lowest eigenvalues of  or to insert the
new ones, but delete or insert a bunch of spectral points above the smallest
one. In particular, two step refactorization procedure allows one
to imbed an eigenvalue into the continuous spectrum, etc.

Let us give now a "discrete time" formulation of the construction.
Denote  and  and take 
( may be treated as a continuous parameter and we could
denote  - all this is a matter of agreement).
This gives an infinite sequence of Schrodinger operators
 with formal factorizations
 
Neighboring  are connected to each other via the
abstract factorization chain 
 
Intertwining relations take the form



Substituting explicit forms of  into ()
one gets a differential-difference equation upon :
 
This chain was derived in and the problem of
searching "exactly solvable" spectral problems was formulated as
a problem of the search of solutions of () such that
the points  define the discrete spectrum of an operator ,
say, . E.g., one may try to find solutions of
the equation ()  in the form of power series in 
( are considered as unknown functions of ).
As shown in the finite term expansion occurs iff
, where  are some elementary
functions of . This leads to the  hypergeometric function
and well known "old" exactly solvable potentials of quantum mechanics.

As evident from the construction,
the constants  determine the smallest eigenvalues of
 under the condition that the zero modes of  are normalizable
and  are not singular.
In general, the  transitions may describe all three possibilities
- removal or insertion of an eigenvalue and isospectral transformations
(sometimes it is convenient to
parameterize inserted eigenvalues as ).

  For a positive integer , let us introduce the operators




The intertwining relations



guarantee that for almost all  solutions of the equations

and  are related to each other
as  and
. As a result, the product
 should commute with  and  should
commute with . A simple computation leads to the equalities
M_j^+M_j^-=_k=0 ^n-1 (L_j-_j+k ), M_j^-M_j^+=_k=0 ^n-1 (L_j+n -_j+k ).
polrel Let  be an eigenfunction of 
with the eigenvalue  and some finite norm .
If we set , then




Zeroes on the r.h.s. for  for some  indicate that the
corresponding eigenvalues were deleted from the spectrum.
Under the condition that zero modes of  are
normalizable and nodeless, , ,
one finds that the functions




define the unit norm eigenfunctions of  with the eigenvalues
:
 and .

The main advantage of the factorization method consists in its pure operator
language formulation. One may replace the Schrodinger operator by any
other (higher order differential, finite-difference, integral, etc)
operator  admitting factorizations into the well defined operator factors
of a simpler nature  (for some applications they are not
necessarily hermitean conjugates of each other).
In all cases one deals with the
abstract operator factorization chain ()
with an appropriate interpretation of the constants  .
It should be noted that this method does not have straightforward
generalizations to the multidimensional spectral problems, only
some of its features are preservable, see e.g..

Supersymmetry 

Supersymmetry is a symmetry between bosonic and fermionic degrees
of freedom of particular physical systems. The corresponding
symmetry algebras are distinguished from the standard Lie algebras
by the presence of anticommutator relations. The simplest superalgebra
is realized upon two neighboring operators in the factorization
chain. Define the matrix operators (supercharges)










where  are the factorization operators defined in ().
They form the following algebra (see, e.g.)
 
where the Hamiltonian






describes a particle with spin 1/2 (a fermionic variable) on
the line in an external magnetic field,  is the
Pauli matrix. In terms of the
hermitean supercharges , the
algebra takes the form .

As a formal consequence of the algebra () the
discrete spectrum of 
is doubly degenerate (such degeneracies are characteristic
to the supersymmetry) with possible exception of the lowest
eigenvalue which cannot be negative (this is another constraint upon
the supersymmetric systems).

This simple construction was generalized in to a
symmetry between particles with parastatistics.
The corresponding symmetry algebras are polynomial
in the generators. E.g., in the simplest case involving a
parafermion of the second order (or the spin 1 particle)
 is given by a  diagonal matrix with the
entries , the corresponding symmetry generators being
 and its conjugate.
  For the hermitean charges  defined as above, one has
now cubic relations
 
The discrete spectrum of  is now triply degenerate with possible
exception of two smallest eigenvalues.

One can go further and propose other modifications of the algebra
(). For instance, one can -deform it:



This lifts the degeneracy of spectra, but creates a nontrivial
scaling relation between spectral points. As a result, it opens
a way for building various -harmonic oscillator models.
Another construction proposed inrefers to a polynomials generalization of (). It appears
after a reduction of the algebra () and similar higher order
polynomial relations to a two-dimensional subspace of eigenfunctions:



where  and














This is a pure supersymmetry again in the sense of a symmetry
between bosons and fermions. However, the consequences
are quite different from the standard case ().
In particular, there are no such severe constraints
upon the smallest eigenvalue of  (the vacuum energy).

All these general constructions are useful because they contain
new concepts providing nonstandard viewpoints upon physical
systems and new mathematical tools for their exploration.
Special functions emerge when one starts to work with
particular "exactly solvable" models with such symmetries.

Darboux transformations 

Let us describe the Darboux transformations technique in its
modern appearance. Consider compatibility conditions of
the following three linear equations
 
 
 
where  is some additional continuous parameter ("evolution time") and
 are some free functions.
The compatibility condition of () and () generates the
intertwining relation , the resolution of which
yields the constraints 
,
where  is an integration constant. Thus one arrives again
to the infinite chain of nonlinear differential-difference equations
() and the formal factorizations ().

The compatibility condition of the equations () and ()
yields the celebrated Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation:
 
a completely integrable Hamiltonian system with an infinite
number of degrees of freedom. If we express 
through  in the equation (), then it takes the form




It appears that the compatibility conditions of this equation
with the Darboux transformation () imposes an additional
non-trivial constraint , which is called the modified KdV
equation.

A substitution of  into
the relation  yields

and the Darboux transformation () takes the form:




where  is a particular solution of the -th equation in
the sequence () for .

Let , i.e. let
 are formal eigenfunctions of  with the
eigenvalues 
equal to constants of integration mentioned above for all .
Denote as 
the Wronskian of a set of functions . Using the identities
 and




one can show that 
 
 
These formulae give an explicit representation of the transformed potentials
 in terms of the initial Schrodinger equation solutions
.

Since the parameter  is a dummy variable during the Darboux
transformations, in fact one deals simultaneously with different solutions
of the KdV equation: if  satisfies (), the same
is true for . This gives a way for building
new complicated explicit solutions of the KdV equation starting from
the simple ones. For instance, one may take  which gives
,
and for some special choice of the signs of  the potential
 becomes a nonsingular reflectionless potential with
 discrete spectrum points . It
defines the famous -soliton solution of the KdV equation.

In the formulae given above one may permute any pair of the 
functions and the final result is not changed, i.e. such a permutation
of the Darboux transformations is a symmetry of the factorization chain
(). In the simplest case, it has the following explicit
form:






all other  staying intact for .
This discrete symmetry may be "discretized" further by passing to
the discrete Schrodinger equation (or the three term recurrence relation
for orthogonal polynomials) and the corresponding discrete Darboux
transformations.

The well known KdV tau-function is introduced as 
. In its terms relations (), ()
are rewritten as ,
. Introducing the variables
, one can write  and
. As a result, the relation between
 and  yields the equation



which starts to play the role of the factorization chain. The function
 is a very convenient object since its zeros in  correspond to
poles of the potential.

Operator self-similarity and quantum algebras 

Let us turn now to the problem of searching particular solutions
of the operator factorization chain (). At first glance
it is not clear how to proceed, but the harmonic oscillator problem -
a base model for the whole quantum mechanics and quantum field theory -
provides a guiding idea. One has to try to form from the factorization
operators  some nontrivial symmetry algebras. In fact, the
relations () look already as defining relations of some algebra,
but they are not closed - the relations between the eigenvalue
problems  for  and  are too weak (they are valid for
any starting potential ). In order to close the system, one has to
assume that there is an additional relation between  and ,
say ,
which would force the operators  to map eigenfunctions of
a taken operator  onto themselves.

In the simplest case one demands that the sequence of
Hamiltonians  is periodic:  for some period .
As a result,  commute with , . This is a
remarkable fact since the existence of additional conserved
quantities may simplify solution of the eigenvalue
problem for . In the differential operator realization of 
this leads to the commuting differential operators.
There is a generalization of this pure periodicity condition to the
periodicity up to a twist condition
, where  is some invertible operator.
This leads again to commuting operators , where
,
but now there is an essential additional freedom in the choice of .

Another possible "closure" or a reduction of the sequence of operators
 consists in the requirement of their periodicity up to a constant
shift and a twist, , where  is a
constant. This results in the ladder relation
 and the operator identities




where  operators are defined as in the previous case.
Denoting , one can form a
polynomial algebra
 
where  is a polynomial of the degree  in .
  For a representation theory of such algebras, see e.g..
Note that for  this is the Heisenberg-Weyl or the harmonic oscillator
algebra, and for  it coincides with the  algebra.

Quantum algebras, or -analogues of the algebras ()
appear from the following operator self-similarity constraint
imposed upon the chain ():
 
When the numerical factor , one can remove  by the uniform
shift . Therefore we
assume below that . Substitute ()
with  into (). Then the operators ,
 satisfy the following identities
 
  For  these relations provide a realization of the -harmonic
oscillator algebra
 
with . One can set  by taking the
normalization condition .
Such a -analogue of the Heisenberg-Weyl algebra was encountered in physics
long ago. In the modern times it became quite popular due
to the inspirations coming from the quantum groups, see e.g..
  For  relations () determine a particular -analogue of
the conformal algebra  admitting the Hopf algebra
structure, etc.

Self-similar potentials 

Consider the Schrodinger equation realizations of the
algebraic relations described in the previous section.
Let us start from the closure ,
where  is the Schrodinger operator
in the notations of Sect. 2 and  is a translation operator
. As a result,
the operators  take the form ,
 and one gets the Heisenberg-Weyl
algebra . The potential
entering  is defined as ,
where  satisfies the following
nonlinear differential-delay equation
 
  For  one gets from this equation the standard harmonic
oscillator model , which is related to
the Hermite polynomials. Although for  and  the author
has found a meromorphic solution of () in terms of
the Weierstrass -function




in general it is quite difficult to build its solutions
analytic in some region, especially for
. Let us remark, that the equation () may
be derived also after imposing the constraint 
upon the chain ().

Turn now directly to the relations (). In this case
one can take  as the dilation (or -difference) operator:
. For real  this is a unitary operator
. Taking 


one realizes the identities (), provided  satisfy the
following system of nonlinear differential-delay equations:



 
Equivalently, these equations appear from the chain ()
after imposing the following constraints
 
having a simple group-theoretical interpretation.

One easily arrives at () using the Lie's symmetry reduction
technique (for a differential context of this theory, see e.g.,
and for an extension to difference equations, see e.g.).
   First, one notices that if  are solutions of the
chain (), then their discrete scaling transformation
 gives solutions of () as well.
Analogously, a shift in the numeration
 maps solutions of ()
into solutions. Let us consider a set of self-similar 
solutions of () which is invariant under a combination
of these two symmetries. E.g., demanding that these two transformations
are equivalent to one another, we arrive to ().
  For , this reduction may be rewritten as
 in which form it
was first met in. The general -periodic reduction ()
was found by the author in an attempt to -deform the
parastatistical supersymmetry algebras ().

Solutions of the equations () have a quite
complicated structure and general methods of solving such
differential-delay equations give relatively weak results.
E.g., for  in the existence and uniqueness of solutions
analytical near the  point was proved under some constraints,
and in existence of the
nonsingular for  solutions was demonstrated (the 
asymptotics of such solutions is not determined yet completely).
Some understanding of the complexity of general solutions is obtained
from considerations of special values of the parameters ,
when  can be expressed through some known functions.

Let  be arbitrary and 

This yields  or the free quantum mechanical particle,
which acquires in this way a -algebraic interpretation.

Suppose that  is not singular at , then in the crystal base
limit  the potential  boils down to the general KdV
-soliton potential.

Substitute now  into () and assume that
.
Then for  one easily gets the
potentials . For  the
corresponding system of equations for  provides
a "cyclic" representation of the Painleve-IV equation
. The  case is related to the Painleve-V
function, etc. This gives also a commutator representation
of the Painleve equations which was noticed first in.
   For  one gets similar situations
with the functions  obeying certain parity symmetry.
If  then for odd  and some cases of even 
the potential  is expressed through the hyperelliptic
functions.

The case when  is a primitive root of unity, 
 is quite interesting. For any odd  and, under
certain conditions, for even  potentials are expressed through
hyperelliptic functions with additional
crystallographic or quasi-crystallographic symmetries.
  For example, for  and  or  one recovers the
Lame equation with the equianharmonic or lemniscatic Weierstrass
-functions. Thus, this classical differential equation of the
second order appears to be related to the representations of the
-harmonic oscillator algebra for  a root of unity.

The general family of self-similar potentials
unifies some of the Painleve functions with hyperelliptic functions.
Due to the connections with quantum algebras, it may be
taken as a new class of nonlinear -special functions (viz. continuous
-Painleve transcendents) defined upon the differential equations.
The standard basic hypergeometric functionsappear in this formalism through the coherent states.

As far as the discrete spectrum of self-similar potentials is concerned,
from the factorization method and () it follows that
in the simplest case it is composed from  independent geometric
progressions: 
. The same follows from the theory of unitary representations
of the algebra ().
The only condition for the validity of this formal conclusion
is that the functions  are non-singular for  and
positive for  and negative for .

Coherent states 

There are many definitions of quantum mechanical coherent states.
In the context of spectrum generating algebras, such as () and
(), they are defined as eigenfunctions of the
corresponding lowering operators. Such eigenfunctions play the
role of generating functions for the space elements of irreducible
representations of a taken algebra. Let us describe briefly
coherent states for the quantum algebra q-alg  (for more details,
see).

Let us denote as  eigenstates of an abstract
operator  entering (),

Suppose that the operators
 are conjugated to each other with respect to some
inner product .
We assume that the spectrum of  is not degenerate.
Then the action of operators  upon 
has the form:






Let  be odd,  and .
Then for
 the operator  may have a discrete spectrum formed only from
up to  geometric progressions corresponding to the lowest weight unitary
irreducible representations of the algebra q-alg .
This follows from the fact that  is the lowering operator for
the  states and 
becomes negative for . Since
, this problem is avoided
for special values of , namely, for
.
   For normalizable
, one gets series of normalizable eigenstates
of the form 
.

Coherent states of the first type are defined as eigenstates of :
 
where  is a complex variable.
Representing  as a sum of the states
 with some coefficients, one finds






where  is a standard basic hypergeometric series
with the operator argument 
and  is a normalization constant (in the set of parameters
of the  function the term 
is assumed to be absent).
The superscript  simply counts the number of lowest weight
irreducible representations of the algebra () each of which
has its own coherent state (or a generating function).
The states  are normalizable
for . Coherent states of
this type were first constructed for the -harmonic oscillator
algebra () in, for a particular explicit model
of them, see e.g..

It is not difficult to see, that zero modes of the operator 
define a special degenerate representation of the algebra ().
Since  operators commute with  in the subspace of these
zero modes, one can consider them as coherent states as well.

Unusual coherent states appear from the non-highest
weight representations of () corresponding to
the  eigenstates of .
Let  be a discrete spectrum
point of . Then the operators  generate from 
a part of the discrete spectrum of  in the form
of a bilateral geometric progression .
Since  for arbitrary  and
, the number of such irreducible representations in
the spectrum of  is not limited. Moreover, a continuous direct sum
of such representations may form a continuous spectrum of .

An important fact is that for  the role of lowering operator is
played by . Therefore one can define coherent states as eigenstates
of this operator as well:
 
Suppose that the bilateral sequence  belongs to the
discrete spectrum of . Then the states  are expanded
in the series of eigenstates :





where  is a bilateral -hypergeometric series
with the operator argument 
and  is a normalization constant.
In this case the states  are normalizable if
.

Suppose that the  region is occupied by the continuous spectrum.
The corresponding states  may be normalized
as .
Let  and the states  are not degenerate.
Taking  in (), we get the expansion





where




There is a countable family of such coherent states which
have a unit norm for  under the
following choice of the normalization constant :






where 
The integral under consideration is a particular subcase of
a Ramanujan -beta integral.

We were considering until now the abstract coherent states.
In the case of Schrodinger equations with the self-similar potentials
one has the doubly degenerate
continuous spectrum for . The structure of 
states in this case is very complicated. Even for the zero potential
case (the free particle) we get a highly nontrivial situation.
Let  and



where  is the dilation operator, 
It can be checked directly that  and
 The equation 
 coincides now with the retarded pantograph equation,
which was investigated in detail in.
As follows from the results of this paper, in the retarded case the
pantograph equation does not admit solutions belonging to .
However, the operator  has infinitely many normalizable
eigenstates. The equation 
coincides now with the advanced pantograph equation
 
which has infinitely many solutions belonging to .
   For the free particle realization of the  symmetry algebras,
one gets the generalized pantograph equations considered in.
As one of the open problems in this field, let us mention a need
to characterize a minimal set of solutions of the equation ()
providing a complete basis of the Hilbert space .


Solitons, Ising chains, and random matrices 

Consider the KdV -soliton solution 
  where  is a Wronskian of 
different solutions of the free Schrodinger equation ().
Actually, there are many determinantal representation for this
tau-function, e.g._N=, _ij =_ij + 2k_i k_j 
k_i+k_j  e^(_i+_j)/2 ,
phase 


The variables  are known to describe amplitudes of solitons
(they are related to the eigenvalues of  as ),
 are the  phases of solitons
and  are their velocities.

A subclass of the self-similar potentials appearing from the -periodic
closure () can be viewed as a particular infinite soliton
potential. Indeed, consider the KdV -soliton solution with the
parameters  subject to the constraint , and
take the  limit. The limiting potential has
the self-similar spectrum 
and an infinite number of free parameters .

The scaled potential 
has the same solitonic interpretation with the phases
 

Let us demand that , i.e.
impose the additional constraint 
, which is seen to match with the condition ().
In this picture the discrete dilation  just deletes
 solitons corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues of  - this
feature is the simplest physical characterization of the
self-similar potentials.

Let us turn now to the statistical mechanics applications.
-soliton tau-function of the KdV equation phase  can be represented
in the following Hirota form:
 
The coefficients , describing phase shifts of the -th
and -th solitons after their collision, have the form
 
As noticed in, for 
this tau-function coincides with the grand
partition function of a lattice gas model on a line
(for a two-dimensional Coulomb gas picture, seeand the next section). In this interpretation the discrete variables
 describe filling factors of the lattice sites by molecules,
 is a chemical potential, and  are the interaction
energies of molecules.

It is well known that a simple change of variables in the lattice
gas partition function leads to the partition function
of some Ising chains:
 
where  is the number of spins ,  are  the
exchange constants,  is an external magnetic field, 
is the inverse temperature. Indeed, a replacement of filling factors
in N_soliton  by the spin variables  yields
_N=e^  Z_N, 1 4 _i<j  A_ij 
+ 1 2 _j=0 ^N-1  _j,
tauising where
J_ij  =-1 4   A_ij ,
H_i=1 2 _i +1 4 _j=0, ij ^N-1  A_ij .
identif Similar relations with Ising chains are valid for the whole infinite
Kadomtsev-Petviashvili (KP) hierarchy of equations
and some other differential and finite difference nonlinear integrable
evolution equations. Corresponding tau-functions have the same form
N_soliton  with a more complicated structure of the phase
shifts  and phases  (a partial list of such
equations can be found in).

The general relation between -soliton solutions of integrable hierarchies
and partition functions of the lattice statistical mechanics models
established in brings a new point of view upon the self-similar
potentials as well. Namely, as shown in self-similar
spectra can be deduced from the condition of translational invariance of
the infinite spin chains. E.g., let us demand that the spin chain is
invariant with respect to the shift of the lattice by one site
 which assumes that .
As a result, the exchange constants  (or the soliton phase
shifts ) depend only on the distance between the sites .
This very simple and quite natural physical requirement forces 
to form one geometric progression (N.B.: uniquely)
 
where  and  are some free parameters.
In a more complicated case one demands the translational invariance
with respect to the shifts by  lattice sites, i.e.
, and this results in the general
self-similar spectra .
The main drawback of these relations between the solitons and Ising chains
is that for fixed  the temperature  (or ) is fixed too,
which is clearly seen from the comparison of () and
() (in the Coulomb gas interpretation one actually finds
that ).

  For finite chains , the translational invariance is
not exact.
The infinite soliton limit  corresponds to the thermodynamical
limit in statistical mechanics. In this picture, all coordinates of
integrable hierarchies ( and higher hierarchy "times") are interpreted
as particular parameters of the external magnetic field .
Since , the  and -dependent part of  decays exponentially
fast for . As a result, in the limit 
only the constants  are relevant for the
partition function (speaking more precisely, they determine the
leading asymptotics term of the partition function at ).
Although in the thermodynamic limit the -dependence is
washed out and the Ising chain is periodic, presence of an infinite
number of free parameters  does not allow one to find
a closed form
expression for the leading term of . However, for the self-similar
infinite soliton systems, characterized by the periodicity
of  or, equivalently, by the periodicity of the
external magnetic field , such expressions do exist.

Take  and let the magnetic field be homogeneous .
Then in the KdV equation case one gets an antiferromagnetic
Ising chain:  and 
(a similar picture is valid for the general ).
The exchange has a long distance character but its intensity falls
off exponentially fast and, as a result, phase transitions
are absent for nonzero temperatures. However, for  or 
the exchange constants  are diverging. Under appropriate
renormalizations one can build a model with a very small non-local
exchange such that a phase transition takes place even for
non-zero .

In order to compute the partition function one can use determinantal
representations for the tau-function, e.g. the Wronskian formula
(). As shown in, for the translationally invariant
Ising chains in a homogeneous magnetic field tau-functions become
determinants of some Toeplitz matrices and their natural -periodic
generalizations. E.g., for  the following result has been derived:
 for ,
where the free energy per site  has the form
-f_I(q, H)=2(q^4;q^4)_H 
(q^2;q^2)_^1/2  
+ 1 4 _0^2 d(()^2 - q^2 H),
free 






( are the standard Jacobi theta-functions).
In the derivation of this formula the Ramanujan  sum
was used at the boundary of convergence of the corresponding
infinite bilateral basic hypergeometric series. A standard
physicists' trick was used for dealing with that, namely, a
small auxiliary parameter  was introduced into
the original expression for the density function 
 
which guarantees the absolute convergence of the series for .
Although the limit  leads to some singularity in 
on the right hand side of (), it does not lead to divergences
after taking the integral in () (a more precise
mathematical justification of this physical "harmlessness"
is desirable). The total magnetization of the lattice

 has the following appealing form
m(H)=(1-1  
_0^ _1^2(, q^2)d _4^2(, q^2)^2H
-_1^2(, q^2) ^2H  )H.
magkdv In order to change the fixed value of the temperature, one may
try to replace () by 
where  is some sequence of integers, and look for integrable equations
admitting -soliton solutions with such phase shifts.
This is a highly nontrivial task, and inonly one more permitted value of the temperature was found.
It corresponds to  and appears from special reduction of the
-soliton solution of the KP-equation of B-type (BKP).
The general BKP -function generates much more complicated Ising
chains than in the KdV case. The corresponding exchange
constants have the form
 
where  are some free parameters.
Translational invariance of the spin lattice, ,
results in the following spectral self-similarity
 
where we set  and assume that .
This gives the exchange




The parameter  is restricted to the unit disk  due to
the inversion symmetry . For  one gets now
the ferromagnetic Ising chain, i.e. ;
for  and 
the chain is antiferromagnetic, i.e. .
In the thermodynamic limit  the partition function
 is given again by the determinant of a Toeplitz matrix,
which is diagonalized by the discrete Fourier transformation.
Similar picture holds for arbitrary -periodic chains,
see for explicit expressions for the magnetization and
technical details of computations.

It is well known that the -particle lattice gas partition functions
define probability distribution functions in the theory
of random matrices. In a natural way, partition functions
of the Ising models considered in the previous section may be
related to the probability distribution functions of some random
matrix models with a discretized set of eigenvalues. Let us
describe briefly this correspondence comparing the KP -soliton solution
and the Dyson's circular ensemble.

Dyson has introduced an ensemble of unitary random 
matrices with the eigenvalues , ,
such that after the integration over the auxiliary "angular variables"
the probability distribution of the phases 
takes the form 

One may relax some of the conditions used by Dyson and work with a more
general set of distribution functions. In Gaudin has proposed
a circular ensemble with the probability distribution law
 
containing a free continuous parameter . It
interpolates between the Dyson's case  () and the uniform
distribution (). Let us note in passing, that the paper
 contains in it implicitly a specific model of the
-harmonic oscillator. The model () admits also
an interpretation as a lattice gas on the circle with the partition function




where  is fixed and the potential energy has the form
 

A surprising fact is that the grand partition function of this model
may be obtained in a special infinite soliton limit of the -soliton
tau-function of the KP hierarchy. This means that the finite
KP soliton solutions provide a discretization of the model, namely,
they define a lattice gas on the circle. This leads to random matrices
with a discrete set of eigenvalues. E.g., one may take unitary
 matrices with eigenvalues equal to -th roots of unity, i.e.
.
The probability measure is taken to be continuous in the auxiliary
"angular" variables of the unitary matrices and discrete in the
eigenvalue phase variables .
More precisely, the integrals over  are replaced by finite sums
over  and the continuous model is recovered for 
with finite :
 
The -particle partition function becomes






while the grand canonical ensemble partition function takes the form
 
where  is an excessive chemical potential, and




are the KP solitons phase shifts for a special choice of the parameters
 

To conclude, the grand partition function of the Gaudin's
circular ensemble coincides with the particular infinite
soliton KP tau-function at zero hierarchy "times".
The root of unity discretization of circular ensembles has been
considered by Gaudin himself, where a connection with
Ising chains was noticed as well, but the relation with soliton
solutions of integrable equations was not established.
The BKP hierarchy of equations suggests a generalization of
the distribution law () to
 
and its discrete analogue, which were not investigated yet appropriately.

It is well known that the -tuple Selberg integral provides an explicit
evaluation of the  particle Coulomb gas partition functions for arbitrary
values of the inverse temperature  (i.e. not just for 
corresponding to orthogonal, unitary and symplectic ensembles).
It would be interesting to know whether a similar
universal formula exists for the grand partition functions of
lattice Coulomb gases.

Lattice Coulomb gas on the plane 

Solution of the Poisson equation on the plane,

defines the electrostatic potential ,
created by a charged particle placed at the point .
In the bounded domains with dielectric or conducting walls, the
potential has a more complicated form since the normal component of the
electric field  should vanish on the surface
of a dielectric,  while the tangent component is zero
at the metallic boundary,  For simple geometric
configurations of boundaries an introduction of artificial images of
charges may simplify solution of the Poisson equation.

The energy of an electrostatic system ("plasma") consisting of 
particles in a bounded domain of the plane is
 
where  and  are the particles' coordinates and charges.
The first term is the standard Coulomb energy, the second one describes an
interaction with the boundaries (or the charge-image interaction),
and the last term corresponds to the external fields contribution.

Suppose that our plasma is composed from the particles of equal charges,
 (in the two component case ), upon a discrete lattice
 on the plane. The grand partition function of such lattice
Coulomb gas is




where  is an effective chemical potential.
In general case one can rewrite  in the form 




where  or 1 depending on whether the site with the
coordinate  is empty or occupied by a particle,
and the functions  and  characterize distribution of
particles of different types. E.g., in the two-component case,
when  charges occupy the  sublattices,
one has . Note that these
2D lattice gases describe simultaneously some 2D Ising magnets.

Let us take now the -soliton tau-function ()
and replace in it the soliton number  by a variable  taking
 discrete values. As a result, it may be rewritten in the form
 
But this is precisely () - one just needs to identify the phase
shifts  with the Coulomb interaction potential
, and the phases  with the function .
As a result of this observation made in, one can construct
a number of new solvable models of Coulomb gases in addition to already
known ones (see, e.g. and references therein).

    For the KP-hierarchy soliton solutions one has 
where  is the -th KP hierarchy "time"
and  are some arbitrary functions of .
    For the BKP-hierarchy  are given by () and

where  are the BKP evolution "times".

Let us take  Then in the KP case
 
where  is the potential created by a positive unit charge placed
at  over a conductor with its surface occupying the  line.
In this case  solves the Poisson equation with
the boundary condition .
The same potential is created by a positive charge placed at the point
 and its image of opposite charge located at the point
.

Similar to the random matrix models situation, the correspondence
between 2D lattice Coulomb gases with specific boundary conditions
and solitons is valid only for fixed , which is found
from the comparison of () with () to be 
Since , one finds an explicit expression for the
zero time soliton phases  in ():
 
where the middle term corresponds to the charge-image interaction, and
 is the potential created by a neutralizing background of
some density , 

The harmonic term 
in () corresponds to an external electric field.
One may conclude that the imaginary hierarchy times evolution of the KP
soliton solutions describes the behavior of a 2D lattice Coulomb gas in a
varying external electric field.

Usefulness of the conformal transformations  is well known
in the potential theory. With their help one can map plasma particles to
various regions. So, the map  puts them inside a corner with
the  angle between the conducting walls.
The exponential map  leads to a gas inside the strip
 between two parallel conductors, etc.

As to the BKP equation case, the choice  leads to the
Coulomb gas placed inside the upper right quarter of the
plane with the dielectric and conductor walls along the  and
-axes respectively. The discrete temperature appears
to be the same, . A curious set of solvable dipole gas models
is generated by the self-similarity constraints imposed upon the
spectral data of the corresponding multi-soliton systems.
   For further details, see.


Appendix. A heuristic guide to special functions
of one variable 

There are many handbooks and textbooks  on special functions.
However, none of them contains a formal list of properties
which a function should have in order to be "special".
One usually talks on functions of some particular type
(hypergeometric, -functions, etc). R. Askey has suggested
one universal definition that if a function is so useful that
it starts to bear some name, then it is "special".
Another essential, but not so universal, characteristic
refers to the asymptotic behavior. Namely, for special
functions one is expected to be able to deduce asymptotics at infinity
from a known local behavior, i.e. the connection
problems should be solvable - such an approach is advocated by people
working on the Painleve type functions.

To the author's taste these two definitions are relying upon
the secondary features of special functions. One has to have already
the functions in hands in order to start to investigate their properties.
If one takes as a goal the search of new special functions, then
it is necessary to find a definition containing a more
extended set of technical tools for work. In this respect it
should be stressed that even the term "classical special functions"
appears to be not so stable. E.g., it is by now accepted that
the family of classical orthogonal polynomials consists of not just
the Jacobi polynomials and their descendants, but of the essentially
more complicated Askey-Wilson polynomials invented just
two decades ago.

The group theory provides a number of tools for building new
functions, but, unfortunately, connections with the
representation theory often provide only interpretations for
functions already defined by other means. Still, the symmetry approach
seems to be the central one in the theory of special functions.
In particular, the key "old" special functions appear from
separations of variables in the very simple (and, so,
useful and universal) equations.
   For the last decade the author's research was tied to the
following working definition: special functions are the functions
associated with self-similar reductions of spectral transformation
chains for linear spectral problems. 
Speaking differently, special functions are connected
with fixed points of various continuous and discrete symmetry
transformations for a taken class of eigenvalue problem.
This definition works well only for special functions of one
independent variable (which may, however, depend on an infinite
number of parameters) and even for them it does not pretend
to cover all possible special functions.
On the one hand, this definition comes from the theory of completely
integrable systems, where a search of self-similar solutions of nonlinear
evolution equations is a standard problem.
On the other hand, particular examples found from this approach
show that it has in its heart the contiguous relations  -
linear or nonlinear equations
connecting special functions at different values of their parameters.

Schematically, a heuristic algorithm of looking for these "spectral"
special functions consists of the following steps:

1. Take a linear eigenvalue problem determined by differential or
difference equations.

2. Consider another linear equation involving variables
   entering the first equation in a different way and
   having the same space of solutions.

3. Resolve compatibility conditions of the taken linear problems
and derive nonlinear equations for free functional coefficients
entering these problems. When the second equation is
differential, one gets the continuous flows associated with the
KdV, KP, Toda, etc equations. When the second equation is discrete,
one gets a sequence of Darboux transformations performing some
discrete changes in the spectral data and providing some
discrete-time Toda, Volterra, etc chains.

4. Analyze discrete and continuous symmetries of the latter equations
in the Lie group-theoretical sense, i.e. look for nontrivial
continuous and discrete transformations mapping solutions
of these nonlinear equations into other solutions.

5. Consider self-similar  solutions of the derived nonlinear equations,
which are invariant with respect to taken symmetry transformations.
As a result, some finite sets of nonlinear differential,
differential-difference, difference-difference, etc equations
are emerging which define "nonlinear" special functions.
Solutions of the original linear equations with
coefficients determined by these self-similar functions
define "linear" special functions.

The last two steps are heuristic since, despite of a big
progress in the general theory of symmetry reductions
(see, e.g.), no completely regular method has been built yet.
E.g., the reductions used in the derivation of the associated Askey-Wilson
polynomials' recurrence coefficientsand in the discovery of new explicit systems of biorthogonal rational
functions described in Zhedanov's lecture at this meeting
did not find yet a purely group-theoretical setting.

Another important ingredient of the theory of special functions, which
was not listed in this scheme, is the theory of transcendency. Painleve
functions are known to be transcendental over the
differential fields built from a finite tower of Picard-Vessiot
extensions of the field of rational functions. In solving differential
(difference, or whatever) equations one has to determine
eventually which differential field a taken solution belongs to
(e.g., whether it belongs to the field of functions over which the
differential equation is defined). As an open problem in this field,
which was discussed partially in, we mention a need to find a
differential (or difference) Galois theory interpretation of the
self-similar reductions of factorization chains.

Acknowledgements. 
The author was partially supported by the RFBR grants No. 00-01-00299 and
00-01-10564.


 99 

 Ablowitz, M.J. and Segur, H., Solitons and the
Inverse Scattering Transform , SIAM, Philadelphia, 1981.

 Adler, V.E., Recuttings of polygons,
Funkt. Anal. i ego Pril.  27 (2) (1993), 79-82.

 Andrianov, A.A., Borisov, N.V., and Ioffe, M.V.,
  Factorization method and Darboux transformation for multidimensional
Hamiltonians, Theor. Math. Phys.  61  (1984), 1078-1088.

AIS  Andrianov, A.A., Ioffe, M.V., and Spiridonov, V.P.,
Higher-derivative supersymmetry and the Witten index,
Phys. Lett.  A174  (1993), 273-279; hep-th/9303005.

 Arik, M. and Coon, D.D., Hilbert spaces of analytic
functions and generalized coherent states, J. Math. Phys. 
17  (1976), 524-527.

ASu  Askey, R. and Suslov, S.K., The -harmonic oscillator and
the Al-Salam and Carlitz polynomials, Lett. Math. Phys. 
29  (1993), 123-132.

 Baxter, R.J., Exactly Solved Models in Statistical
Mechanics , Academic Press, London, 1982.

 Bureau, F.J., Differential equations with fixed critical
points, in: Painleve Transcendents ,
Levi, D. and Winternitz, P. (eds), NATO ASI series. Series B; vol. 278,
Plenum Press, New York, 1990, pp. 103-123.

 Burchnall, J.L. and Chaundy, T.W., Commutative ordinary
differential operators I  II, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.  21  (1923),
420-440; Proc. Roy. Soc.  A118  (1928), 557-583.

 Coon, D.D., Yu, S., and Baker, S., Operator formulation
of a dual multiparticle theory with nonlinear trajectories,
Phys. Rev.  D5  (1972), 1429-1433.

 Crum, M.M., Associated Sturm-Liouville systems,
Quart. J. Math. Oxford  6  (1955), 121-127.

 Darboux, G., Lec ons sur la Theorie
Generale des Surfaces , Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1889.

 Date, E., Jimbo, M., Kashiwara, M., and Miwa, T.,
Transformation groups for soliton equations, in: Nonlinear
Integrable Systems , World Scientific, Singapore, 1983, pp. 41-119.

 Deift, P.A., Applications of a commutation formula,
Duke. Math. J.  45  (1978), 267-310.

 Faddeev, L.D., The inverse problem of the
quantum scattering theory, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk (Russ. Math. Surveys) 
14 (4) (1959), 57-119.

Fl  Flaschka, H., A commutator representation of
Painleve equations, J. Math. Phys.  21  (1980), 1016-1018.

 Forrester, P.J., Jancovici, B., and Tellez, G.,
Universality in some classical Coulomb systems of restricted
dimension, J. Stat. Phys.  84  (1996), 359-378.

 Frisch, U. and Bourret, R., Parastochastics,
J. Math. Phys.  11  (1970), 364-390.

 Gaudin, M., Une famille a une parametre d'ensembles
unitaires, Nucl. Phys.  85  (1966), 545-575.

 Gaudin, M., Gaz coulombien discret a une dimension,
J. Phys. (France)  34  (1973), 511-522.

 Gasper, G. and Rahman, M., Basic Hypergeometric
Series , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.

 Gendenshtein, L.E. and Krive, I.V.,
Supersymmetry in quantum mechanics, Uspekhi Phys. Nauk
(Sov. Phys. Uspekhi)  146  (1985), 553-590.

 Geronimus, Ya.L., On the polynomials orthogonal with respect
to a given number sequence and a theorem by W. Hahn,
Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR  4  (1940), 215-228.

 Hirota, R., Direct methods in soliton theory,
in: Bullough, R.K. and Caudrey, P.J. (eds.) Solitons ,
Springer, Berlin, 1980.

 Infeld, L., On a new treatment of some eigenvalue
problems, Phys. Rev.  59  (1941), 737-747.

 Infeld, L. and Hull, T.E., The factorization method,
Rev. Mod. Phys.  23  (1951), 21-68.

 Iserles, A., On the generalized pantograph
functional-differential equation, Europ. J. Appl. Math. 
4  (1993), 1-38.

 Kato, T. and McLeod, J.B., The functional-differential
equation , Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 
 77  (1971), 891-937.

 Kitaev, A.V., Special functions of the isomonodromy
type, Acta Appl. Math.  64  (2000), 1-32 and lectures at the
NATO ASI "Special functions-2000", 2000.

 Krein, M.G., On a continuous analogue of a
Christoffel formula in the theory of orthogonal polynomials,
Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR  19  (1957), 1095-1097.

 Levi, D. and Winternitz, P., Continuous symmetries
of discrete equations, Phys. Lett.  A152  (1991), 335-338.

 Liu, Yu., On functional differential equations with
proportional delays, Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge University, 1996.

 Loutsenko, I.M. and Spiridonov, V.P., Self-similar
potentials and Ising models, JETP Lett.  66  (1997), 789-795;
Spectral self-similarity, one-dimensional Ising chains and random matrices,
Nucl. Phys.  B538  (1999), 731-758.

 Loutsenko, I.M. and Spiridonov, V.P.,
Soliton solutions of integrable hierarchies and
Coulomb plasmas, J. Stat. Phys.  99  (2000), 751-767;
cond-mat/9909308.

 Macfarlane, A.J., On -analogues of the quantum
harmonic oscillator and quantum group , J. Phys.
A: Math.  Gen.  22  (1989), 4581-4588.

 Maeda, S., The similarity method for difference
equations, IMA J. Appl. Math.  38  (1987), 129-134.

 Miller, W., Jr., Lie theory and difference equations I,
J. Math. Anal. Appl.  28  (1969), 383-399.

 Miller, W., Jr., Symmetry and Separation of Variables ,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1977.

 Perelomov, A.M., Generalized Coherent States
and Their Applications , Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.

 Rubakov, V.A. and Spiridonov, V.P., Parasupersymmetric
quantum mechanics, Mod. Phys. Lett.  A3  (1988), 1337-1347.

 Schminke, U.-W., On Schrodinger's factorization
method for Sturm-Liouville operators, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh 
80A  (1978), 67-84.

 Schrodinger, E., A method of determining
quantum-mechanical eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, Proc. Roy.
Irish Acad.  A46  (1940), 9-16; Further studies on solving
eigenvalue problems by factorization, Proc. Roy.
Irish Acad.  A46  (1940), 183-206.

 Shabat, A.B., The infinite dimensional dressing
dynamical system, Inverse Prob.  8  (1992), 303-308.

 Skorik, S. and Spiridonov, V.P.,
Self-similar potentials and the -oscillator algebra at roots of
unity, Lett. Math. Phys.  28  (1993), 59-74; hep-th/9304107.

 Smith, S.P., A class of algebras similar to the
enveloping algebra of , Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 
322  (1990), 285-314.

 Spiridonov, V.P., Exactly solvable potentials and quantum
algebras, Phys. Rev. Lett.  69  (1992), 398-401;
Deformation of supersymmetric and
conformal quantum mechanics through affine transformations,
in: Proceedings of the International Workshop on Harmonic Oscillators,
NASA Conf. Publ. 3197 , 1992, pp. 93-108; hep-th/9208073.

 Spiridonov, V.P., Coherent states of the -Weyl algebra,
Lett. Math. Phys.  35  (1995), 179-185; Universal superpositions
of coherent states and self-similar potentials, Phys. Rev.  A52 
(1995), 1909-1935; (E) A53 , 2903; quant-ph/9601030.

 Spiridonov, V.P., Symmetries of factorization chains for
the discrete Schrodinger equation, J. Phys. A: Math.  Gen. 
30  (1997), L15-L21.

 Spiridonov, V.P. and Zhedanov, A.S., Discrete Darboux
transformations, discrete time Toda lattice and the Askey-Wilson
polynomials, Methods and Appl. Anal.  2  (1995), 369-398.

 Veselov, A.P. and Shabat, A.B.,
Dressing chain and spectral theory of Schrodinger operator,
Funk. Anal. i ego Pril.  27 (2) (1993), 1-21.

 Weiss, J., Periodic fixed points of Backlund
transformations, J. Math. Phys.  31  (1987), 2025-2039.



