

Particle Spectrum of the Supersymmetric Standard Model from the Massless Excitations 
of a Four Dimensional Superstring 
B. B. Deo and  L. Maharana(E-Mail:  lmaharan@iopb.res.in)  
 Physics Department, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar-751004, India. 
 
A superstring action is quantised with Neveu Schwarz(NS) and Ramond(R) boundary conditions. 
The zero mass states of the NS sector are classified as the vector gluons, W-mesons,
-mesons and scalars containing Higgs. The fifteen zero mass fermions are obtained 
from the Ramond sector. A space time supersymmetric Hamiltonian of the Standard Model is
presented without any conventional SUSY particles.
11.25-w,11.30Pb,12.60.Jv 
There is an exciting possibility that the observed spectrum of elementary particles of
the standard model is obtainable from a suitable N=1, D=4 superstring massless modes of excitations.
Because the number of fermionic modes as observed today is thirty due to the fifteen 
fermions. Similarly, including Higgs, the number of bosonic modes is twenty eight. If we
include two noninteracting scalar modes, the bosonic degrees of freedom will match
with those of the fermions. Therefore there could be a distinct supersymmetry scenario. 
With this aim in mind, we examine the case of a recently proposed new type of superstring 
in four dimensions  where this is  realised.

 A world sheet  supersymmetric action is written as  
 are the bosonic coordinates. , j=1,.,6 and , k=7,.,11
are the Lorentz Majorana spinors in the bosonic representation of SO(3,1), with
 
and
 
The upper index in the action refers to a row and lower index to a column.
By counting the contributions of the fermions and bosons, the central charge of the 
action in equation () is 26 like Nambu-Goto string but unlike a 
normal superstring. This is, because, the action also contains the light cone ghosts

 
whose central charge adds up to eleven, like  superconformal ghost 
action. The action in equation () is invariant under the supersymmetric transformations,

 
with  as the constant anticommutating spinor.  and
 are the two unit component c-number row vectors with the property that
 and   and it
follows that
=6 and =5.
The commutator of two such transformations is a translation with coefficient
 provided
 and
 where
 
and  is the superpartner of  as can be checked. Writing out the 
2-d local supersymmetric action of Brink, Di Vecchia, Howe,Deser and Zumino ,
we can write down  the Noether current in the gravitinoless gauge,
 
and in the simpler light cone co-ordinates
 
and  the energy momentum tensor
 
From action in equation (), commutation and anticommutation of the fields can be 
found and the string is quantised using Neveu-Schwarz and Ramond   boundary
conditions. The co-ordinate quanta, , satisfy 
 
In the NS sector, the quanta of  and  are respectively      and 
,   with r half integral and obey
 
Similarly the quanta d and d of R sector satisfy (m, n integers), the nonvanishing 
anticommutations
 
The unusual negative signs are taken care of, by the phase factors,
 
It will be useful to note   

.  Similarly for the  d,  ;

.

Virasoro generators  (dot implies summation of all qualifying indices and : :
for normal ordering)
 
By direct calculation, it is easily checked that the generators satisfy super Virasoro
algebra with anomaly term typical of central charge 26. To cancel these anomalies, 
we can use the known way of introducing the conformal ghosts b and c.

 
The BRST charge operator should also include 11 pairs of commuting 
  superconformal ghost system. Defining


  such that  
  and     with 
 .   Since the conformal dimension 
of  is   and of    is  , 


In NS sector, the BRST charge is
 
and  =0 if a=1 is proved directly. The nilpotency proves the unitarity. Details can
be found in reference  .  As can be shortly shown, the physical state conditions 
remove all the ghosts from the Fock space,
 
 We shall assume the Gupta- Bleuler condition  . 
Since  ,  we get 
. Further    leads to  
  and  ;  
. Similar analysis yields 
.  
There is no Lorentz metric longitudinal ghost in the Fock space.


Obtaining a ghost free, anomaly free and unitary string, we calculate the zero mode string 
excitations leading to the Standard Model. The , the hypercharge vector, is
simply given from the state
 
 condition  () tells that  is massless and  condition gives
the Lorentz condition  .

In NS sector,  the objects like     
are massless due to  (). Dropping the suffix , we construct 
the traceless tensor, (i,j  = 1,2,3), expressable in terms of vector fields ,
 
The eight gluons are obtained by using the eight Gell-Mann   matrices.
 
Similarly for (i,j = 7,8), we get the -mesons
 
with
 
where , =1,2,3 are the  isospin matrices.
Of the remaining , j=4,5,6 and , k=9,10,11, we can form six 
Lorentz scalars      and   
.   Let us call them   .  
The Higgs bosons are 
 
leaving behind a scalar 
 

Let us consider the fermion sector. With  as Dirac matrices and 
u(p) being the fermion wave function,  the states (), () ,() 
and  () with    and 
   are all massless states. Broadly j=1,..,6 
are the colour sector and k=7,..,11 are the electroweak sector. We shall drop the 
suffix -1 and note that the condition gives  ,  the Dirac 
equation for each of them. We list, in Table I, the fermi particles with the assigned 
states and quantum numbers of the Standard Model.
 

 
Particle Spectra, States and Quantum Numbers (SM) 

There are fifteen fermions with 30 degrees of freedom matching the 30 bosonic degrees 
of freedom from above equations. 
We now proceed to construct the Hamiltonian which is supersymmetric and 
 invariant following the ideas presented by one of
us .
The vector fields denoted by , l=1,..,8, are gluon fields. l=9 is the 
field and l=10,11,12  stand for W-mesons fields. We shall use the temporal gauge ,
where  =0. For each , there are electric field strength  and 
magnetic field strength  . Following Nambu , the combination 
 
satisfies the only nonvanishing equal time commutation relation
 
We then construct Wilson's loop line integrals to convert the ordinary derivatives acting
on fermion fields to respective gauge covariant derivatives.
The phase function for the colour is
 
Denoting
 
the isospin phase functions are 
 
The  will denote the fermions, =1,..,6 refer to the coloured quark doublets. 
The sum of the products 
 
The singlet phased  colour quarks are
 
The Q=1,  singlet    and the   are phased as
 
The Higgs doublets  and the lepton doublet   are phased like
 
In writing down the supersymmetric charge Q, we shall use  matrices, 
 and 's are the three Pauli spin matrices,
 
where  is the electroweak 
symmetry breaking term with . We use the usual 
commutators and anticommutators at equal times and the 
 and obtain
 
 is the Hamiltonian H and P is the total momentum. We get the
 invariant Hamiltonian as
 
and  similarly lengthy expression for P (see reference [3]). The last two terms involving 
Y=2 meson is absent in the standard model. But the Hamilton's equation of motion for 
the extra meson, obtained from the total Hamiltonian, is
 
and decouples from other standard model particles.

Supersymmetric transformations exhibiting the superpartners are
 
The only particle, not in the standard model, , is noninteracting and decoupled.

In summary, we wish to emphasise that the proposed superstring excitations of zero 
mass fall into the standard model particles in a very natural way. The bosons are 
themselves, the superpartners of the fermions and vice versa. It is not surprising that 
the  exotic SUSYs are not observed in the electroweak scale and the present formulation
provides a justification for their absence.


 99 
 B. B. Deo,  A new type of Superstring in four dimensions  hep-th/0211223 and
Phys. Lett. B  to be published
 B. B. Deo and L. Maharana,  Derivation of 
Einstein's equation from a new type of superstring in four
 dimensions  hep-th/0212004.
B. B. Deo, Supersymmetric Standard Model from String Theory  hep-th/0301041
 L. Brink, P. Di Vecchia and P. Howe, Phys. Lett. 65B (1976) 471;
S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 65B (1976) 369.
  M.A. Virasoro, Phys. Rev. D1 (1970) 2933,
 B. B. Deo, Mod. Phys. Lett.  A13 (1998) 2971,
 N. H. Christ and T. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. D22 (1980) 939,
 Y. Nambu, Supersymmetry and Quasisupersymmetry , E.F. Reprints(unpublished)
1991,
 


