
unsrt  
 

  
Self-Dual Fields and Quaternion Analyticity 
 
 
Sultan Catto
Physics Department
 The Graduate School and University Center
 The City University of New York 
365 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10016-4309
 and 
 Center for Theoretical Physics 
The Rockefeller University 

1230 York Avenue
 New York NY 10021-6399 
 
 
 

 
Quaternionic formulation of  conformal group and of its associated twistors and their relation to harmonic analyticity is presented. Generalization of  to the  conformal group  and its covering group  that generalizes the euclidean Lorentz group in  [namely  which allow us to obtain the projective twistor space ] is shown. Quasi-conformal fields are introduced in  and Fueter mappings are shown to map self-dual sector onto itself (and similarly for the anti-self-dual part). Differentiation of Fueter series and various forms of differential operators are shown, establishing the equivalence of Fueter analyticity with twistor and harmonic analyticity. A brief discussion of possible octonion analyticity is provided. 
 

PACS numbers: 12.40.Aa, 12.40.Qq, 11.30.Pb

 

 Work supported in part by DOE contracts No. DE-AC-0276 ER 03074 and 03075, and PSC-CUNY Research Awards.
 Introduction 


We give an expanded review of recent developments of Fueter's theory as discussed in Gursey and Tze's book "On the Role of Division, Jordan and Related Algebras in Particle Physics." A brief discussion to possible extension to octonionic analyticity will be presented. An appendix is added to the review on use of coherent states and coset decompositions. 

There are intriguing correspondences between the rotation (or pseudorotation) groups and
conformal groups in  Euclidean or Lorentzian space-times due to the properties
of the underlying division algebras. The conformal group is infinite dimensional in  and
trivially so in . This
has led to the development of conformal field theories and string theories on the  world
sheet as well as solvable lattice models in  statistical mechanics. These features again
appear in  topological field theories and quantum gravity. There are also some
correspondences to the self dual and anti self dual sectors of  gauge theories. Here we shall
confine ourselves to the cases  associated respectively with  and . The
situation is summarized in the following table:
 
 
In the Lorentzian two dimensional space the conformal group factorizes, giving rise to left
movers and right movers associated with real wave functions , . On the
other hand  factorizes in euclidean  where real three dimensional self dual fields
exist associated with  and  representations of . In 
instead of left and right movers we can define analytic and anti analytic functions  and
,  being anti analytic. This is analogous to the 
representation of  in  being complex and  being like the complex conjugate
of  just like analytic and anti analytic functions. Thus some aspects of analytic functions
in  will have their counterparts in the self dual or anti self dual sectors in  with
complex numbers being replaced by quaternions. These are the possibilities we shall now explore.

The Conformal group in , quaternions and twistors 


The conformal group in Euclidean  is the non-compact Lie group  with the
covering group . These groups generalize the Lie groups  in Euclidean . 

In  we can start from the two-dimensional representations of  namely
the complex spinor  with components  (). It transforms under the group as

 
where  is a  complex unimodular matrix,  is a 
representation. The right handed spinor  associated with the 
representation transforms as

  

Because of the identity

 
the  conjugate of , defined as

 
transforms like a right handed spinor  according to the law in Eq.() 

 

When  is interpreted as the Lie conformal group in ,  is a twistor
transforming linearly under  which is generated by translations, rotations, dilatation
and inversion.  can be regarded as the homogeneous coordinates of a point in the
projective space . The inhomogeneous coordinate is

 
which transforms non linearly under  represented by 

 

Then  transfoms undergoes a Mo bius transformation

 
with special cases giving:

a) dilatation

 
b) rotation

 
c) translation

 
d) inversion

 
e) special conformal transformation (translation of the inverse)

 
or

 

We now consider homogeneous functions of the spinor  ( twistor) of the form  such that

 
 being complex and  denoting the degree of homogeneity.

Choosing  and using Eq.() we obtain

 
Under  we have

 
so that we can define

 

These correspond to the  representation of  in terms of homogeneous
analytic functions . The  representations are obtained through
the transformation

 
and

 
so that

 
or, taking 

 
which gives

 
Hence

 
For the  representation, we have

 
Such primary fields transform like

 

Indeed under

 
we have

 
leading to

 
Hence

 

Under a more general transformation

 
we obtain

 

The transformation () is still a conformal mapping in  and corresponds to an
infinite group that generalizes the Mobius transformation ().

We now turn to the generalization of  to the conformal group  in . Its
 quaternionic representation is

 
 acts on a two dimensional quaternionic ket  in quaternionic Hilbert spaces

 
with the  complex representations

 
Thus  can be represented by the  complex matrix with first column  and
second column , where

 
The inverse  matrix  can also act on a  quaternionic row
from the right, so that

 

 
where the bar denotes quaternionic conjugation.

The inhomogeneous coordinate in the projective quaternionic space  is the ratio of
 and  so that

 

The -spinor  is the twistor representation of the conformal group . We find

 
or

 
The twistor  takes the form

 
where

 
and

 

We also have the  invariant quaternion

 
Under a conformal transformation  we have

 

 
where , , ,  are the quaternionic elements of .

Hence, the position quaternion  transforms under the Mobius transformation

 
while

  

Special cases, together with their infinitesimal forms, are

a) Translations

 

b) Dilatations

 

c) Left rotations

 

d) Right rotations

 

e) Inversion

 

f) Special conformal transformations

 

Like in the case of  we consider homogeneous functions of the  twistor.
These can be regarded as functions of  and the spinor , or the spinors  and
, or again functions of quaternions  (equal to ) and .

Under the  subgroup of  we have

 

 

We could also introduce another position vector  through the components of the left twistor 
 of Eq. ()

 

     

Under the  subgroup we have

 
so that

 
This gives the transformation law

 
Hence  also transforms like a -vector.

We find

 

 

It follows that from a right twistor and a left twistor we can form the two -vectors
 and  which transform respectively like a  and
 representations of the  group. It follows that

 
is an anti self-dual antisymmetrical tensor. On the other hand

 
is an  invariant scalar.

Introduction of quasi-conformal fields in . Covariant Fueter mappings 


In analogy to primary conformal fields in  that are homogeneous functions of the spinor
representations of  we shall construct certain functions of the lowest
dimensional representation of  in .  We have seen that in 
homogeneous functions of  can be regarded as analytic functions of
 once a power of  is factored out. In turn, the analytic
function  represents a conformal mapping of the -plane. Let us then start from a
function  of the two quaternionic components  and  of the fundamental
representation of , or, equivalently a function  of the first column  and  of
 and  which form the spinorial components of a twistor. Introducing the position
quaternion  we have

 
or

 
where we have used the definition (). 

These functions are homogeneous with respect to dilatation if we can write

 

 
We can now choose

 
so that

 

 
If we put

 
then W is a unit quaternion denoting a point on the sphere  parametrized by the
normalized spinor , so that

 

 

We can go further, to see for what kind of functions the quaternion  represented by a unitary
matrix can be further reduced.

Let

 
Then

 
where  is associated with rotations around the third axis. Since the  matrix
representation for  is

 
its general parametrization is

 
so that the complex number

 
denotes a point on .

By taking  in Eq.() complex

 
we can write

 
where

 
and  is a point on . Since in that case the function of 
 are reduced to functions of  and , we find
the projective space  introduced by Penrose and Ward. Such functions can be also 
interpreted as function of  and a point on  parametrized by . This is the
method of harmonic analyticity of F. Gursey, V. Ogievetsky and their collaborators C. Devchand, M. Evans, W. Jiang, C-H. Tze and others.

We shall now present a third category of functions associated with a quaternionic homogeneity
corresponding to the quaternionic projective space .

Consider functions  that transform like some representation of  subgroup
of  with ,  being quaternionic,  is assumed to get multipliers 
,  such that

 
or

 

Taking

 
we obtain

 
where we have used Eq.().

More generally  and  can also undergo an  transformation

 
Hence, we can have more general multipliers  and . Indeed,

 
where have have put

 
Taking

 
we find

 
where  and  are in general function of ,  and .  If  is a scalar, 
then  and  can not depend on  and , or alternatively  and .  They will depend on the scalar .  Hence in that case if the homogeneity degree is  we have

 

If  is a quaternion transforming like  under , then we must have

 

Such a function is a power series in

) 
so that

 

These are just left-right holomorphic Fueter functions of . If  transform like 
 representation of  then we have a function of

 
where  transforms like a -vector under  as

 
so that

 
Then

 
If  transforms like a -vector, then it is of the form

 
It transforms as

 
which is the transformation law for .  Thus we have the mapping defined by

 
where we have also used an arbitrary  transformation.  Note that unlike the  case
this mapping is not conformal.  We shall call it quasi conformal.

Consider the special case

 
with  going from zero to infinity.  Then the mapping takes the form

 
which is equivalent to a quaternionic Mobius transformation that represents a conformal
transformation.  Hence the infinite parameter mapping of Eq.() admits the conformal
group as a subgroup.

This is the generalization to  of the infinite parameter 
holomorphic mapping in ,

 
where  are complex.  The mapping admits as a finite parameter subgroup

 
which is the Mobius transformation that is a nonlinear realization of 
on the coset 

 
 being the dilatation and  the Euclidean group in .

In the case of  the holomorphic group and its Mobius subgroup are both conformal,
since

 
This is not true in .  The infinite group Eq.() does not lead to a conformally flat
metric, but its Mobius subgroup does. Indeed we have

 
so that

 

The quaternionic holomorphic mapping of Eq.() can be called quasi conformal.  If we
make the  transformation

 
it takes the form

 
or, putting

 

 
In this last form the mapping is recognized as being a left-right 
holomorphic Fueter transformation.

If we write

 
then it is easily shown that in -dimensional polar coordinates we have

 

In fact, putting

 
it takes the form

 
where  is the line element on .  Then, this 
Kruskal form 
that generalizes the conformal metric merits the name: quasi conformal.

Another similarity with  is provided by differential equations 
satisfied by the mappings.

In  we have

 
which imply the harmonicity of , i.e.:

 
In  the mapping

 
defined by Eq.() satisfies

 
showing that  is biharmonic.  We have seen that in a special  
frame this mapping takes the Fueter form

 
which satisfies

 
where

 
In other words the function

 
satisfies

 
which is equivalent to the massless -component Dirac equation

 
where we have used the following  representation for G:

 
The Eq.() generalizes the Cauchy-Riemann Eq.().

Here we must note that instead of  standing for  which 
transforms like  representation of  we could have taken  representing
.  Also writing  for  that transforms like 
 we have an alternative form of the pseudo conformal mapping that reads

 
Under the  transformation Eq.() we have

 

 
This shows that the self-dual sector is mapped into itself, the same being valid for the
anti self-dual sector.


 Geometric Interpretation - Functions on elements of the coset  


The covariant Fueter functions can be shown to be elements of a 
function of a coset element 

 
 represented by a  quaternionic matrix.  The dilation  and the  groups act linearly on .  We parametrize the  matrix  in the following way:

    
or

 
where

 
represents the subgroup  and

 
is the coset element.  In order to eliminate the subgroup  we introduce the element

 
which commutes with  and form the matrix

 

We have

 
Hence  has the form

 
where

 

 

We can also write

 
where

 
Under the subgroup  acting on  from the left, we have

 
or

 

 

Consider now a power series in , or a function of 

 
under  we have

 
The function  is biharmonic when  is regarded as a function of 

 
since we have

 

Introduce the  Dirac operators

 
We have

 

 

 
Hence, if we define

 
we have

 
which is the condition of Fueter analyticity for the function

 

The elements of  have definite tensorial properties under :

 

 

We now turn to the transformation properties under the remaining
transformations of  under which both  and  transform non
linearly.

We have, from Eq.()

 

Under left action of  we have

 
where

 

Solving for  and  we find

 
Hence

 
giving

 

 
It follows that  transforms like the difference of two position vectors, or like . This
implies that under the translation subgroup

 

 

Hence  transforms like a momentum under the Poincare subgroup of the conformal group.

We note that

 
and

 
behave like quaternionic twistors with respect to left multiplication of  by 









As before we can introduce functions of  and  that acquire 
quaternionic multipliers under an  transformations.  They are generalized
quasi-conformal fields as discussed in the previous section.

The Quadratic Schwarz Differentials in . Differentiation of Fueter Series 



In the case of the complex Mobius transformation

 
the Schwarz derivative

 
vanishes, so that

 

We can also define the quadratic Schwarz differential

 
which also vanishes for the Mobius transformation.

The Schwarz differential can also be obtained as the limit of the 
cross-ratio of  points when they all tend to a common point.

Consider the successive mappings

 
Then

 
which is equivalent to, but simpler then the well known rule

 
In the special case 

 
we have

 
or

 

Thus, under  transforms like  and  
like  so that it has conformal weight .  However, under  the
conformal field transforms inhomogeneously, acquiring an additional piece that corresponds to
the central extension of the infinite group of homogeneous analytic transformations.

We now turn to the  case and the quasi-holomorphic mappings  of
quaternions.  Is is much easier to generalize differentials than derivatives in the non
commutative case.  Hence we define two kinds of quadratic Schwarz differentials, both being
cross ratios of four nearby points in euclidean space-time.

 

 

If  and  are -vectors, then

 
is  invariant, while  and  transform respectively
like a self dual and an anti self dual tensor. Now we have

 

 
for a quaternionic Mobius transformation, generalizing Eq.().

In the case of the more general pseudo-conformal mapping, we seek a generalization of
Eq.(). To this end we introduce the infinite matrix  with elements equal to unity in
the upper line parallel to the diagonal, with all other elements being zero.

 

We now consider the quaternionic matrix

 

Define the kets

 
The basis for this kets is provided by the harmonic oscillator operators ,   which obey 

 
Then we have

 
etc. With these notations it is easy to check that

 

 
displaying the Fueter mapping as a matrix element of the operator . Its other
matrix elements are also Fueter functions. We can now calculate :

 

If we have

 
we can write

 
 
while

 

These formulae allow us to evaluate quaternionic quadratic Schwarz differentials for Fueter mappings.

Note that the operator

 
satisfies

 
while this is not true for the matrix elements of . Thus

 

The possibility now arises to define a left or right pseudo-conformal field as a quaternionic
Fueter function that transforms like a power of  or . Due to the
inhomogeneous term in the transformation that vanishes for Mobius transformation such fields
will represent a centrally extended Fueter algebra, the extension being quaternionic in general.
The determination of the exact nature of the extension is still an open problem. The general
problem first investigated by Gelfand and Fuchs has been recently discussed by Cardy, Fradkin and his collaborators, Nair and Schiff and others from various angles (see forexample references , , , , ,). Many of the formulas of ADHM construction of solutions to self-dual Yang-Mills are most conveniently written in terms of quaternions.

Basis of Fueter analytic functions. Relation to harmonic analyticity. 

We have seen that the left-right holomorphic quaternionic Fueter series of the form

 
cannot be used in physics if  is a -vector transforming under  as in Eq.()
since powers of  transform like tensor elements, so that  will not have a definite tensorial
property. However functions of  or , where

 
with  being  scalars lead to

 
such that  are  scalars,  is self-dual and
 is anti self-dual.

Then the functions  defined by

 
are called left-right analytic by Fueter. Under  we have, using the definition
Eq.()

 

 

Thus we have

 

 

By direct differentiation one finds

 

Each term of the series  satisfies the analytic equation. Thus

 

Putting

 
we find

 
for . We have

 

For negative  we have

 
We also have the orthogonality property

 
for . Here

 
where  is the surface element. The -dimensional surface integral can be
taken over .

In this way a solution  of the massless Dirac equation

 
can be expanded in the basis functions .
Now a solution of the Dirac equation is also a solution of the equation

 

We can write

 
where

 
is the self dual part of the angular momentum tensor associated with the 
 subgroup of .  The operator  is the dilatation.  Hence  satisfies

 
If  is homogeneous of degree , we have

 

Iterating and using the commutation relation

 
we find

 
so that

 

Hence  is proportional to a Wigner  function on  (or
).  The formulas ()-() give the relation between the  functions
and the basis functions of Fueter analytic mappings.
     
To find the relation with the harmonic analyticity of Ogievetsky and his collaborators 
let us rewrite Eq.() in  matrix form. We have

 
where

 
With these new coordinates  takes the form

 


 
We can rewrite this as

 

Let 

 
We find

 
or if 

 

 
an operator associated with the self-dual angular momentum generating left rotations.  The
 subgroup is generated by

 
whereas the dilatations giving the degree of homogeneity is given by

 

On  for a given representation  and  have given eigenvalues so that
the self-dual analyticity equation () reduces to an equation in .  This operator
and the variable  defined in Eq.() are the cornerstones of harmonic analyticity
which involve functions of  and , where  represents a spinor or a unit quaternion. 
If  is defined up to a phase it represents a point on  and functions of  and
 are equivalent to functions of a twistor or functions of two quaternions. It follows that
twistor analyticity, harmonic analyticity and quaternionic Fueter analyticity are all related.
     
The operator  represents the dilatation and the left rotation subgroups of the
conformal group. Similarly

 
represents the combination of dilatations and right rotations.   represents the translations.  In
a special conformal transformation we have from Eq.()

 
where

 
Hence for a function  we have

 

This equation gives for the generators of special conformal transformation the operators

 
which in quaternion form read

 

Thus, the  quaternionic matrix operator for  takes the form

 

Various forms of quaternionic differential operators 


Consider the quaternion

 

Written as a  matrix it has the form

 
where

 
and

 
so that u is unitary and has the form

 
with

 

The unitary matrix  is an element of . Its subgroup  can be chosen as the
diagonal subgroup

 
Thus

 
where the complex  parametrizes the coset  which has the form

 
and represents the sphere .

Thus, instead of the real -coordinate  we can use the two complex coordinates
,  or the coordinates ,  and  with  real and positive, 
real and in the interval  and  complex.

The relations are given by Eqs.() and () and

 
 
or

 

Also

 

 

 

We now construct the quaternionic differential operators  and  given by

 

 
 has the matrix form

 
where

 
In terms of ,  we have

 

 

We also have

 

 

Consider the dilatation operator

 
and the covariant angular momentum operator

 

Its self dual part is

 
where

 

Let

 
We find

 

 
where  is given by Eq.(). Let
 
We find

 

 

 

Using Eqs.() to (), () and () we find

 

 

 

 
or

 

 

 
Note that  depends only on  and  does not depend on , while
 depends only on  as it should be.

Factorization of the Energy-Momentum tensor as the analog of the 
Sommerfield-Sugawara factorization in . Generalizations. 


In a large class of  chiral field theories we are led to the 
Sommerfield-Sugawara,  form of the traceless energy-momentum tensor

 
where  and their duals  are conserved currents of the
theory

 
Then

 

It is known that the moments of  generate a Kac-Moody algebra, whereas those of
 satisfy a Virasoro algebra.
     
In conformally invariant  theories the energy momentum tensor  is
traceless and symmetric.  It can be represented by a traceless symmetric  matrix 
associated with the representation  of .

Hence it should be possible to factorize it into  self-dual fields 
and  anti self-dual fields  so that

 

Now quaternions have two real  matrix representations associated respectively with
left and right quaternionic multiplications.  Since these two operations commute so do the matrix
representations.  For purely vectorial quaternions one corresponds to a self-dual antisymmetric
matrix, while the other is anti self dual and antisymmetric.  They have the forms

 
and

 
and we have

 
In the case of one internal degree of freedom we have

 
or





 
T is symmetric and traceless. On putting

 
one obtains the familiar form of Maxwell's tensor in euclidean space-time.  When  and
 are labeled by an internal symmetry index  they can be interpreted as the self dual
and anti self dual part of an anti-symmetric Yang-Mills field tensor in euclidean space-time. 
Then

 
becomes the self-duality equation.

Note that  are not currents but self-dual fields.  Currents  are
represented by  quaternions with trace  which transform like vectors
under .  In the Maxwell case we have

 
The homogeneous set of Maxwell's equations reads

 
The current is given by

 
and it transforms like the  representation of . 

The conservation of  is given by

 
since  is traceless.  In the anti self-dual case  so that  as expected.  The same
result follows from  self duality.

Thus, the decomposition of  in terms of currents is

 
where  is the Dirac Green's function in the massless case.

When  we can obtain  and  as quaternionic analytic functions, since for example

 
 
Then 

 
which is also a solution of 

 
associated with harmonic analyticity as we have seen earlier.
     
The energy momentum tensor  is not the only tensor that can be constructed from  and
.  In fact we can obtain a scalar , a  for  [ of ]
represented by self-dual Weyl tensor  and  for  [ of ]
represented by an anti self dual Weyl tensor .  The  field is represented by a
traceless  symmetric matrix. It can be combined with the  scalar  into a
 matrix  while a scalar  is combined with the  into another 
matrix . Introducing the diagonal matrix 

 
We find

 
and similarly for 

 

We have

 

 
giving the two invariants of Maxwell's theory in the euclidean case.

Here we note that the curvature tensor in a Riemannian euclidean tensor can be decomposed into
 pieces transforming under  as follows
 

 

 

 

In the case these  functions can be expressed quadratically in terms of the six components
 and  of an antisymmetrical tensor , its 
pieces can be factorized into ,  and .  If  (self dual
) then the Ricci tensor as well as  vanish and we have a half-flat space.  All 
the curvature can be expressed in terms of  which has the quaternion analytic form

 

When  is meromorphic we have a gravitational instanton solution.  These results generalize
to the Yang-Mills case with , etc.

This shows that the factorization of the self-dual Weyl tensor is a better analog to the
Sommerfield-Sugawara factorization of  in , since both factors  can be analytic,
whereas  in  requires one analytic factor  and one anti analytic factor .

For an operator product expansion of  for example we would have

 
 is a  matrix that decomposes into a multiple of unity
(), an antisymmetrical matrix () and a symmetric traceless matrix.  Thus we can write 

 
with singular -number coefficients that can be determined from dimensional arguments.  The
product  is more complicated and bears less resemblance to the  case.  We
conclude that the analog of  in  is  which has the simplest operator 
product expansion.

To test its true usefulness and power, this quaternionic formalism must still await further 
progress in the representation theory of  diffeomorphism and current algebras and the 
discovery of  counterpart of the Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten model.

Understanding of geometry of supersymmetry through harmonic analyticity and harmonic superspace led into wide variety of applications in physics and geometry. It has potentially interesting application to some on-shell supermultiplets which arise naturally in string theory in the context of Maldacena conjecture (which relates supergravity theories on anti-de Sitter backgrounds to conformal field theories on the boundary, i.e. super-Minkowski space). 

The search for exceptional structures associated with eleven dimensions has lead us into description of space-time by means of exceptional groups. A quest toward a unified theory has taken us through a progression from particle world lines of quantum field theory ( analyticity) to string worldsheet in order to incorporate gravity ( analyticity) into -brane worldvolumes in order to realize duality ( analyticity). Next step would be the search for octonionic analyticity ( analyticity). -theory might turn out to be supersymmetric in eleven dimensions. 

Octonionic planes may possibly provide the geometrical foundation for the existence of internal symmetries like color and flavor. These octonionic geometries allow us to construct new finite Hilbert spaces with unique properties. The non-Desargues'ian geometric property makes them non-embeddeble in higher spaces, hence essentially finite. It also leads to peculiarities in the superposition principle in the color sector of the Hilbert space. This theory of the charge space, if correct, suggests a new geometric picture for the substructure of the material world, that of an octonionic geometry attached at each point of Einstein's Riemannian manifold for space time with local symmetry that leaves the properties of charge space invariant.  Extension of the formalism we presented to octonionic structures may help to understand geometry, duality and non perturbative physics in a deeper way.

Four dimensional conformal field theory can also be formulated on Kulkarni -folds leading to a formalism that parallels that of D conformal field theory on Riemann surfaces. In this framework the notion of Fueter analyticity, the quaternionic analogue of complex analyticity plays an essential role. For other approaches where symmetry of some field equations were investigated, see for example paper by Kruglov.

Appendix: Use of Coherent States in  

Let 

 
and

 
with

 
and defining the vacuum state , we have

 

We can construct a superposition state (coherent state) out of the vacuum state

 
that has the following properties:

(1.)

 

(2.)
 
or

 
with

 

(3.)

 

 
so that

 

(4.)

 
so that  is an eigenstate of . We see that

 
and similarly

 

(5.)

 
or

 
is homogeneous in ,  of degree  so that

 
and

 

(6.)

 
 

(7.)

 
Also

 
so that on  we have , .

(8.)

 

The D functions of  

Since

 

 
and the relations

 

 
we have

 
and

 

Now let

 
with

 
where

 
so that

 
where 

 
so that , and .

Also 
 

Now we can write

 

Now to get the expression for , consider

 
Using

 
and  we get

 
which is homogeneous of degree  in , . Hence the expression

 
does not depend on . Thus

 
does not depend on . Hence we have

 
Thus

 
Using

 
we finally get

 

We note that  numbers rows,  numbers columns. We have

 

 

 

 
so that

 

Similarly

 
where  are the  (isotopic spin) matrices. They are

 
and we have

 
These satisfy  and cyclic permutations. Now using angles ,  and  we can write

 
so that

 
and

 

Using these we can now write  as

 

We have shown that we have formed  functions with  in first columns. 

Euler Angles and  Coset Decomposition 

A group element for  can be taken as

 
where
 
with , or

 

We can rewrite Eq.() as

 

Let

 
and

 
where  and  are the parameters of the coset decomposition

 
We can write  as , where  and  is the  subgroup of  (locally isomorphic to  subgroup of ). Now 

 

Since 
 
we have

 
Thus

 

Now

 
labels cosets . Therefore

 
with  and  is the coset label for . 

Under a rotation

 
with

 
we have

 
or

 

We can write

 
with .

Thus, for the coset label  we have the transformation law

 
which is a Mobius transformation determined by .

We also have

 

Thus far we have shown  and under 

 

 
where  is the label for  and  where  is the parameter for the  subgroup.

Using Eqs.() and () we arrive at

 
where

 
has the form

  

If we put

 
then

 

On the other hand, if 

 
we have

 

Thus the formulas Eqs.() and () give the relation between Euler angles and the coset decomposition with respect to . Note that  involves only the two Euler angles  and .

For  we find
 
or

 

In general the elements of 

 
are polynomials in  and . The first column is analytic and the last column is antianalytic.






Acknowledgments 
I thank Chia-Hsiung Tze and C. Devhand from whom I learned most all of this material. Discussions and working together with late professors Feza Gursey at Yale and Victor Ogievetsky at Rockefeller was of great joy and experience. 
I also thank Vladimir Akulov, Ramzi Khuri and Anatoly Pashnev for useful discussions.
 99 
 F. Gursey and C. Tze, On the Role of Division, Jordan and Related Algebras in Particle Physics . World Scientific (1996)
See R. Penrose and W. Rindler, Spinors and Space-Time, Vol.1 and 2, (Cambridge University Press, 1984 and 1986); R.S. Ward and R.O. Wells, Jr., Twistor Geometry (Cambridge University Press);R.S. Ward, Phys. Lett. 61A  (1977) 81 .
 A. Galperin, E. Ivanov, V. Ogievetsky and E. Sokatchev, Ann. Phys. 185  (1988) 1 ; and Ann. Phys. 185  (1988) 22. 
M. Evans, F. Gursey and V. Ogievetsky, Phys. Rev. D47  (1993) 3496. 
C. Devchand and V. Ogievetsky, Four-Dimensional Integrable Theories.  Proc. of the Gursey Memorial Conf. I, p. 169, Ed. G. Aktas and M. Serdarog lu, Springer-Verlag (1995); hep-th/9410147.
 F. Gursey and W. Jiang, J. Math. Phys. 32  (1991) 2365. 
 F. Gursey and C.H.-Tze, Ann. Phys. 128  (1980) 29. 
 Preservation of Kruskal form by Fueter transformations in euclidean gravity was first noted by F. Gursey and C. H.-Tze, Lett. Math. Phys. 8  (1984) 1187. 
 I.M. Gelfand and D.B. Fuchs, Funct. Anal. Appl. 2  (1968) 92  ; see also D.B. Fuchs, Cohomology of Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras  (Plenum, 1986).
 J.L. Cardy, Nucl. Phys. B270  (1986) 186. 
 E.S. Fradkin and V.Y. Linetsky, Phys. Lett. B 253  (1991) 97. 
 E.S. Fradkin and M.Y. Palchik, Conformal Field Theory in D-Dimensions  (World Scientific, 1993).
 V.P. Nair and J. Schiff, Phys. Lett. 246B  (1990) 423. 
 R. Penrose, Twistors, Particles, Strings and Links. The Interface of Mathematics and Particle Physics.  Eds. D.G. Quillen, G.B. Segal and S.T. Tsou, p.49 (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1990). 
 M.A. Singer, Twistors and Four-Dimensional Conformal Field Theory, ibid., p.181 
 A.P. Hodges, String Amplitudes and Twistors Diagrams: an Analogy, ibid., p.217 
 M.A. Singer, Comm. Math. Phys. 133  (1990) 75. 
 M.A. Atiyah, N.J. Hitchin and I.M. Singer, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A362  (1978) 425. 
 A.P. Hodges, R. Penrose and M.A. Singer, Phys. Lett. B216  (1989) 48. 
 E. Martinec, "Geometrical Structure of M-theory."  arXiv:hep-th/9608017.
 W. Siegel, Phys. Rev. D52  (1995) 1042.  
 H. Sugawara, Phys. Rev. 170  (1968) 1659. 
 C.M. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. 176  (1968) 2019.  
 M. Kaku, Strings, Conformal Fields, and Topology  (Springer Verlag, 1991).
 C.-H. Gu, et. al. Sci. Sin. 21  (1978) 475. 
 See P.S. Howe, "On Harmonic Superspace."  arXiv:hep-th/9812133.

 J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 231. 

 M.J. Duff, J.M. Evans, R.R, Khuri, J.X. Lu and R. Minasian, Phys. Rev. B412  (1997) 281. 

 P. Ramond, "Algebraic Dreams."  arXiv:hep-th/0112261.
 S. Catto, Exceptional Projective Geometries and Internal Symmetries."  arXiv:hep-th/0302079.
 R.S. Kulkarni, J. Diff. Geom. 13  (1978) 109. 
 R. Zucchini, J. Geom. Phys. 27  (1998) 113 ; arXiv:gr-gc/9707048.
 S.I. Kruglov, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 41  (2002) 653 ; arXiv:hep-th/0110251.







