




















1.2 
4pt
0pt


0pt















 
TIT/HEP-491 

hep-th/0302028  

February, 2003 



 


BPS WALL IN  SUSY 

NONLINEAR SIGMA MODEL 


WITH EGUCHI-HANSON 
MANIFOLD
 





Masato Arai , Masashi Naganuma , 

Muneto Nitta , and    Norisuke Sakai  



 
  Institute of Physics, AS CR, 
  182 21, Praha 8, Czech Republic 

  Department of Physics, 
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 

Tokyo 152-8551, JAPAN 


  Department of Physics, Purdue University, 

West Lafayette, IN 47907-1396, USA


 
BPS wall solutions are obtained for  supersymmetric 
 nonlinear 
sigma model with Eguchi-Hanson target manifold 
in a manifestly supersymmetric manner. 
The model is constructed by a massive hyper-Kahler quotient 
method both in the  superfield 
and in the  superfield (harmonic superspace). 
We describe the model in simple terms and give 
relations between various parameterizations 
which are useful to describe the model and the solution. 
Some more details 
can be found in our previous paper [hep-th/0211103]. 
This article is 
dedicated to Professor Hiroshi Ezawa on the occasion of his 
seventieth birthday. 




Introduction      

Supersymmetry (SUSY) has been a most promising guiding principle 
to construct realistic unified models beyond the standard 
model. 
In recent years there have been vigorous studies on 
models with extra dimensions, where 
our world is assumed 
to be realized on an extended topological defects 
such as domain walls or various branes. 
Supersymmetry can be combined with this brane-world scenario  
and helps the construction of the extended topological defects. 

Solitons saturating an energy bound, 
called the BPS bound, 
have played a crucial role also in 
non-perturbative studies of supersymmetric 
(SUSY) field theories in four dimensions.  
BPS domain walls are topological solitons of co-dimension one, 
which depend on one spatial coordinate and connect two 
SUSY vacua.
Since they preserve half of the original SUSY, 
they are called  BPS states.  
Such BPS domain walls were well studied 
in various models with global 
 SUSY in four dimensions.  
Non-BPS multi-wall solutions were also studied to understand 
the SUSY breaking mechanism on the brane due to the coexistence 
of the other brane. 
More recently we have constructed an exact BPS wall solution 
as well as non-BPS multi-wall solutions in the supergravity 
theory in four dimensions. 
The intersections or junctions of domain walls 
preserve  of the original SUSY and have 
been discussed in  
models in four 
dimensions. 

In order to consider models with extra dimensions, 
we need to discuss 
supersymmetric theories in spacetime with dimensions 
higher than four. 
They should have at least eight supercharges. 
The simplest field theory with eight SUSY is based on 
hypermultiplets containing only 
scalar and spinor as physical fields. 
Recently we have formulated  
BPS domain walls in an eight SUSY model in four 
dimensions. 
Moreover we have also succeeded in constructing the  BPS 
wall consistently in five-dimensional supergravity. 
Before discussing the SUSY five-dimensional theories, 
it is useful to consider models with eight SUSY 
in four dimensions without gravity. 



The rest of our paper 
is organized as follows. 
Sec. 2 explains how to obtain nonlinear sigma models of 
hypermultiplets with eight SUSY. 
Secs.3, 4 and 5 are devoted to 
 superfield formulation of the model. 
In Sec. 3, we present the model 
using the  gauge field. 
We give the bosonic part of the action and 
eliminate auxiliary fields in the Wess-Zumino gauge. 
The hyper-quotient method 
in terms of the so-called moment map 
becomes very clear. 
In Sec. 4, we eliminate auxiliary superfields 
in the superfield level,  
taking a gauge compatible with SUSY
rather than the Wess-Zumino gauge. 
This has the advantage because we obtain 
the Lagrangian in terms of independent superfields.
In Sec. 5, we use the  gauge field to 
formulate the model instead of the  gauge field.
Sec. 6 is devoted to a brief review of harmonic superspace formalism 
(HSF). 
In Sec. 7, we formulate the model in HSF 
and eliminate auxiliary fields in the Wess-Zumino gauge. 
In Sec. 8, the constraints are solved 
by independent fields. 
We close our paper by Sec. 9, 
in which the BPS equation and 
the domain wall solution are given. 


 Model with Hypermultiplets in  Dimensions 

If we take two free chiral scalar supermultiplets  and  
with a complex mass term 
 between them, 
they together become a free massive hypermultiplet with  
SUSY 
  
where complex conjugate is denoted as c.c. , and 
the scalar components are denoted by the same letter as the 
superfields(
We follow mostly the notation of Ref. , 
except that  denote space time in four dimensions, 
)  
 .  
Since four 
real scalar fields Re, Im, Re, and Im 
are symmetric, we can form three 
complex fields 
using any one of the fields, say Re 
 with any one of the other three fields : 

 ReRe, and  ReIm 
beside the ordinary . 
These three complex structures are completely symmetric 
and serve as a characterization of  SUSY 
for hypermultiplets. 
It has been shown that any nonlinear sigma 
model consisting of hypermultiplets should have 
a triplet of complex structures, 
and the target manifold should be 
hyper-Kahler (HK) 
in contrast to 
Kahler of the  SUSY 
nonlinear sigma model. 

Theories with eight SUSY are so restrictive that 
the nontrivial interactions require the nonlinearity of 
kinetic term (nonlinear sigma model) 
if there are only hypermultiplets. 
In order to obtain a wall solution, we need to have a nontrivial 
 potential. 
In the case of  SUSY nonlinear sigma model containing 
only hypermultiplets, one can introduce a nontrivial 
potential which is the square of the Killing vector 
 acting on the HK manifold multiplied 
by a mass parameter. 
Moreover the Killing vector has to be 
holomorphic with respect to 
the three complex structures (tri-holomorphic). 
These models are called "massive HK nonlinear sigma models".  

Let us now explain a mechanism to obtain a nontrivial potential 
as a Sherk-Schwarz reduction 
from six or five  dimensions. 
It is usually best to start from a model in spacetime with 
maximal dimensions which is allowed by the postulated number 
of SUSY charges. 
In the present case of eight SUSY, we should consider hypermultiplets 
in six dimensions. 


Let us first illustrate the dimensional reduction by 
a free massless hypermultiplet in six dimensions, 
since a mass term is  forbidden by SUSY. 
If two (one) spatial dimensions are compactified, a nonvanishing momentum 
in these compactified dimensions gives a 
complex (real) mass term resulting in Eq.(). 
This mass parameter gives rise to a central term 
 
in the  SUSY algebra in four dimensions. 
In the case of a nonlinear sigma model with the target space metric 
 in six dimensions, the kinetic term (of bosonic part of 
the Lagrangian) reads 
 
where , . 
Then we can twist the boundary condition 
for the compactified 
directions, say  and  
using a Killing vector  for the isometry of 
the target space metric  
 
Then we obtain a nontrivial potential term  from the Lagrangian 
() 
 
 
This is the Sherk-Schwarz dimensional reduction. 
Since theories with eight SUSY have three complex structures, 
the Killing vector  has to be holomorphic with respect to 
all three complex structures (tri-holomorphic). 

Many target space metrics can be 
embedded in higher dimensional flat space 
as illustrated by a 
sphere embedded in three 
dimensions in Fig.. 


 

    3sphere.eps  



Sphere as a constrained subspace 
embedded in three-dimensional flat space. 
 
The nonlinear sigma models with these target space metrics 
can be realized by giving a constraint on hypermultiplets with 
minimal kinetic terms. 
One of the most convenient methods to impose the constraint 
is to introduce a vector multiplet without a kinetic term. 
If we integrate the vector multiplet, it acts as a Lagrange multiplier 
field to produce a constraint on hypermultiplets, 
resulting in a curved target manifold 
such as the Eguchi-Hanson manifold. 
In this process, the mass term automatically becomes a nontrivial 
potential which is a square of a Killing vector 
corresponding to the isometry of the resulting curved target space. 
Since the gauge field serves to identify the gauge orbit, 
the introduction of the gauge field without a kinetic term 
gives a quotient manifold. 
In particular, we call 
the method as hyper-Kahler quotient method, 
when the resulting manifold is hyper-Kahler. 
In our SUSY case, the curved manifold is a result of 
the constraint coming from integrating 
the auxiliary fields in the gauge supermultiplet 
as well as from the gauge orbit quotient.
Since we also have a mass term as a central extension of the SUSY algebra, 
this procedure is called the massive hyper-Kahler 
quotient  method. 
In this way, we can understand the potential term as the 
square of the tri-holomorphic Killing vector and 
the mass parameter multiplying the potential 
as the central extension of the  SUSY algebra 
in four dimensions. 

There have been a number of works to study nonlinear sigma models 
 with eight supercharges. 
The massive nonlinear sigma
 model with 
 nontrivial Ka hler metric as target space was
 studied, and BPS equations and 
 BPS solutions such as walls and junctions 
 were obtained. 
Multi domain walls solution was also 
 obtained
 and the dynamics of those walls was examined.Single or parallel domain walls in such models 
preserve  SUSY, 
whereas their intersections preserve  SUSY. 
In most papers, nonlinear sigma models were studied in
terms of component fields.
However, it is often useful to maintain as much SUSY as possible 
. 
Harmonic superspace 
 formalism (HSF) is most suited to maintain the SUSY 
 maximally, but there has been relatively few attempt to
 formulate the BPS equations and to obtain BPS 
 solutions in the HSF until our recent work.
Our nonlinear sigma model can most easily be obtained 
by a quotient method in terms of a  
vector multiplet without a kinetic term. 
In  formalism,
 the massless HK sigma model on  
 was obtained as the HK quotient.The massive HK quotient 
 was obtained in component level. 
The massless model with the Eguchi-Hanson target 
manifold () has been constructed in 
  formalism, and 
 its central extension was analysed.In order to obtain also a potential term, 
we need to perform a quotient method for a massive 
hypermultiplet charged under the  vector multiplet. 
When we are writing this up this work, 
another interesting work appeared discussing various wall and 
flux tube solutions in similar  models. 



Eguchi-Hanson  Nonlinear Sigma Model 
in  Superfields in the  Basis 


The massive hyper-Kahler quotient method 
for the massive Eguchi-Hanson nonlinear sigma model 
requires two hypermultiplets :  as doublets. 
The doublet  has charge  
under an   vector 
multiplet  without a kinetic term 
which serves as a Lagrange multiplier constraining 
hypermultiplets to form a four-dimensional (in terms of 
number of real degrees of freedom) target manifold. 
Here  and  are vector and chiral superfields
in  superfield formalism, respectively. 
Representing two doublets  as column vectors, 
the action is given in terms of  superfields 
as 
 
where we have absorbed a common mass of hypermultiplets into the field 
 and denote  as a complex parameter for the mass splitting. 
The electric and magnetic Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) parameters 
are denoted as . 
We see below that these parameters become the value 
of the triplet of the moment map for the  gauge symmetry.

In the limit of , the model has a global (flavor) symmetry 
 defined by 
 
and, in the case of , it has the additional 
 symmetry
 
The  symmetry is consistent with the  SUSY, 
but the  symmetry is only with 
the manifest  SUSY. 
The mass splitting parameter breaks this 
 
global symmetry (for ) down to 
 defined by 

, 
with  unchanged. 
The  subgroup parametrized by  is gauged. 
Since this mass splitting parameter affects only the potential term 
without affecting the kinetic term, 
the curved target manifold has Killing vectors for the isometry 
  for ]. 
The  symmetry of 
  is gauged away and 
is absent in the target manifold.  
However, only the Killing vectors for the isometry  
are consistent with the  SUSY and hence tri-holomorphic. 
The Killing vector for the  isometry for   
is holomorphic,
 but not tri-holomorphic.  
Since we have introduced the mass parameter through the  
generator, we will eventually obtain the potential term 
which is a square of the tri-holomorphic Killing vector 
corresponding to , after eliminating the vector multiplet. 

In the Wess-Zumino gauge, the bosonic action is given by 
 
 
where 

. 
 
 

The equation of motion for gauge field  in () 
allows us to write gauge field  in terms of scalar fields 
 
If we eliminate the gauge field by this algebraic equation of 
motion, we obtain the kinetic term for hypermultiplets as 
 

If we integrate the Lagrange multiplier fields 
 and  in (), 
we obtain two constraints 
 
The Lagrangian () gives algebraic 
equations of motion for 
the auxiliary fields  
 
After eliminating the auxiliary fields  by these algebraic 
equations of motion,  
we obtain 
the potential term 

 
In the last line, we have eliminated the scalar field 
 in the  
vector multiplet  by its algebraic equation 
of motion 
 

In Eq. () 
the left hand sides constitute 
the triplet of the moment map (Killing potential) 
for the  gauge symmetry. 
Hence we see that these values are fixed to
the FI parameters by integrating the auxiliary fields  and , 
and that the hyper-quotient is obtained 
together with the  quotient (). 
In the limit of  the singularity appears 
and the manifold becomes 
the orbifold , 
whereas the non-zero values of  and  
resolve the orbifold singularity 
through the deformation of the complex structure 
and the blow up, respectively.  






Eguchi-Hanson Nonlinear Sigma Model 
After Integrating Vector Multiplet 
in the  Basis  


Instead of taking the Wess-Zumino gauge in the component level, 
we can eliminate the auxiliary superfields 
 and  directly 
in the superfield formalism. 
Their equations of motion read from Eq.() as 
 
in which  can be solved immediately to give 
. 
We thus obtain the Kahler potential 
 
where we have chosen the plus sign of the solution 
for the positivity of the metric. 

Fixing the complexified  gauge symmetry and solving 
(), 
we can obtain the Lagrangian of the nonlinear sigma model
in terms of independent superfields. 



We have presented some gauge fixing 
applied to  for general . 
Here we give a more symmetric gauge for 
in the case of . 
In this case, we can fix the gauge as ,  
and () can be solved as 
 and  
(and hence ).  
The Kahler potential becomes 
  
  
and the superpotential is given by 
  
The metric and its inverse can be calculated to give 
 
where  and
 .
The scalar potential can be calculated as 
  V = g^ij^*  _i W _j^*  W^* 
     =  c ^2^4 1+4c^2  ^4    
        (1 c^2  ^8 + x^2 y^2 )  .
The manifold admits 
the tri-holomorphic isometry , 
defined in Eq.().(
The  transformation law of 
 as the coordinates of 
the quotient target manifold 
is unchanged from the one in Eq. () 
and hence is still linear , 
because the gauge fixing condition 
is invariant under the  action. 
This is the advantage of our gauge fixing condition. 
To define the  action 
in the cases of the other gauge condition , 
we need an appropriate  gauge action 
to compensate the variation of the gauge condition, 
which makes the transformation law of  nonlinear .

The diagonal  isometry defined in Eq.() 
of  
isometry is holomorphic but not tri-holomorphic.
) 
The Killing vectors for this action  

 () 
are given as 
 
The Killing potential  for these vectors, 
defined by ,   
are given as  
Using these geometric quantities, 
the scalar potential can be rewritten 
 by the square of the Killing vector 
 
as was shown in Eq. ().
It is now manifest that only the action of 
 among three Killing vectors 
preserves the potential term and 
therefore is the symmetry of the whole Lagrangian 
as expected from the mass term in ().  
The vacua are fixed points of 
the Killing vectors  
or the critical points of 
the Killing potential .



Eguchi-Hanson  Nonlinear Sigma Model  
 in  Superfields in the  Basis 


It is also useful to rewrite the model in terms of  gauge group 
instead of , since  basis 
is most frequently employed in the harmonic superspace 
formalism as given in the next section. 
Introducing   doublets  as a column vector and 
 as a row vector, 
superspace action in the  basis is given by 
 
where the hermitian  generator is given from a diagonal 
generator  by 
 
In order to establish a relation between superspace action in the 
 and  bases, it is convenient to define fields 
 with 
definite  charge by means of a rotation from the  
basis 
 
In terms of these superfields, the action becomes 
 
By identifying the  and  gauge fields, 
we find that the superfields  in the  
basis should be related to the superfields 
 in the  
basis as 
 
The most general solution of the conditions 
() and 
() 
is given in terms of two unitary matrices  
 
The constraints () and 
() give conditions 
 
respectively. 
The first condition gives . 
By substituting it to the second condition we obtain 
 
The most general 
solution of these conditions is now given 
in terms of two arbitrary angle parameters  by 

 
These angles  clearly represent the 
 symmetry of our Lagrangian. 
Therefore a general solution for the identification 
 of superfields  in the  basis and 
 superfields  in the  
superfields is given by 
 
 From now on, we shall take  case 
as a representative choice 
which is given by  
 



Bosonic part of the Lagrangian in the  basis 
() is given in the Wess-Zumino gauge 
 
 
 
 


The equation of motion for gauge field  is given by 
 
Eliminating the gauge field by this algebraic equation of 
motion, we obtain the kinetic term for hypermultiplets as 
 
Integrating the Lagrange multiplier fields 
 and  in (), 
we obtain two constraints 
 
Eliminating 
the algebraic 
equations of motion for 
the auxiliary fields  
 
After eliminating the auxiliary fields  by these algebraic 
equations of motion,  
we obtain 
the potential term 

 
In the last line, we have eliminated the scalar field 
 in the  
vector multiplet  by its algebraic equation 
of motion 
 





A Brief Survey of Harmonic Superspace Formalism 
 
Harmonic superspace is defined as 
  which is called
 the central basis.
The  are called the harmonic variables which parameterize 
 the coset ,
 where  is  index and  denotes  charge.
The superfield in the Harmonic Superspace Formalism 
 (HSF) is not defined in the central basis 
 but in the subspace which is called the analytic subspace 
 
  where parentheses for indices  mean symmetrization, for instance, 
 
Hypermultiplet and vector multiplet superfields are defined as the
 function in the analytic subspace as  and
 , respectively, which are called 
the analytic superfields.  

To describe the real action in terms of the analytic superfield,
 the star conjugation must be introduced in addition to the
 usual complex conjugation.
The complex conjugation rules for the coefficients in the harmonic
 expansions  (see ()), 
 the Grassmann variables 
  and the harmonic variables 
 are defined as

 

respectively.
The star conjugation rules are defined as

 

Note that the star conjugate acts only on the quantity having  charge.
We write the combination of the complex and the star conjugation
 as

  

The combined conjugation rules are defined by

 



The simple example of the real action is the free massless action 
 of the Fayet-Sohnius hypermultiplet;
 
 where  is defined by 
 
with  for a massless hypermultiplet.
Suffix  in the spacetime derivative  denotes 
the variable appropriate in the analytic superspace, 
 is the harmonic differential defined by 
 . 
 For details of notation in HSF, we refer to our paper 
or a textbook. 

The action is real in the sense of ordinary complex conjugation
 .
This property follows from the fact that 
 .








Analytic superfields for the hypermultiplet 
 can be 
expanded in powers of Grassmann numbers  as 

 
where  is a flavor index. 
Note that each component 
 in the hypermultiplet analytic superfield () 
 is a function of , and the harmonic variables . 
 Therefore it 
 includes infinite series of functions of  
 when expanded by the
 harmonic variables   (harmonic expansions), for instance,

 

Thus, the hypermultiplet includes infinitely many auxiliary fields in
 addition to physical fields.
 

We also use the convention to raise and lower the  indices 
by means of 
 and , 
 
For instance the scalar fields for hypermultiplet 
 have the property 
: 
 
where lower index  denotes fundamental representation 
 in flavor symmetry group.

Therefore the scalar fields for hypermultiplet has the following 
reality property in conformity with our convention of complex conjugate 
in HSF () : 
 
Namely we have , 
. 
We shall use  and its complex 
conjugate field  as much as possible instead of 
. 





The Eguchi-Hanson Nonlinear Sigma Model  in HSF 
 

The massive HK sigma model on Eguchi-Hanson 
manifold () 

is described in terms of harmonic superfields 
integrated over the analytic subspace   

 


where the covariant derivative  defined in 
() contains the central charge  
 satisfying the following eigenvalue 
 equation 

 

This mass parameter can be attributed to the 
Sherk-Schwarz reduction from six 
dimensions : 
. 

The Lagrangian () is invariant under  gauge 
 transformation 

 





Similarly to the Grassmann expansion of hypermultiplets 
(), the vector multiplet  can also be 
expanded into infinitely many components when expanded 
in powers of Grassmann numbers . 
These components can then be expanded into power series in harmonic 
variables . 
However, we can exploit the gauge transformation () 
to eliminate most of the auxiliary components in powers of Grassmann 
number  and also in powers of harmonic variables  
in the vector multiplet. 
After eliminating infinitely many auxiliary fields by the gauge 
transformations, we obtain a gauge fixing 
 

which is called the Wess-Zumino gauge and is denoted by the suffix 
WZ. 
As a result, the remaining fields 
 in () 
are physical fields except , 
if there is a kinetic term for vector multiplet. 
The field  is the usual SUSY auxiliary field. 
However, we will use here a vector multiplet with no kinetic term. 
Therefore we will eventually eliminate all these component fields in the 
vector multiplet giving rise to constraints for hypermultiplets. 

After integrating Grassmann variables 
 and the harmonic variables, 
and eliminating infinitely many auxiliary fields of the hypermultiplet 
expanded in powers of harmonic variables , and taking 
the Wess-Zumino gauge for the vector multiplet in HSF, 
we obtain the bosonic part of the action as 

 
 
 

where  denotes fundamental representation
 in  gauge group.
The scalar potential 
 is given by 

 

Let us stress once again that 
we adopt a convention for complex conjugation of complex scalar fields  


 
and use  and  to denote a complex conjugate pair. 

There are still auxiliary fields  and  
and  of the 
 vector multiplet.
By changing variables, we can also introduce 
the most frequently used parameterization given by 
 Curtright and Freedman : four complex fields 
 

 

where  and . 

The Lagrangian in the HSF 
()-() 
can be related to the component Lagrangian 
()-() 
in terms of 
 superfields in the  basis 
in the Wess-Zumino gauge 
by the following identification : 
  
and fields  of HSF 
can be identified with  fields  
in the  basis ()-() 
as 
  
The Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters  
in HSF are identified with Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters 
 
in the  
superfield formalism as 
  
The  auxiliary fields  
in HSF are identified with 
 the auxiliary fields  
in the  
superfield formalism as 
  
These results are in conformity with the reality property of 
the Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters  and the 
  auxiliary fields  
in HSF and those in  superfield formalism  
  
  
The identification () implies 
that the complex scalar fields  belong to 
anti-chiral scalar superfields, and   to 
chiral scalar superfields. 
The suffix  denotes fundamental representation of the 
gauge group . 

The complex fields  in the Curtright-Freedman 
basis () are more directly related to 
the complex scalar fields of the  superfields 
 in the  basis in 
()-() as 
  
Therefore the complex scalar fields  are identified as those of 
chiral scalar superfield, and   are identified as those of 
anti-chiral scalar superfield. 
We also notice that all the complex fields 
 
in the Curtright-Freedman basis have 
 charge  in conformity with the charge 
assignment obtained in the model constructed by 
the tensor calculus for supergravity. 
This supergravity model shows that our model can be embedded 
into supergravity. 
Moreover it explicitly demonstrates that our model can be 
extended to a model in five dimensions. 

The equation of motion for the gauge field  gives 
  
After eliminating the vector field , 
we obtain the kinetic term for the scalar fields 
 in the hypermultiplets 

  
Integrating over 
scalar  and the 
auxiliary fields  in the vector multiplet, 
we obtain constraints  

 

This constraint makes the target space 
of the massive nonlinear sigma model into the 
 Eguchi-Hanson manifold.In the case of massless 
(without potential) model,
the target metric for the four independent real 
 bosonic fields has been shown to be just the Eguchi-Hanson 
 metric. 

The equation of motion for scalar field  gives 
 
where the flavor indices are summed.
Integrating over  gives the potential term as 
  

The parameters  have mass dimensions two and represent 
the scale of the curvature of the target manifold. 


The bosonic action becomes in the Curtright-Freedman basis as 
 





Nonlinear Sigma Model in Independent Fields : 
Spherical Coordinates and Gibbons-Hawking Parameterization 
 

Here we shall describe the model in terms of independent 
fields in several parameterizations by solving the constraints 
(). 
In the following we shall take 
 
for simplicity. 
Then the constraints () become 
 

It is convenient to introduce independent fields 
 through 
the following Ansatz 
  
  
where  are complex fields satisfying 
  

The real functions  and  
are uniquely determined 
by the constraints () and () as 

 

The action can be described without constraint by the independent 
 complex fields . These fields  are invariant under the 
 gauge transformations in ()  
which is used to take the quotient of  
the target manifold. 

Another useful parameterization of the model is given by the 
spherical coordinates which are invariant under the  
gauge transformations 

 

 
 
The bosonic action becomes in the spherical coordinates as 
 


It is also useful to change variables into the following 
 parameterization appropriate to describe 
the Gibbons-Hawking multi-center metric 
 

By using the parameterisation 
 ()-() and ()-(),
 the bosonic part of the action () can be rewritten as 

 

where
 


 and 

) 

The harmonic function  can be described

 

where  is a unit three vector, which is given by 

 . 
 is a potential whose solution is given as

 

It is found that the target metric of the action () 
is just the Eguchi-Hanson 
 metric.


BPS Equation and Domain Wall Solution
 In this Sec., we give the BPS domain wall solution in our model. 
In the following the complex mass parameter  is taken to be real 
for simplicity. 
By requiring that the fermions 
conserve half of SUSY we obtain 
the BPS equations in HSF 

 



BPS wall solution should approach the supersymmetric discrete 
 vacua as . 
 From the trivial solution of BPS equation (translational invariant 
 solution), we find that there are only two vacua 
:  in terms of the spherical coordinates 
(), (). 
Another way of understanding these vacua is to observe from 
Eq.() that these two 
points are the minima of the scalar potential 
 
with vanishing vacuum energy 
 

Therefore we consider the domain wall solution connects these vacua,
and we can expect that  has nontrivial configuration. 
After some algebra, we obtain four independent 
differential equations in terms of the spherical coordinates 
 


 

The boundary condition of  at  
dictates 
the solution 
of () to be 
 and  . 
The other two equations in () 
gives a nontrivial dependence in  
resulting in the following BPS solutions 

 

where  and  are real constants: 
 determines the position of the domain wall 
along  direction and  corresponds to the 
Nambu-Goldstone (NG) mode of  isometry of target space. 
The BPS wall solution is illustrated in Fig.. 


 

      tanhwl2.eps  



BPS domain wall solution of field  as a function of  with 
. 


Our BPS wall solution 
is obtained from  SUSY theory in four dimensions. 
However, subsequent study 
revealed that our model can be extended to an 
  SUSY theory in five dimensions. 
 In fact we obtain precisely the same BPS solution as in 
() by taking the limit of vanishing gravitational 
coupling in the BPS wall solution in five-dimensional 
supergravity. 
Therefore we can now use our BPS wall solution as a starting point for 
an interesting phenomenology for a unified model : 
our four-dimensional spacetime being 
a wall in higher dimensional spacetime following the 
brane-world scenario. 

In terms of harmonic superfields () 
and their bosonic components (), 
the BPS solution is given by 

 


In terms of the fields in the Curtright-Freedman basis 
(), 
the BPS wall solution is given by 
 


The BPS wall solution in the Gibbons-Hawking multi-center metric 
parameterization () is given by 
  


Acknowledgements 

One of the authors (NS) thanks Yoshiaki Tanii for useful 
discussion on hypermultiplets in six dimensions. 
This work is supported in part by Grant-in-Aid 
 for Scientific Research from the Japan Ministry 
 of Education, Science and Culture  13640269. 
The work of M. Naganuma is supported by JSPS Fellowship. 
The work of M. Nitta is supported by the U. S. Department
 of Energy under grant DE-FG02-91ER40681 (Task B).

 000 
  M. Arai, M. Naganuma, M. Nitta, and N. Sakai, 
             "Manifest Supersymmetry for BPS Walls 
               in  Nonlinear Sigma Models"
               to appear in Nucl. Phys.  B  [hep-th/0211103].
  S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, 
             Nucl. Phys.  B193  (1981) 150; 
             N. Sakai, Z. f. Phys. C11  (1981) 153;
             E. Witten, Nucl. Phys.  B188  (1981) 513;
             S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, 
              Phys. Rev.  D24  (1981) 1681.

 N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali, 
             Phys. Lett.  429B  (1998) 263 
             [hep-ph/9803315]; 
             I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, 
             and G. Dvali, 
             Phys. Lett.  436B  (1998) 257 
             [hep-ph/9804398]. 
 L. Randall and R. Sundrum, 
             Phys. Rev. Lett.  
             83  (1999) 3370 [hep-ph/9905221]; 
             Phys. Rev. Lett.  83  (1999) 4690 
             [hep-th/9906064].
   E. Bogomol'nyi, 
             Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.   B24  (1976) 449;
                M. K. Prasad and C. H. Sommerfield, 
             Phys. Rev. Lett.   35  (1975) 760.

 E. Witten and D. Olive, 
             Phys. Lett.   B78  (1978) 97.

 N. Seiberg and E. Witten, 
             Nucl. Phys.   B426  (1994) 19
             [hep-th/9407087]; 
             Nucl. Phys.   B431  (1994) 484
             [hep-th/9408099]. 
 M. Cvetic, F. Quevedo, and S. Rey,
               Phys. Rev. Lett.  67  (1991) 1836;
               M. Cvetic, S. Griffies, and S. Rey,
               Nucl. Phys.  B381  (1992) 301 
               [hep-th/9201007];
               G. Dvali and M. Shifman, 
               Nucl. Phys.  B504  (1997) 127 
               [hep-th/9611213]; 
               Phys. Lett.  396B  
               (1997) 64 [hep-th/9612128]; 
               A. Kovner, M. Shifman, and A. Smilga, 
               Phys. Rev.  D56  (1997) 7978 
               [hep-th/9706089]; 
               B. Chibisov and M. Shifman, 
               Phys. Rev.  D56  (1997) 7990 
               [hep-th/9706141];
              A. Smilga and A. Veselov, 
               Phys. Rev. Lett.  79  (1997) 4529 
               [hep-th/9706217]; 
              J. Edelstein, M.L. Trobo, F. Brito, and D. Bazeia, 
               Phys. Rev.  D57  (1998) 7561 
               [hep-th/9707016];
               V. Kaplunovsky, J. Sonnenschein, and S. Yankielowicz, 
               Nucl. Phys.  B552  (1999) 209 
               [hep-th/9811195];
               G. Dvali, G. Gabadadze, and Z. Kakushadze, 
               Nucl. Phys.  B562  (1999) 158
               [hep-th/9901032];
               B. de Carlos and J. M. Moreno,
               Phys. Rev. Lett.  83  (1999) 2120 
               [hep-th/9905165];
              M. Naganuma and M. Nitta,
               Prog. Theor. Phys.  105  (2001) 501
               [hep-th/0007184];
               D. Binosi and T. ter Veldhuis, 
               Phys. Rev.  D63  (2001) 085016, 
               [hep-th/0011113].

  N. Maru, N. Sakai, Y. Sakamura, and 
                R. Sugisaka, Phys. Lett.  B496  
                (2000) 98, [hep-th/0009023]. 
  N. Maru, N. Sakai, Y. Sakamura, and 
                R. Sugisaka, Nucl. Phys.  B616  
                (2001) 47 [hep-th/0107204];

                the Proceedings of the 10th Tohwa 
                international symposium on string theory, 
                American Institute of Physics, 607, pages 209-215, 
                (2002) [hep-th/0109087]; 
                "SUSY Breaking by stable non-BPS configurations", 
                to appear in the Proceedings of the Corfu Summer Institute
                on Elementary particle Physics, 
                Corfu, September 2001 [hep-th/0112244].
  N. Sakai and R. Sugisaka, 
                Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A17  (2002) 4697 
                [hep-th/0204214].
  M. Eto, N. Maru, N. Sakai, and T. Sakata, 
                Phys. Lett.  B553  (2003) 87
                [hep-th/0208127].

  E. R. C. Abraham and P. K. Townsend, 
             Nucl. Phys.   B351  (1991) 313;
G. Gibbons and P. Townsend, 
              Phys. Rev. Lett.  83  
              (1999) 1727 [hep-th/9905196]; 
S.M. Carroll, S. Hellerman, and M. Trodden, 
              Phys. Rev.  D61  (2000) 065001 
              [hep-th/9905217];
              P.M. Saffin, Phys. Rev. Lett.   83  (1999) 
              4249-4252 [hep-th/9907066]. 
H. Oda, K. Ito, M. Naganuma, and N. Sakai, 
              Phys. Lett.  B471  (1999) 140 
              [hep-th/9910095]; 
K. Ito, M. Naganuma, H. Oda, and N. Sakai, 
              Nucl. Phys.  B586  (2000) 231 
              [hep-th/0004188]; 
             Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  101  (2001) 304 
               [hep-th/0012182].
 M. Naganuma, M. Nitta, and N. Sakai, 
              Phys. Rev.  D65  (2001) 045016 
              [hep-th/0108179];
       "BPS Walls and Junctions in  SUSY Nonlinear Sigma Models"
              to appear in the  the Proceedings of the third international 
              Sakharov conference on Physics, 
              [hep-th/0210205].
A. Gorsky and M. Shifman, 
              Phys. Rev.  D61  
              (2000) 085001 [hep-th/9909015];
             Nucl. Phys.   B586  (2000) 231 
             [hep-th/0004188];
             D. Binosi and T. ter Veldhuis, 
             Phys. Lett.   B476  (2000) 124 
             [hep-th/9912081];
             S. Nam and K. Olsen, JHEP  0008  
             (2000) 001 [hep-th/0002176].
 M. Arai, S. Fujita, M. Naganuma, and N. Sakai, 
             "Wall Solution with Weak Gravity Limit 
               in Five Dimensional Supergravity"
               [hep-th/0212175], 
               to appear in Phys. Lett.  B .

 P. Fayet, 
               Nucl. Phys.  B113  (1976) 135.

 
              J. Wess and J. Bagger, 
               "Supersymmetry and Supergravity", (1991), Princeton 
               University Press. 

L. Alvarez-Gaume  and D. Z. Freedman, 
Comm. Math. Phys.  80  (1981) 443.

  B. Zumino,
               Phys. Lett.  87B  (1979) 203.

L. Alvarez-Gaume  and D. Z. Freedman, 
Comm. Math. Phys.  91  (1983) 87.

J. Sherk and J.H. Schwarz, 
             Phys. Lett.   B82  (1979) 60. 

G. Sierra and P. K. Townsend,
           Nucl. Phys.  B 233  (1984) 289,
 
E. Abraham and P. K. Townsend, 
Phys. Lett.  B 291  (1992) 85.
J. P. Gauntlett, D. Tong, and P.K. Townsend, 
               Phys. Rev.  D63  (2001) 085001 
               [hep-th/0007124]. 

              J. P. Gauntlett, R. Portugues, D. Tong, and P.K. Townsend, 
               Phys. Rev.  D63  (2001) 085002 
               [hep-th/0008221].

 J. P. Gauntlett, D. Tong, and P. K. Townsend,  
               Phys. Rev.  D64  (2001) 025010 
               [hep-th/0012178]. 
  D. Tong, 
               Phys. Rev.  D66  (2002) 025013 
               [hep-th/0202012]. 

M. Naganuma, M. Nitta, and N. Sakai,
               Grav. Cosmol.  8  (2002) 129, 


               [hep-th/0108133].

 R. Portugues and P. K. Townsend, 
               JHEP  0204  (2002) 039 [hep-th/0203181]. 

  T. L. Curtright and D. Z. Freedman,
               Phys. Lett.  90B  (1980) 71.

 L. Alvarez-Gaume  and D. Z. Freedman, 
               Phys. Lett.  94B  (1980) 171.

              M. Roc ek and P. K. Townsend, 
               Phys. Lett.  96B  (1980) 72.

 
              U. Lindstro m and M. Roc ek, 
               Nucl. Phys.  B222  (1983) 285;
              N. J. Hitchin, A. Karlhede, U. Lindstro m, and M. Roc ek, 
               Comm. Math. Phys.  108  (1987) 535. 

C. M. Hull, A. Karlhede, U. Lindstro m and M. Roc ek,  
Nucl. Phys.  B266  (1986) 1. 

 
              Y. Sakamura, 
                "Superfield Description of Effectiver Theories on BPS Domain 
                   Walls", [hep-th/0207159]. 

              A. Galperin, E. Ivanov, S. Kalitzin, V. Ogievetsky, and 
              E. Sokatchev,
               Class. Quantum Grav.  1  (1984) 469; 
              A. Galperin, E. Ivanov, V. Ogievetsky, and E. Sokatchev,
               Class. Quantum Grav.  2  (1985) 601; 617.

              B. M. Zupnik,
               Theor. Math. Phys.  130  (2002) 213
               [hep-th/0107012]. 

              A. Galperin, E. Ivanov, V. Ogievetsky, and P. K. Townsend,
               Class. Quantum Grav.  3  (1986) 625. 
              A. Galperin, E. Ivanov, V. Ogievetsky, and E. Sokatchev,
              "Harmonic Superspace", Cambridge University Press,
              Cambridge (2001).

              S. Ketov and C. Unkmeir, 
               Phys. Lett.  422B  (1998) 179 [hep-th/9710185].
  T. Eguchi and A. J. Hanson,  
               Phys. Lett.  74B  (1978) 249;

               Ann. Phys.  120  (1979) 82. 
              B. Zupnik, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.  44  (1986) 512;
              E. Ivanov, S. Ketov, and B. Zupnik, 
              Nucl. Phys.  509  (1998) 53.
              G. W. Gibbons, D. Olivia, P. J. Ruback, and G. Valent,
               Nucl. Phys.  B296  (1988) 679.
G. W. Gibbons and C. N. Pope, 
Commun. Math. Phys.  66  (1979) 267. 

G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, 
Phys. Lett.  78B  (1978) 249.

 M. Shifman and A. Yung, 
            "Domain Walls and Flux Tubes in  SQCD : 
            D-brane Prototypes", [hep-th/0212293]. 




