



 
 
unsrt  
 

  
Constraint Superalgebras and Their Application to Gauge Field Theories and String Theories 
 
 
Sultan Catto
Physics Department
 The Graduate School and University Center
 The City University of New York 
365 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10016-4309
 and 
 Center for Theoretical Physics 
The Rockefeller University 

1230 York Avenue
 New York NY 10021-6399 
 
 
 

  We show that with every classical system possesing first class constraints that form a natural Lie algebra, we can asssociate a superalgebra that admits the constraint Lie algebra as a subalgebra. An odd generator of this superalgebra that commutes with the constraints is shown to be the BRST operator whose form follows from a non linear coset representation of the superalgebra. We further show the existence of the superalgebra for all Yang-Mills theories and for 26-dimensional bosonic strings.
 

PACS numbers: 12.40.Aa, 12.40.Qq, 11.30.Pb

 

 Work supported in part by DOE contracts No. DE-AC-0276 ER 03074 and 03075, and PSC-CUNY Research Awards.

Introduction 
Superalgebras were discovered in the context of hadronic physics, first as a generalization of the  symmetry mixing states of different spin and then by Ramond, Neveu and Schwarz in the
construction of dual resonance models that accounted for parallel mesonic and baryonic Regge trajectories. Finally a class of supersymmetric relativistic field theories were discovered by Wess and Zumino following initial examples by Gol'fand and Likthman, and Akulov and Volkov.  Hadronic
supersymmetry had two offshoots.  One was a fundamental superstring theory of particles, the other was the
approximate supersymmetry between even and odd nuclei developed as a model for nuclear structure, generalizing the  interacting boson model, by Balantekin, Bars and Iachello.  

In this paper we shall deal with a totally different application of superalgebras to the quantization of Hamiltonian systems with first class constraints, following along the lines first introduced by Bowick and Gursey. We shall show that with every classical system possessing first class constraints that form a natural Lie algebra, we can associate a superalgebra that admits the constraint Lie algebra as a subalgebra.  An odd generator of this superalgebra that is invariant under the subalgebra of first class constraints is the BRST operator that was introduced in physics by Becchi, Rouet and Stora and also independently by Tyutin in the context of the covariant quantization of gauge theories.  The remaining odd operators that transform like the adjoint representation of the Lie superalgebra are the Faddeev-Popov ghost operators.  The BRST operator Q can also be expressed in terms of the first class constraints , the ghost operators  and their canonical conjugate antighost operators .  The resulting expression is a cubic function of those operators.  It was first written explicitly by Koszul as the form of the cohomology operator of Lie groups as a step in Cartan's program for a complete differential geometric interpretation of Lie groups.  This was the same year in which Dirac had formulated his theory of constrained Hamiltonian systems and their quantization.  Later on physicists rediscovered Koszul's formula.  The connection between the cohomology approach and the quantization of constrained systems approach was realized gradually during the seventies.  Looking back we see the simultaneous discovery of the two theories as yet another example of a happy conjuncture of great physical and mathematical ideas.

In physics Dirac's method was applied with the greatest success to the covariant quantization of non-abelian gauge
theories and string theories.  The algebraic structure of the constraint-ghost system
was analyzed by many authors, including Fradkin, Vilkovisky and their collaborators, Marnelius, Schwarz, Baulieau, and Aldaya and collaborators. Recently there has been a flood of papers dealing with the BRST formalism in string theory and string field theories

that will not be the object of our main concern. We shall concentrate on the imbedding of the constraint Lie algebra in a superalgebra and give some applications. For some applications of the superalgebra method introduced in reference  to string field theory we refer to articles in cited in reference  among many others.

The BRST Operator and the Superalgebra of Constraints 

Following Dirac, let us consider a Hamiltonian system with , where , as Hamiltonian and  as first class constraints, such that

 
and the Poisson bracket relations

 
Here  and  denote respectively the generalized coordinates and their canonical moments, such that

 

For a conservative system with total energy E we may introduce

 
and regard  as an additional first class constraint. Defining

 
we can combine the two sets of Eq.() into a single set with structure constants  antisymmetric in  and .

We quantize this system by turning functions of ,  into hermitian operators and replacing Poisson
brackets by  times commutators.  The generalized coordinates satisfy

 
and  become elements of the Lie algebra defined by

 
When  are hermitian, the structure constants are purely imaginary. If  are taken to be antihermitian, then  are real.  They also satisfy the Jacobi identity

 
Note that we have not required the existence of a Killing metric. Hence indices cannot be raised or lowered and no antisymmetry of  in three lower indices is required.  In other words, the Lie algebra of constraints does not have to be semi-simple.  Moreover, the number  of original constraints can be infinite as in the case of gauge theories and string theories.

In the quantized theory we require the vanishing of the matrix elements of the constraints between physical states  and , so that

 

This means that the constraints vanish weakly. The strong condition requires the vanishing of the operators themselves.

At this point we introduce Grassmann numbers  as odd operators as well as their canonical conjugates  such
that, in analogy to the Heisenberg relations Eq.() we have the anticommutator relations

  
 are ghost creation operators, equal in number to the constraints . Out of these fermionic Heisenberg
operators which commute with the constraints we can construct another copy of the constraint Lie algebra by defining

 

Using Eqs.(),() and () we obtain

 

Since  and  can be represented by matrices, the operators  form a matrix representation of the constraint Lie algebra. We also have
 

It follows that the modified constraints

 
also obey the same Lie algebra as the .  The original constraints  and the bilinear  are the analogs of the orbital angular momenta  and the spin angular momenta  when the constraint Lie algebra  reduces to the rotation group . We have

 

 
Eq.() tell us that the modified constraints  act like total angular momentum operators, while Eq.() express the fact that the original constraints and the "spin" operators transform like the adjoint representation of the group  generated by .  In the case of the  group this means simply that L and S are vectors. We also find

 

Hence the ghosts also transform like the dual of the adjoint representation of .  A mirror property holds for the 
antighosts  which transform like the adjoint representation of , so that

 

We are now ready to introduce the BRST charge operator  with the following properties

(a) -  is an odd nilpotent operator:

 

(b) -  is invariant under the group :

 

(c) -  together with the modified constraints  and the antighosts forms a superalgebra . Hence the anticommutator of  with the antighosts must be proportional to the modified constraints. Normalizing  so that the proportionality constant is unity, we obtain

 

(d) - We shall often use a supplementary condition that  be hermitian with respect to an appropriate scalar product. This
means that we shall restrict ourselves to the unitary representations of the supergroup associated with , or the
representations of the superalgebra  by hermitian operators acting on the states of a definite Hilbert space.

If we assume  to be a function of ,  and  we can write

 
since  must be odd and a scalar under .   and  are invariant coefficients that commute with ,  and . We can take them as numerical coefficients.  Nilpotency gives

 

On the other hand, using the expression Eq.() we can write

 
so that, the Jacobi identity Eq.() yields

 

Substitution of this result in Eq.() shows that the condition for  to be nilpotent is given by

 

In order to satisfy condition (c) we calculate

 
where we have used Eqs.(), () and (). Hence the superalgebra closes if .  We also note the relation

 

To summarize, we have succeeded in embedding the group  in a superalgebra  given by

 

 

 

   A realization of this superalgebra is obtained by taking  to be given by Eq.() and  by

 

Comparing with the expression Eq.() for the modified constraints , note the occurrence of the factor
 in front of the spin operator in Eq.().

Another peculiarity of the operator  is its non symmetrical appearance.  A more symmetrical form can be given if we remember that the constraints  are the analogs of the orbital angular momenta.  They are also functions of the canonical variables  and .  Let us introduce  new collective coordinates  and their canonical conjugates , both functions of  and , that satisfy the Heisenberg relations

 
and are chosen such that

 

Then we find that Eq.() is satisfied.  In terms of the bosonic canonical pair  and the fermionic canonical pair  we find

 

 

These operators form a superalgebra together with .  The generators of  are then functions of the coordinates
 of a superspace point and their canonical conjugate momenta  that label a point in the
super-momentum space.

The constraint superalgebra can be enlarged through the introduction of the ghost number operator

 

Its eigenvalues give the ghost numbers.  We have

 

 

Hence the constraints and modified constraints have ghost number zero.  It is  for ghosts and the BRST operator, while it is  for the antighosts .

 If the superspace formulation is used we can also introduce the bosonic number operator 

 
with the properties

 

 

Finally we note that the superalgebra  is not semi-simple even if the group  of the constraints is
semi-simple.  The hermiticity of  poses also a delicate problem.  Since  is nilpotent it can only be hermitian with respect to a scalar product with an indefinite metric.  This is often the case in relativistic theories. The infinite dimensional constraints bring additional convergence problems for the existence of .  We shall illustrate these
points by some concrete examples.

In the case of infinite algebras another difficulty may arise in the form of a central extension of the algebra. The disappearance of the central term occurs if certain restrictions are met, like the critical dimensions of strings or superstrings associated with the infinite Virasoro or super-Virasoro algebras.  In our construction the BRST charge is a nilpotent element of a super-algebra that by definition has no central extension.


Properties of Physical States 

In the BRST formalism one considers BRST invariant states  annihilated by the operator , that are
simultaneously eigenstates of the ghost number operator  with eigenvalue ,

 

 
Such states form the sector with ghost number .  The property that  increases the ghost number of a state by one, coupled with its nilpotency yields a trivial solution to Eqs.(), () of the form

 
Two solutions  and  of the same equations are equivalent if they differ by a trivial solution. Thus

 
Such a pair of states are regarded as belonging to the n'th cohomology class of the group .

Physical states are those that belong to the zeroth cohomology class.  They are annihilated by both  and .  We shall write  instead of  .

 

Since  and  are canonically conjugate such a state cannot be annihilated by both ghosts and antighost operators. Hence, instead of Eq.() we can write

 
together with

 
These two equations lead to

 
as well as

 
and consequently

 
which is the quantum version of the original classical constraints given by the vanishing of .

Eqs.()-() tell us that the physical states are invariant under the whole constraint superalgebra that we have introduced.

From a more general point of view we may consider the case of a BRST operator  that is hermitian with respect to a scalar
product defined in the vector space .  The metric in such a space must be indefinite, otherwise a hermitian  could not be simultaneously nilpotent.  When these two conditions are realized, taking the hermitian conjugate of Eq.() with respect to the metric, we obtain

 
so that  also annihilates bra states belonging to the sector with ghost number .  It follows that

 
Hence the matrix elements of the modified constraints between BRST invariant states are seen to vanish.  For  this leads to

 
meaning that the quantum constraints vanish weakly according to Dirac's definition.
     
Because the eigenvalues of  are non negative integers there is no trivial physical state.  If such a state existed, it would have been generated by  from a state  with negative ghost number, but we have seen that such states are not part of our vector space.  It follows that BRST invariant states of ghost number zero are invariant under the superalgebra  as well as under its Lie subgroup .  For positive ghost number there will be trivial BRST invariant states and the cohomology class has to be determined at each level of ghost number .

Linear and Nonlinear Representations of the Constraint Superalqebra 

We start by giving a linear regular representation of the constraint superalgebra .  It will be constructed out of the
adjoint representation  of the constraint Lie algebra . We have

 
where the coefficients  are the structure constants of  given by Eq.().  are then  matrices.  We now consider the  matrices

 
which form a linear representation of , so that

 

Let us introduce at this point the odd operators

 
where ,  commutes with , but anticommutes with all odd parameters  that enter in the definition of an element of the supergroup.  The inclusion of  is necessary for the generators  to anticommute with odd parameters of the group.  Finally, by means of the  unit matrix , we define

 
These operators obey the relations

 

 

 

 

 
showing that ,  and  form a linear  matrix representation of the constraint
superalgebra, with  representing the antighosts and  the BRST operator.
     
An element of the supergroup is now given by

 

The ghost number operator  is represented by the matrix

 
Indeed we have

 

We can obtain more general matrix representations of  if we represent  by  matrices .  Then, replacing  by  and  by  the  unit matrix in Eq.() and Eq.(), we immediately find a  representation of the same superalgebra, including the ghost number.

As an example, if  and  , the  Pauli matrices, the  matrix
representation of  that we obtain is a -dimensional ( even,  odd) superalgebra which is a subalgebra of the matrix algebra generated by the  matrix representation of the conformal group in  dimensions. 
The three operators  generate -dimensional rotations. The BRST operator  is  times the time translation
(energy) operator,  are given by  times the three special space-like conformal transformations (generators of constant accelerations) and finally the ghost number operator  is proportional to the generator of space-time dilatation.

We now turn to a non-linear realization of  in the superspace with even coordinates  and odd coordinates  for a point .  An infinitesimal nonlinear transformation  of the superpoint  induces a change  in a function of , so that

 
where, in terms of the infinitesimal parameters , ,  of  we have

 
Here , ,  are differential operators linear in  
and .

The non-linear representation will be obtained from the action of the super group on the coset of  with respect to the
sub-supergroup generated by the constraints  and the antighosts  that act linearly on .  The one
odd-parameter BRST transformation that is in the coset will then have a non-linear action on .  To this end let us start from the following decomposition of a group element of  in a given matrix representation

 
where

 

 

 

The group will act on a module  that depends only on the parameters  and .

Let  be a diagonal matrix that commutes with . We define  as the matrix obtained from  through the adjoint action of the group element  defined by

 
giving

 

The coset element  has disappeared because it commutes with . Putting

 
where  does not commute with any of the , we find

 
where

 
Thus, to each point  of the superspace  corresponds a module  given by the matrix Eq.() that can also be written in the form

 

This superspace element belongs to the coset of  with respect to the BRST subsupergroup .

Under the left action of the group element  given by Eq.() on the group element  given by 
Eq.(), we have

 

This induces the transformation

 
on the module .  In turn, the superspace point  is transformed into  by the group action.  Let us consider the
action of the various sub-transformations on .  First, we can work out the action of the subgroup .  We have

 
which, on using Eq.() leads to

 
or

 

This means that both  and  transform under  like the dual of its adjoint representation.  Hence, we have, from Eq.()

 

Under the subsupergroup with parameters  we have

 
By means of Eq.(), we find

 
so that

 

The effect of  is to translate the odd coordinates and leave the even coordinates invariant in superspace.  Hence  acts linearly on .

Turning now to the BRST transformation, we find

 

Using the expression Eq.() for , we can write

 

 

  The transformation induced by the BRST operator in superspace is thus displayed to be nonlinear.  Since  is
nilpotent, we obtain

 

 

The last formula is seen to be the standard transformation formula for ghosts.  The even coordinates in superspace also
transform non-linearly according to Eq.().

The differential form  of the operator  is now obtained through the use of Eq.() in the form

 
where we have used  for  and to satisfy Eqs.() and ().  Finally we get

 
which is exactly the same formula as Eq.() and is equivalent to the standard form given by Eq.().

Example from Gauge Theories 

In this section we shall illustrate our general procedure by an example from a non-Abelian gauge field theory.  Let us start by reviewing the well established BRST method for an action involving gauge fixing and ghost terms.  Consider the Yang-Mills
Lagrangian based on the compact group :

 
where  are the structure constants of  and the coupling constant  is taken to be unity.  The Lorentz metric  has been chosen such that

) 
Here  is an auxiliary tensor field.  The variation of the action with respect to this antisymmetrical
tensor gives

 

Inserting this in the Lagrangian we get the usual Lagrangian

 
which is invariant under the infinitesimal gauge transformation

 

 
where  denotes the covariant derivative.

Variation of the action with respect to the potential yields the equation of motion

 
When  is compact, the structure constants are totally antisymmetrical in their three indices and we recover the usual
formula for the covariant derivative

 

Under a gauge transformation the change in the field is given by

 
so that it transforms homogeneously.

For canonical quantization we must find the canonical conjugates to the potentials .  We have

 

 

A covariant gauge fixing term  is added to the Lagrangian in order to allow for covariant quantization. In terms of the auxiliary scalar fields , the usual form is

 

This term breaks the local gauge invariance but allows a non vanishing conjugate to .  We have

 

Thus,  plays a role similar to . The variation with respect to it gives

 
so that when these values of  are inserted in  we obtain

 
which is the standard fixing term for Lorentz gauge.  The equation of motion Eq.() is now modified to

 

Since covariant quantization introduces negative probabilities and negative energies due to the presence of  and
, these unphysical effects must be compensated by Faddeev-Popov ghost fields  and 
which are fermionic scalar fields and occur in the Lagrangian in the combination

 

The total Lagrangian is now
 
Varying with respect to  we get the equation of motion

 
Varying with respect to  we have

 
The equation of motion Eq.() now takes its final form

 
Calling  and  the canonical conjugates of  and  respectively, we find

 

 
It is well known that  is invariant under the BRST transformation obtained by replacing the gauge functions
 by  so that Eq.() takes the form

 
where  is a constant Grassmann variable anticommuting with  and . Then  is
invariant under this transformation.  The BRST transformation leaves the auxiliary field B invariant

 
and the transformation laws for the ghosts and antighosts are

 

 
Since  the term  is BRST invariant, we find

 
Now

 
or

 
because of the Jacobi identity.  Hence we obtain

 
The Lagrangian changes by a total divergence, so that the action is BRST invariant.

Let us find the corresponding conserved Noether current. We have
 
where we have used Eq.().  The other equations Eq.()-Eq.() give

 

 

It follows that the conserved Noether current is given by

 
or, using Eq.() through Eq.()

 
We shall define the corresponding conserved charge  by

 
where, using Eqs.(),() and Eq.() we find

 
Doing a partial integration, we can also write

 
This is the final form of the BRST operator.  Now the classical constraints which generate gauge transformations are

 

The  do not commute but generate a current algebra.  The  do commute.   and  form an infinite Lie algebra of first class constraints.  The corresponding ghost variables are respectively  and .  Since they are functions of position we must sum over the index and integrate over x.  Thus the formula Eq.() is identical with the general formula Eq.().  Using the canonical commutation relations it can be checked easily that  generates the transformation laws Eq.()-
Eq.().  On the other hand, because  has the standard form its square must also vanish. The physical states of Yang-Mills theories are therefore annihilated by .  The ghost number is given by

 
which is constant in time owing to the conservation of the ghost current

 
which follows from the equations of motion Eq.() and Eq.(). Then, for the zero ghost number sector the modified constraints  coincide with the classical constraints and the usual physical states are annihilated by  and .  The modified constraints  are given by

 
More details about the BRST treatment of Yang-Mills theories with applications to their renormalizability and unitarity can be found in the excellent reviews by Baulieu and Henneaux.  What we have just shown here is that the constraint superalgebra with even elements that represent the modified constraints  and  as well as ghost number , and with odd elements ,  and the BRST charge , leaves the physical states invariant. Actually, the Lagrangian  given by Eq.() is invariant under a larger superalgebra that includes the anti-BRST operator  which generates non trivial transformations for the fields .  This larger invariance was discovered by Gurci and Ferrari, and Ojima and further developed and formalized by Baulieu and Thierry-Mieg and Alvarez-Gaume  and Baulieu.


Example from String Theories 

As a last example we shall display the infinite constraint superalgebra for a bosonic string.  Consider the loop algebra
generated by the differential operators

 
which obey the infinite Lie algebra

 
This is a Virasoro algebra without central extension, also called a loop algebra.  Its structure constants are given by

 

Introduce conjugate Grassmann numbers  and  such that

 

A finite  subalgebra consists of the dilation operator

 
the translation operator

 
and the translation operator for the inverse , namely

 
,  generate the group  and the Virasoro algebra may be regarded as its affine extension.
 
A more general form of the Virasoro algebra without central extension can be constructed by means of the harmonic oscillator 
operators  (multiplication by ) and  (represented by the differential operator )

 
which also obey Eq.().  Then  and  correspond to the well known Dyson representation of  with Casimir invariant

 
equal to .

Now, construct the "spin" operators

 
  
The modified constraints are
 
while the BRST operator is given by

 


The associated superalgebra is again given by ,  and .  The ghost number operator is

 
               
Note that for the representation Eq.()  is different than . If we have a representation for which

 
then the Virasoro algebra Eq.() defined for  and  () defines the whole algebra.  In that case it is enough to impose constraints for  only. When ghost variables  and  are introduced, we must also require

            
These conditions lead to the hermiticity of .

In string theory the Virasoro operators are the moments of the two-dimensional energy-momentum tensor.  They can be 
expressed in terms of oscillator mode operators  in the form

 
where

 
               
Physical states are annihilated by  () and  with  being a constant and  normal
ordered:

 
     
The hermiticity conditions are now satisfied, but there is a price: for this string representation the Virasoro algebra 
develops a well known anomaly term and takes the form

 
          

This modified algebra has the same  subalgebra generated by  and .

The spin algebra develops a different anomaly term, namely

 
         
The modified constraints  in Eq.() will then satisfy the anomaly free algebra

 
provided that the total anomaly vanishes.  This anomaly must include an additional term  induced 
in  by normal ordering.  Hence we must have

 
which gives

  
           
Thus in the string representation of the Virasoro algebra the modified constraints form a Lie algebra embedded in the 
superalgebra generated by ,  and , only if the string is in 26 dimensions with intercept  
equal to one.  The physical states are invariant under this constraint superalgebra which fails to exist in other 
dimensions for the bosonic string.

In mathematical terms, the cohomology for the Virasoro algebra has been rigorously solved by Frenkel, Garland 
and Zuckerman.  Hence, the ghost-free and manifestly unitary treatment of the bosonic string on
the light cone is now fully justified.


Further Outlook 

We have established the existence of a super algebra in which the Lie algebra of the first class constraints is 
embedded. The odd generator that commutes with the constraints is the BRST operator.  Its form follows from a non linear coset representation of the superalgebra. The superalgebra exists for all Yang-Mills theories and for -dimensional bosonic strings.

In Yang-Mills theories two BRST operators  and  can be introduced.  This suggests that the constraints can 
be embedded in larger superalgebras.  Such formal possibilities have already been explored. It remains to show their utility in the covariant quantization of gauge or string theories, especially when the superalgebra is a simple one.

When constraints are second class, Poisson brackets are replaced by Dirac brackets.  Can such constraints be also embedded in a superalgebra?  The resolution of the problem may have bearing on the covariant quantization of supergravity and super particle theories.

In the more general case of both bosonic and fermionic constraints that form a superalgebra, the latter can be regarded as a 
subalgebra of a larger superalgebra involving both bosonic and fermionic ghosts and BRST operators. This possibility is 
realized for the superstring. The embedding super algebra then exists only is the critical dimension . A complete 
classification of all conditions under which the constraint superalgebra exists remains to be worked out.
 99 

 H. Miyazawa, Prog. Theor. Phys.(Kyoto) 36  1266 (1966);
     Phys. Rev. 170  1586 (1968).  For preliminary work on       
     baryon-meson symmetry see also R.C. Hwa and J. Nuyts,
      Phys. Rev. 151  1215 (1966).
   P. Ramond, Phys. Rev. D3  2415 (1971).

   A. Neveu and J.H. Schwartz, Nucl. Phys. B31  86 (1971).

 J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70  39 (1974).

 Y.A. Gol'fand and E.P. Likthman, Pis'ma Z Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 22  452 (1971).

 V.P. Akulov and D.V. Volkov, Phys. Lett. B46  109 (1973).

   T. Yoneya, Prog. Theor. Phys. 51  1907 (1974); J. Scherk and J. H. Schwartz, Nucl. Phys. B81  118 (1974); Phys. Lett. 57B  463 (1975);  F. Gliozzi, J. Scherk and D. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B122  (1977). For a review of this early period see J.H. Schwartz, Phys. Reports 89  223 (1982).

   A. Arima and F. Iachello, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 99  253 (1978); 111  201 (1978); 123  468 (1979).

   A.B. Balantekin, I. Bars and F. Iachello, Nucl. Phys. A370  284 (1981).

   M. Bowick and F. Gu rsey, Phys. Lett. B175  182 (1986); Nucl. Phys. B283  331 (1987).

   C. Becchi, A. Rouet and R. Stora, Phys. Lett. 52B  344 (1974); Ann. Phys. (N.Y ) 98  287 (1976);
     I.V. Tyutin, Lebedev preprint FIAN No. 39  (1975).

  L. Faddeev and V.N. Popov, Phys. Lett. 25B  29 (1967); Grassmann variables were also introduced in the same connection by R. P. Feynman, Acta. Phys. Polonica 24  697 (1963); and B.S. de Witt, Phys. Rev. 162  1195 and 1239  (l967).

  J.L. Koszul, Bull. Sac. Math. de France 78  5 (1950).

  P.A.M. Dirac, Canad. J. Math.  2  129 (1950); Proc. Roy. Soc. A246  326 (1958); Lectures on Quantum 
      Mechanics (Yeshiva Univ. 1964).

  E.S. Fradkin and G. A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. 55B  724 (1975); C. Becchi, A. Rouet and R. Stora, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 98  287 (1976); T. Kugo and I. Ojima, Suppl. Prog. Theor. Phys. 66  1 (1979); G. Zuckerman, in Proc. 
     XI. Int. Colloq. on Group Theor. Methods in Physics, ed. M. Serdarog lu, p.1 (Springer, 1983).

  See L. Faddeev and A. A. Slavnov, "Gauge Fields, Introduction to Quantum Field Theory" (Benjamin-Cummings 1980)

  M. Kato and K. Ogawa, Nucl. Phys. B212  443 (1983); S. Hwang, Phys. Rev. D28  2614 (1983).

  L.A. Batalin and G. A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. 69B  309 (1977); E.S. Fradkin and T.E. Fradkina, Phys. Lett. 72B  343 (1978); E.S. Fradkin and M.A. Vasiliev, Phys. Lett. 72B  70 (1978); I.A. Batalin and E.S. Fradkin,  
      Phys. Lett. 86B  263 (1979); I.A. Batalin and G.A. Vilkovisky, J. Math. Phys. 26  172 (1985).

  R. Marnelius, Phys. Lett. 99B  467 (1981).

  J.H. Schwartz, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 86  70 (1986).

  L. Baulieu, Phys. Lett. 126B  455 (1983); Nucl. Phys. B227  157 (1983); Nucl. Phys. B241  557 (1984).
 V. Aldaya, R. Loll and J. Navarro-Salas, Phys. Lett 225B  340 (1989); Phys. Lett. 237B  392 (1990).

  T. Banks and E. Peskin, Nucl. Phys. B264  513 (1986); W. Siegel and B. Zwiebach, Nucl. Phys. B263  105(1986); K. Itoh, T. Kugo, H. Kunitomo and H. Oguri, Prog. Theor. Phys. 75  162 (1986); W. Siegel, Nucl. Phys. B284  632 (1987)

  A. Barducci, R. Casalbuoni, D. Dominici and R. Gatto, Phys. Lett. B194  257 (1987); A. Neveu and P. C. West, Nucl. Phys. B268  125 (1986).

  L. Baulieu, Phys. Reports 129  1 (1985).

  M. Henneaux, Phys. Reports 126  1 (1985).

  G. Gurci and R. Ferrari, Phys. Lett. 63B  91 (1976); Nuovo Cimento 32A  151 (1976).

  I. Ojima, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 66  324 (1979); Prog. Theor. Phys. 64  625 (1980).

  L. Baulieu and J. Thierry-Mieg, Nucl. Phys. B197  477 (1982).

  L. Alvarez-Gaume  and L. Baulieu, Nucl. Phys. B212  255 (1983).

  F. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 102  1217, 1231 (l956).

  For a review see M.B. Green, J.H. Schwartz and E. Witten, Superstring Theory, Vol. I. Chapter 2 and 3,
        (Cambridge U. Press, 1987).
  I.B. Frenkel, H. Garland and G. Zuckerman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 83  8442 (1986).


