







 
Kaigorodov spaces 
 and their Penrose limits   
 
Christophe Patricot (email: C.E.Patricot@damtp.cam.ac.uk ) 

 
 DAMTP,
 University of Cambridge,
 Centre for Mathematical Sciences,

Wilberforce Road,
 Cambridge CB3 0WA,
 U.K. 













 
Kaigorodov spaces arise, after spherical compactification, as near horizon limits of M2, M5, and D3-branes with a particular pp-wave propagating in a world volume
direction. We show that the
uncompactified near horizon configurations  are solutions
of  or  IIB supergravity which correspond to
perturbed versions of their  analogues. We derive the
Penrose-Guven limits of the Kaigorodov space and the total spaces
and analyse their symmetries. An Inonu-Wigner contraction of the Lie algebra is shown to
occur, although there is a symmetry enhancement. We compare the results to the maximally supersymmetric CW spaces found as
limits of  spacetimes: the initial gravitational perturbation on the
brane and its near horizon geometry remains after taking
non-trivial Penrose limits, but seems to decouple. One particuliar
limit  yields a time-dependent
homogeneous plane-wave background whose string theory is solvable,
while in the other cases we find inhomogeneous backgrounds.  




Introduction 
Penrose showed that any spacetime, in the
neighbourhood of a null geodesic containing no conjugate points, has a
plane wave limit spacetime. This limit is essentially local, and may
be thought of physically as the spacetime seen by an observer approaching the
speed of light at a given point,  along a particular null
geodesic, and recalibrating his clock to its affine parameter. It can thus be understood as a null
Lorentz boost together with a (singular) uniform rescaling of the
coordinates which leaves the affine parameter along the chosen null
geodesic invariant. G uven extended the concept to
supergravity theories: given a solution 
of the supergravity equations of motion, there exists a limit of this
solution which also satisfies these
equations and has a plane-wave spacetime. 

It has long been known that string theory on gravitational wave backgrounds    
is exact and potentially solvable, mainly because all
of the curvature invariants of these spaces vanish
. The recently discovered (BFHP) maximally
supersymmetric plane-wave solution of IIB string theory
was shown to be exactly solvable. The fact that this
maximally supersymmetric plane-wave, together with its 11-dimensional analogue
 (KG),  arise
as Penrose limits of  spacetimes, suggests
one could probe into the  string
or M-theories of the latter. This idea was vindicated by the BMN proposal
, or plane-wave/CFT correspondance. 

One should not forget however that 
spacetimes, though maximally supersymmetric solutions of supergravity
or IIB string theory by themselves, also essentially arise in these theories as
near-horizon limits of extremal branes. These branes also are
fundamental dynamical objects which maybe in essence should be thought
of as canditates for "world-volumes". The AdS/CFT
correspondance together with the BMN correspondance certainly give an insight into gravity theories on the
extremal branes whose near horizon geometry is of  type,
but what if the geometry of these branes were perturbed ? 

In and, the
near-horizon geometries of non-dilatonic extremal branes with a pp-wave propagating in the
world-volume were analysed, and it was found that in the most simple
case one gets a product of a sphere and a homogeneous space of constant negative
cosmological constant which generalizes the 4 dimensional Kaigorodov
space. We will show in fact that the near horizon
configurations of these particuliar M2, M5 and D3-pp-branes are also
solutions of D=11 supergravity or D=10 IIB supergravity, and are
analogous to the  spaces. Therefore it seems interesting to find the
Penrose limits of these spaces, not for the mere sake of
geometry, but rather to find backgrounds to study string theory which
naturally arise from perturbed branes.
 
Indeed, string theory was explicitly 
solved in the light-cone gauge not only in the time-independent
Cahen-Wallach  spaces, but also recently in some time dependent
plane-wave backgrounds (, and
earlier references therein). The
quantization of strings and particles gives rise to time-dependent
harmonic oscillators, and whenever the plane-wave spaces are homogeneous,  it
seems the equations of motion can be solved explicitly (for the
particle case see). It turns out
that one of the plane-wave spaces we derive is very similar to that
in, and on these grounds should admit an explicitly
solvable string theory,  though one of the oscillators has negative
mass. The article is organized as follows.


  
In section  we first briefly review how
Kaigorodov spaces arise as near horizon limits of M2, D3, and M5 pp-branes.  We show
that the near-horizon geometries of type  together with their
fluxes, satisfy the equations of supergravity or IIB theory in the
respective cases. In fact, these configurations can be thought of as
perturbed   spaces. We then briefly describe the geometry of the Kaigorodov
 space . This non-conformally flat homogeneous Einstein spacetime can be
interpreted as an  space with a propagating
gravitational wave. Although it is non-static and has a
pp-singularity, we show that it is stably causal in the sense of
. In
fact, the gravitational wave will be reminiscent in the non-trivial
Penrose limit spaces we find. In section  we derive the  Penrose limit
 plane-wave spaces of the Kaigorodov space alone,  and analyse the
 symmetries of a particular limit space which is homogeneous. An In on u-Wigner contraction of the group of bosonic
 symmetries is shown to occur although there is an enhancement of 1 symmetry in the limit. We then derive in section
  the Penrose limits of the uncompactified
  spacetimes and their associated field-strengths, by
 considering both the null geodesics which wind around the
 sphere and those which do not. As opposed to the  case,
we get non-trivial 
 limits even in the non-winding case. These provide homogeneous
plane-wave backgrounds with
solvable string theories which have vanishing field strength and
constant dilaton. The non-winding case yields
non-homogeneous plane-waves whose matrix  in Brinkman
coordinates is not diagonal.      

Kaigorodov spaces in M/String theory 

Near-horizon limits of perturbed branes 
We first review in detail the near horizon geometry of an M2-brane
with a gravitational wave propagating in one of its world volume
directions, and then give the general expressions of the metrics and
derive the field strengths of the near horizon geometries in  the 3
cases of the M2,
D3, and M5 pp-branes. The pp-wave or brane-wave solutions actually
arise as intersections of branes.
 
Following, a   supergravity solution describing  a
non-dilatonic extremal M2-brane with a pp-wave is given by
* 
where  is the distance to the brane in the bulk. The affine change of coordinates 
 yields a simpler expression, similar to the formalism
used in:
 
and one can change  into  by further coordinate transformation. This shows that
from the brane point of view, the gravitational wave propagates
along
the 
 null direction and is uniformly distributed along the
world-volume directions, but although this solution is often denoted as a pp-brane, the
metric () does not possess a covariantly constant null Killing
vector: it merely arises as the intersection of a membrane with an 11
dimensional pp-wave. Note that the wave is not localized on the brane
since  depends on , but spacetime is asymptotically flat away
from the brane. The near horizon limit  together
with rescalings of the coordinates by powers of  and , and the change of variable  
, induce the following metric and field strength:
 
This is the  metric of the product space of a 4 dimensional Kaigorodov
space of negative cosmological constant  and
a 7-sphere of radius . It will be denoted .
 
The cases of the near horizon geometries of the M-5 supergravity brane
and the D-3 type IIB brane are obtained in a similar way. They yield 
 spaces, with  the -dimensional
generalisation of , and  the -dimensional sphere. The
(negative) cosmological constant  of  and the radius
of the sphere  depend on the
charges of the initial branes. It turns out these can be expressed quite simply
combining results of and. 

 spaces as solutions of supergravity 
In ,
 or  dimensions, for , ,  
respectively (M2, D3, M5 pp-brane), the near horizon geometry is a
(topological) product of the Kaigorodov space  of cosmological
constant  and a -sphere  of radius
, with  depending on the charges of the brane. If we call  the charge of the extremal brane, in the sense that
its harmonic function is , then the Kaigorodov
parameter  of the horizon geometry is ,
with  the dimension of the . After rescaling the
colatitude coordinate  of  by a factor of , the
3 metrics read:  
 
Here  is the surface element of a -sphere of
unit radius, and .  Neither nor
 give the expressions of the fluxes in the limit. In
our coordinate system, restoring , ,  for the M2, D3,
M5-pp-branes respectively, the
field strengths are :
 
The field equations of supergravity with the fermionic
fields set to zero,
in the conventions used in, read:
 
Calling  the determinant of the metric of the Kaigorodov space , we
see that . Thus the flux  is
proportional to the  volume form on  arising from the metric,
hence is closed () and co-closed. As ,
 satisfies (). The Einstein equation
() follows  since  and  are Einstein
spaces. In detail, with  labelling the coordinates of  and
 those of , the right-hand-side of
() expands to:
* 
For Kaigorodov spaces  (see next
section) and for
-dimensional spheres of radius ,
, but here . Hence () is satisfied, and 
 is a solution of supergravity. 

Similarly,  since  is proportional
to the
volume form of ,   is
closed and co-closed, and proprotional to the volume form of
. In fact , thus
 (on ) and
 (on ). Hence  is a solution of
supergravity.  is proportional to   the self dualized volume form of
 or ,  and the same computations show that 
 is a  solution of the field equations of chiral   supergravity. These solutions are completetly analogous to the 3 
 configurations, in the same way as the M2, M5 and D3-pp-branes are
analogous to their "flat" versions. We now review some important
geometric features of Kaigorodov spaces. 


Kaigorodov spaces versus  spaces 
Some general properties of Kaigorodov spaces can be found in
 and. In
 spacetime dimensions, letting , their metric
reads:
 
These spaces are solutions of Einstein pure gravity with cosmological
constant ; they admit  Killing vectors and are
homogeneous spaces. They are not static, and are 
supersymmetric. We show in section  that they are stably
causal in the sense of Hawking. 

The change of coordinates
 
where , takes the metric to a horospherical-type form ( only)
 
In this appendix, starting from this expression of the metric, we find
an isometric embedding of the Kaigorodov space  into a space
of signature . In this coordinate system, the metric of the
uncompactified  spaces (), with the
radii of the spheres , read:
 
Podolsky argued  that the Siklov spaces (a general
family of spacetimes containing the
Kaigorodov space) can be viewed as an  space-time with a
propagating gravitational wave, whose spatial direction rotates at a
constant velocity in orthonormal frames parellely transported along
timelike geodesics. He also showed that these spaces have a
pp-singularity at : the geodesic deviation equation becomes
singular, but the square of the Riemann tensor remains finite. This
occurs at  in (), which corresponds to the brane horizon
for us. We shall show in section  that
this pp-singularity, which reprensents the divergence of tidal forces as one approaches
the brane, can remain after taking the Penrose limit. 


Clearly () can be interpreted as a wave propagating on the
horospheres of , but  is not covariantly
constant. However this form of the metric suggests the rescalings:
 
whereupon taking the singular limit  the metric becomes that
of  in horospherical coordinates
 
Although  is null, Killing and hence geodetic, this is
not a Penrose limit, since the metric is not rescaled by 
to yield conservation of the affine parameter along . The
corresponding Penrose limit, as explained in the next section, yields
flat space. Thus () can be interpreted as an
infinite unrescaled boost of the Kaigorodov spacetime, which yields
. The dynamical interpretation of this boost is unclear though. (One also gets the  metric by rescaling all the
coordinates by  and letting ). In
, it is shown that the boundary CFT energy-momentum
tensor of the Kaigorodov space is a constant null momentum density,
therefore it is the Kaigorodov space which should be thought of as an
infinitely boosted  spacetime, and not the reverse. It will be 
more relevant in our analysis to consider Kaigorodov spaces just as  spacetimes with a
gravitational wave perturbation.

In this sense, the near horizon limits: M/D-brane  and
M/D-pp-brane  show a nice
geometric behaviour of the world-volume gravitational waves under the limiting
procedure: indeed the null direction of propagation of the wave on the
brane,  in (
),  becomes that of the wave on the
Kaigorodov space, ie  in () or  in
(). In a way these perturbations on the branes can be added
either before or after the near horizon limiting procedure, and yield
a perturbed  spacetime. This may be viewed as a decoupling of the
perturbation. 

On the Penrose limit point of view, any 10 or 11 dimensional
plane-wave spacetime  we
will obtain can trivially be thought of as flat space or a maximally
supersymmetric plane-wave space, with a superposed gravitational wave breaking some of the symmetries. Formally, the analogy between flat membranes and membranes
with a gravitational wave remains both after taking the near-horizon
limit and then taking a Penrose limit which is not trivial. We now
derive the Penrose limits of , and analyse a particuliar
homogeneous plane-wave we get. 







Penrose Limits of  

Construction 
To classify all the possible Penrose limits of , we could follow the method of "celestial spheres",
consisting of looking at the orbits of the tangent vectors at a point
under the isometry group, but this requires finding a group
representation of the Killing vectors. Clearly starting from the
metric () the null geodesics of  which are going to give
non-trivial Penrose limit spaces are those for which  varies
with the affine parameter. Otherwise the  dependence of the
metric vanishes in the limit and we get flat Minkowski space. In
particular, the limit along the null geodesic of tangent vector
, ie along  the direction of propagation of the
gravitational wave in the horospheres of (), yields flat space.

Because null hypersurfaces play a crucial role in finding coordinates adapted
to taking Penrose limits, we adopt the Hamilton-Jacobi
formulation. The following formalism is not explained in
, and it seems that it provides a general way of finding
adapted coordinates of type (). Let  be such that 
. Introducing the conserved
"momenta"  , we find that  
 
where 
 
Equivalently, the Lagrangian formulation 
 yields
 
where  for null geodesics. We see that  is necessary to find null geodesics for which
 varies. It is sufficient provided  stays small enough.

We can easily show here that Kaigorodov spaces admit a
time function, or indeed, because they are time and space orientable,
they are stably causal in the sense of Hawking. The following
argument is adapted from the -dimensional case in.We write the
metric () as 
 
and require for timelike or null future-directed geodesics:
 
If  vanishes at one point, then using
equations () we see that  implies
 and the
's must all be constant. Since this is not an acceptable
solution,  for every timelike or null future-directed
geodesic, and hence  provides a suitable time
function. 



We now find the general Penrose limit of () about the
geodesic of tangent vector 
, where  is the affine
parameter along the chosen null geodesic and the future null geodesic
congruence. Note that  is both orthogonal to the null hypersurfaces 
and null, hence is tangent to them. It is easier to find an integrable
system of coordinates using covectors or one-forms rather than
coordinate vectors, since the integrability conditions of one forms
are just that they be total derivatives. We want to put () in the form
 
with ,  and  functions of the
coordinates.This is equivalent to looking for coordinates , ,
 such that
 
or coordinate-forms such that
 
A solution to this system is 
 
The line element then reads:
 
where  is a function of  defined by (). The Penrose
limit is taken by letting  in the following coordinate rescalings: 
 
The metric is also rescaled by
a factor of . Thus the general metric of all non-trivial
Penrose limits of  is 
  
Although this formula breaks down when one , it is easy to see
that it is equivalent to cancelling the  cross term and
keeping the  term with . Furthermore, it is clear
that we recover Minkowski space if  is constant, but  unlike the 
 case, we also get non-trivial limits.  

Explicit solutions can be found by integrating and inverting
(). For , we get 
 
and after various rescalings of the coordinates the metric reads: 
 
Note that this metric has a scaling symmetry:
 
The Penrose limit obtained here is valid globally for  and 
 : although the
limiting process is defined locally, the coordinate system used to
obtain () describes the whole initial
spacetime. However the plane-wave metric is well defined for , so the
question of coordinate extension through  should be raised: the
vanishing of the determinant of the metric at  merely signals the presence of
conjugate points.  The coordinate extension 
is usually done by going to Brinkman coordinates. Indeed, for the
maximally supersymmetric solutions, the  coordinate singularity in Rosen
coordinates disappears in Brinkman coordinates. 
 


Geometry and symmetries of the pp-wave 
It is simple to express () in Brinkman coordinates as the tranverse part of the metric is
diagonal. Consider the following change of coordinates 
 
v=2x^-, u=x^+-1 2(n+4)x^- (n(y^0)^2-2_i=1 ^n y^i ^2),

z=(2x^-)^n n+4  y^0, x^i=(2x^-)^-2 n+4  y^i where upon () becomes
 
The dependence on  cannot be scaled out. It is easily seen, as
was expected, that
this plane-wave metric satisfies the Einstein vacuum
equations with zero cosmological constant: the  term,
written as , satisfies . It describes a
gravitational wave propagating in the null direction ,
distributed along the 's. The null Killing vector  is convariantly
constant. We notice that the coordinate singularity at 
remains, but although () is
ill-defined and the components of the Riemann
tensor diverge as , the square of the Riemann tensor
vanishes. The singularity is a so-called pp-singularity. 
 
Actually  corresponds to  in Kaigorodov
space, so to the pp-singularity initially present in spacetime. In a
sense it remains after taking the Penrose limit. 

This singularity can be reached in a finite time, thus the spacetime
is geodesically incomplete. However, the extra scaling symmetry
(), or  and 
 in (), makes this spacetime homogeneous. We now analyse its Lie
algebra of 
symmetries, explain why the space is a Lorentzian homogeneous
space. We then exhibit an Inonu-Wigner contraction
of the Lie algebra  of the initial space into a subalgebra of the
symmetries of the plane-wave spacetime. 

  

Applying the general procedure of the plane-wave metric
() admits,
in addition to the  Killing vectors  generating the 
symmetry algebra of the 's,   Killing vectors spanning a
Heisenberg algebra. Moreover, the scaling symmetry (
) provides an extra Killing vector, . In the Rosen
coordinates of () these vectors read:
 
The non trivial commutation relations are :
 

Thus  is a  dimensional
Heisenberg algebra of central element , and 
acts on the 's and 's as on vectors. We notice that
 and  generate a Lie algebra
 of dimension
, which is
precisely the same dimension  as , the symmetry
algebra of .

However, there is an extra Killing vector , which acts on 
as an outer automorphism. The maximal Lie algebra of symmetries of the plane-wave can be
written as 
, as  acts non-trivially only on . There is
an enhancement of 1 bosonic symmetry in the Penrose limit, while the
fraction of supersymmetry goes from 1/4 to 1/2. 

In the same way as  homogeneity of the CW-spaces
relies on the extra Killing vector , the existence of
the Killing vector  or  implies that the plane-wave spacetime
() is (Lorentzian) homogeneous since the other
Killing vectors are clearly transitive on the plane of constant  in
(). Homogeneity
is not hereditary in Penrose limits, and can be lost as we shall see
in the next section. Strictly speaking though, one must
remove the hyperplane  because it is invariant under the action of
, but it precisely corresponds to the pp-singularity of the
plane-wave and the initial space. Moreover,
,  covers the whole initial
Kaigorodov space.

Inonu-Wigner contraction 
Although symmetry is enhanced, we can try to relate  to
, since they have the same dimension. 
The rescalings of the coordinates by  in the Penrose
Limit suggest an Inonu-Wigner contraction of  into . The forthcoming contraction is very
similar to 
in the Penrose limit ,
and the other similar types,
apart from the fact that we cannot take the outer automorphism of the
plane-wave algebra since it stems from a symmetry enhancement. 

 is       
spanned by the following Killing vectors expressed in the coordinates of
():
 
We define  and consider 
 
P_+ ^2P_+ , P_- P_- , J J , 

K_i K_i , L_j L_j , L_ij  L_ij    
Taking , the commutation relations of
 (see) yield
those of , where we further make the following association
 
e_+=P_+, e_0=P_-, e^*_0=-J (n+2)L , 

 e_i=-2K_i,e^*_i=L_i, e_ij =L_ij .
Thus we get the Inonu-Wigner contraction

. However one could perfectly interchange  and  and get  as
the central element of the contracted algebra: it is not clear
whether  really "undergoes" a contraction in the
Penrose limit, as the latter is not uniquely defined. The similar
feature arises in the maximally supersymmetric cases. Nevertheless,
one likes to think of Penrose limits as yielding approximations of
spacetimes, and the trivialization of any algebra of symmetries into a
Heisenberg type algebra certainly "happens". On the dynamical point
of view, a precise understanding of what happens group theoretically
should help to explain how the degrees of motion of a particle or a
string decouple to yield independent
harmonic oscillators in the plane-wave limit. We  now
consider possible limits of the whole supergravity or IIB spacetimes,
topological products of Kaigorodov spaces and spheres.






Penrose limits of spaces 
We want to find a coordinate system which singles out a particular
null geodesic congruence of the following metrics, for  or 11:
 
Again we adopt the Hamilton-Jacobi
formulation, with  a function of the coordinates
satisfying  
. Introducing , angular
momentum about , in addition to the same conserved quantities as
before,  we find 
 
where now
 

Non-winding geodesics 
We will first consider the case where the chosen null geodesic of
tangent vector 
 does not wind around the
sphere, ie , . In this case, the spherical part of the metric
yields flat space, and the limits of  where found in the
previous section. In the particuliar case
, using (), the limit metric is simply: 
 
The field strength Guven limit
 yields
 for , whatever ,
, provided that   and . Indeed 
 
so  goes as  in the limit and vanishes. The same is true
for the field strengths  and .
This merely reflects the fact that Kaigorodov
spaces are solutions of Einstein pure gravity. Indeed, as a consequence, their Penrose limits,
and hence the Penrose limits of  spaces along non winding 
geodesics, satisfy Einstein pure gravity too. Therefore, all the plane-wave
spaces
of type () for  or 10  are trivial solutions of
supergravity (with vanishing field strengths). They describe a gravitational wave propagating in 
dimensions. However, they only arise as limits of brane-like solutions
for , 2 or 4. 

As all generic pp-waves, the spaces () preserve  of the
supersymmetries, merely the constant spinors  satisfying
 in the light-cone vielbein formalism (see
 for example). Since the field strengths vanish, there are no
non-constant solutions and these are the only solutions. Comparing
with the  Penrose limits, we here have non-trivial gravitational
waves even in the non-winding case. They are essentially 
dimensional, and thus can be viewed as consequences of the waves perturbing the
initial branes and their near horizon geometries. Formally one can write
() as a Minkowski metric (Penrose limit of the 
along non-winding geodesics) "perturbed" by an  dimensional wave. 

In fact these plane-wave spacetimes, as their  dimenesional
analogues (), are Lorentzian symmetric spaces. In
10 dimensions, with a constant dilaton field, they can provide a time
dependent background on which string theory is exact and solvable
. However, the term  will give rise to a
negative mass harmonic oscillator. Fixing  corresponds to the
background studied in.     

Winding geodesics 
Whereas in the previous case the plane-wave obtained propagated in
 dimensions only, we might expect as in the  cases
 to find an essentially
11(or 10)-dimensional plane-wave by taking a null geodesic which winds
around an equator of the sphere. Anagously to section () a possible coordinate transformation
for , ,  is given by :
* 
This is only valid for , because
greater values of  are not reached by the chosen geodesic
congruence, as can be seen by analysing (). Again the
Hamilton-Jacobi formalism to find null hypersurfaces and therefore
possible null geodesic congruences, together with  the orthogonality conditions on the
coordinate-forms (), yield this non-trivial (integrable) change of
coordinates. The metric then reads 
 
To find  one must set  
 during inetegration, however
() stays valid for all  if we accept
 periodic in  on the range , and the
remaining coordinate transforms still make sense. Note that () does not cover the whole of ,
but at any given point (so any ), we can pick  and  so
 as to cover a neighbourhood of that point with null geodesic
congruence coordinates which break down when . The
coordinates of () cannot be
used to discuss global properties of  spacetimes.

As usual we define the following rescalings of the coordinates, the
metric and the field strength:
 
The Penrose-Guven limit is obtained by taking
.  Using () and
, (take ) this yields: 
 
After rescaling the coordinates appropriately by powers of  and
, we get the following plane-wave spacetime, where the flux term  is
only relevant in the  case (limit of : 
 
These Rosen coordinates are valid for . Similarly we
obtain from () the limits of  and  for the
  and  cases respectively:
 
Note that the metrics and the field strengths obtained are independent of ,
, and also the Kaigorodov parameter . Only the region of the initial space covered by
 depends on them. The limit spaces do not
depend on the charges of the initial pp-branes. 

One can easily find the Killing vectors of the metric
() which generate a Heisenberg algebra of
dimension , together with those which span the  and  algebras
respectively (see for example). Counting these symmetries,
and since 
has  Killing vectors, there is an enhancement
of at least 1 bosonic symmetry in the Penrose limit, and in fact no more. This is true in
the three cases. There is no obvious additional scaling symmetry as we had in
(). As suggested in
, it is often easier to see that in Brinkmann
coordinates. 


Brinkmann coordinates 
The change of coordinates between Rosen and Brinkmann coordinates have
been known for a long time. It is reviewed in for example.  We relabel the
coordinates of () by , ,
 for , and also call , for 
,  the coordinates of . From now on latin indices
range from 0 to .  The spatial part of
(), denoted ,  is not diagonal, and cannot be
made so by staying in Rosen type coordinates. Thus the change of
coordinates involves a particuliar inverse vielbein field  of
  which non-trivially rotates the  and 
coordinates. Formally, the solution can be written:
 
with  satisfying  and ,
where the dot denotes differenciation with respect to . This
yields the plane-wave metric:
 
A possible solution is given by  whose only non-vanishing
components are:
* 
Q^0 _0(v)=(v)^-1 ( v)^-4 n+4   (2v n+4 ), 

Q^0 _1(v)= (v)^-1 ( v)^-4 n+4   (2v n+4 ) 

Q^1 _0(v)= -(v)^-1  (2v n+4 ) -(2v n+4 ), 
 
Q^1 _1(v)= -(v)^-1  (2v n+4 ) +(2v n+4 ) 

Q^i _i(v)= (v)^-2 4+n   for  i=2,, n+1 

Q^i _i(v)= ^-1  (nv n+4 ) for  i=n+2, , n+d.
The expression for  given by () turns out
complicated (and non-diagonal) for . For the diagonal
terms , 
 reads:
* 
Then letting , and defining 
, the metric reads:
 
Introducing  seems unecessary. However, the
first line   of () describes the maximally
supersymmetric plane-waves (when supported by appropriate field strengths
of course). Indeed, for  or  in 11 dimensions, ( or
), it 
corresponds to the Kowalski-Glikman solution (also
described in), while for
 in 10 dimensions,  it is the metric of the BFHP maximally
supersymmetric type IIB plane-wave. Although we could say of any plane-wave that it consists of the sum of a
maximally supersymmetric Cahen-Wallach space and another plane-wave,
the argument seems illuminating here in the context of Penrose limits
of particuliar brane solutions. Indeed, the Penrose limits of the 
 spaces along geodesics which wind round the sphere
 yield
the maximally supersymmetric plane-waves. Here, starting from  a 
 geometry, or an  spacetime perturbed with an
-dimensional gravitational wave, we
exhibit a Penrose limit space which can quite naturally be interpreted
as a maximally supersymmetric plane-wave together with an additional
gravitational wave.  
When solving the Kiling equations, we see that
() does not admit a Killing vector with non-vanishing
 component. Indeed, the diagonal terms   for
 are neither constants nor proportional to
. Hence the plane-wave we obtain is not homogeneous.    

Conclusion 
The plane-wave spacetimes obtained in this paper should really be
thought of as arising from Penrose limits of Kaigorodov spaces,
themselves near horizon limits of M2, M5 or D3-pp-branes. In this
sense they are dynamically relevant. Moreover 
spaces provide themselves  interesting solutions of supergravity. In
 and evidence was given that gravity in
the Kaigorodov space is dual to a CFT in the infinite momentum frame
with constant (null) momentum density, and that therefore one can
consider the Kaigorodov space as an infinitely boosted version of
. When taking Penrose limits, it
seems difficult to
keep track of this fact. However, when we think of  as an
 space perturbed by a gravitational wave, the picture seems clearer. The plane-waves
() and () can be naturally
interpreted as the corresponding Penrose limits of 
spaces along non-winding and winding null geodesics, perturbed by a
gravitational wave. The meaning of this decoupling, similar to the one
occuring when taking the near horizon geometries of pp-branes, is
unclear. 

Our analysis of various Penrose limits certainly illustrates the variety of possible
symmetry enhancements. The example of the Kaigorodov space limit is
worth noting: an enhancement of one bosonic symmetry, but nevertheless an
Inonu-Wigner contraction of the initial algebra of symmetries to a
subalgebra of the plane-wave symmetries. Note that since all
plane-wave Lie algebras have the same structure (up to a possible 
extra  outermorphism), the contraction of the algebra of  into
 can be showed to occur
systematically in all cases. The loss of homogeneity when
taking the limit of  spaces along winding geodesics might
seem striking, but is linked to the fact that the limiting process is
essentially local. In addition,  although the number of Killing vectors is conserved or
increases, their action often becomes redundant. For
example, in the typical -dimensional plane-wave Heisenberg
algebra, possibly enlarged by  a semi-direct product of rotations, only  symmetries yield
 motions  of the spacetime in independent dimensions.  The
question of homogeneity becomes important when one wants to solve
string theories in plane-wave backgrounds in view of possibly
relating them  to a certain CFTs, since the extra conserved quantity
simplifies the equations. The precise understanding of
what the algebra (and super-algebra) of symmetries incurs in the limit, should help to
 understand how the degrees of motion of strings and particles moving
in a given background decouple to yield, in the bosonic part for
example, independent harmonic oscillators, and then better relate their
simple  dynamics to that of the initial space.         











Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Gary Gibbons for motivating discussions and
useful comments, and also the EPSRC, the DAMTP, and the Cambridge European and Isaac Newton Trusts for financial support.



Isometric embedding of the Kaigorodov space 
It seems natural to look for an embedding of  which
resembles that of  in Minkowski space of signature
. Consider the -signature space of metric (
): 
 
One can isometrically embed the hyperboloid-like hypersurface defined
by:
 
Analogously to the  case we define horospherical coordinates on this
hypersurface:
 
and replace  with (). The induced metric
on the hypersurface is then that of  in horospherical-like
coordinates, for  :
 
One might think that a simpler embedding space could be found by
changing the right-hand-side of () by a function
, but in  fact it only amounts to a change of coordinates in
the embedding space.
The embedding space satisfies the Einstein vacuum field equations, is
Ricci flat, and
its Riemann and Weyl tensors only have the following independent
non-vanishing components:
 
Therefore this space is not a symmetric space (the Riemann tensor is not covariantly constant). As a side remark, solving Killing's equations of
() should not be difficult, and finding 
the Killing vectors which survive on the hypersurface might give a deeper
insight into the Lie group of motions of the generalized Kaigorodov
spaces, as an intersection of the anti-de-Sitter group and the group
of motions of ().












 99 
R. Penrose, Any space-time has a
plane wave limit , in Differential Geometry and Relativity , edited by
E. Cahen and M. Flato (1976), pp.271-275. 
 R. Guven, Plane wave limits and T-Duality ,
Phys. Lett. B482 (2000), pp.255-263, arXiv:hep-th/0005061.
 G.T. Horowitz, A.R. Steif, Strings on strong
gravitational fields , Phys. Rev. D42  (1990), p. 1950.
 G.W. Gibbons, Quantized fields propagating in
plane-wave spacetimes , Commun. Math. Phys. 45  (1975), pp.191-202. 
 M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, C. Hull,
G. Papadopoulos, A new maximally supersymmetric background of
IIB superstring theory , JHEP 0201 (2002) 047, arXiv:hep-th/0110242. 
 R. Metsaev and A. Tseytlin, Exactly solvable
model of superstring in plane-wave Ramond-Ramond background ,
arXiv:hep-th/0202109.
 J. Kowalski-Glikman, Vaccum states in
supersymmetric Kaluza-Klein theory , Phys. Lett. 134B ,
pp.194-196.
 M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farill and G. Papadopoulos,
Penrose limits, supergravity and brane dynamics ,
arXiv:hep-th/0202111.
 D. Berenstein, J. Maldacena and H. Nastase, Strings
in flat space and pp-waves from  Super-Yang-Mills , arXiv:hep-th/0202021.
 M. Cvetic, H. Lu and C. Pope, Spacetimes of
boosted p-branes, and CFT in infinite-momentum frame ,
arXiv:hep-th/9810123.
 D. Brecher, A. Chamblin and H. Reall, AdS/CFT in
the infinite-momentum frame , arXiv:hep-th/0012076
V.R. Kaigorodov, Einstein spaces of maximal
mobility , Soviet Physics Dokl, vol 7  (1963), pp.893-895. 
 H. Fuji, K. Ito and Y. Sekino, Penrose limit and
string theories on various brane backgrounds , arXiv:hep-th/0209003.
 G. Papadopoulos, J.G. Russo and A.A. Tseytlin,
Solvable model of strings in a time-dependent plane-wave
background , arXiv:hep-th/0211289.
 M. Blau and M. O'Loughlin, Homogeneous
plane-waves , arXiv:hep-th/0212135. 
 J. Podolsky, Interpretation of the Siklos
solutions as exact gravitational waves in the anti-de-Sitter
universe , arXiv:gr-qc/9801052.
 S.W. Hawking, The existence of cosmic time
functions , Proc. R. Soc, , 433 (1969).
 H. Yang, Localized intersecting brane solutions
of D=11 supergravity , arXiv:hep-th/9902128.
 D. Youm, Localized intersecting BPS branes ,
arXiv:hep-th/9902208. 
 E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, Supergravity
in eleven dimensions , 
Phys. Lett. B76  (1978), pp.409-412.
 J. Figueroa-O-Farrill and G.Papadopoulos,
Homogeneous fluxes, branes and a maximally supersymmetric
solution of M-theory , arXiv:hep-th/0105308.
 J.H. Schwarz, Covariant field equations of
chiral N=2 D=10 supergravity , Nucl. Phys. B226  (1986),
pp.269-288. 
 R. Penrose, Techniques of differential
topology in relativity , Philadelphia, Soc. for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (1972).
 M.E. Osinovsky, Stable Causality of highly
mobile space-times , Acta. Phys. Polon. B 5  (1974), pp.74-79.
 E. Inonu and E.P. Wigner, On the Contraction
of groups and their representations , Proc. of the Nat. Ac. of
Sc. (USA), vol 39  (1953), pp.510-524.
 M. Hatsuda, K. Kamimura and M. Sakaguchi,
Super-pp-wave Algebra from super- algebras in
eleven-dimensions , arXiv:hep-th/0204002.
 J.P. Gauntlett, C.M. Hull, pp-waves in
11-dimensions with extra supersymmetry , JHEP 0206 (2002) 013,
arXiv:hep-th/0203255. 
 M. Cvetic,  H. Lu and C. Pope, M-theory
pp-waves, Penrose limits and supernumerary supersymmetries ,
arXiv:hep-th/0203229.


















