

apsrev 


Quantum order from string condensations
and origin of light and massless fermions
 
Xiao-Gang Wen 
http://dao.mit.edu/ wen 
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 

Dec. 2002 

 
Recently, it was pointed out that quantum orders and the associated
projective symmetry groups can produce and protect massless gauge bosons and
massless fermions in local bosonic models. In this paper, we demonstrate that
a state with such kind of quantum orders can be viewed as a string condensed
state.  The emerging gauge bosons and fermions in local bosonic models can be
regarded as a direct consequence of string condensation.
The gauge bosons are fluctuations of large 
closed strings which are condensed in the ground
state.  The ends of condensed open strings are the charged particles of the
corresponding gauge field.  For certain types of strings, the ends of strings
can even be fermions.  According to the string picture, 
fermions always carry gauge charges. This suggests the existence of
a new discrete gauge field that couples to neutrinos and neutrons.  We also
discuss how chiral symmetry that protects massless Dirac fermions can emerge
from the projective symmetry of quantum order.
11.15.-q 
Quantum orders, Gauge theory, chiral symmetry, emerging fermions 

Introduction 

Fundamental questions about light and fermions 

We have known light and fermions for many years. But we still cannot give a
satisfactory answer to the following fundamental questions: What are light and
fermions?  Where light and fermions come from?  Why light and fermions exist?
At moment, the standard answers to the above fundamental questions appear to
be "light is the particle described by a gauge field" and "fermions are the
particles described by anti-commuting fields".  Here, we like to argue that
there is another possible answer to the above questions: our vacuum is filled
with  string-like objects of arbitrary sizes and those strings form a quantum
condensed state.  According to the new string picture, the light (and other
gauge bosons) is a vibration of the condensed strings and fermions are ends of
strings.  The string condensation picture provides a unified
origin of light and fermions.(Here, by "string condensation" we
mean condensation of string-like objects of arbitrary sizes.) 


Before discussing the above fundamental questions in more detail, we would
like to clarify what do we mean by "light exists" and "fermions exist". We
know that there is a natural mass scale in physics - the Planck mass. Planck
mass is so large that any observed particle have a mass at least factor
 smaller than the Planck mass.  So all the observed particles can be
treated as massless when compared with Planck mass. When we ask why some
particles exist, we really ask why those particles are massless (or nearly
massless when compared with Planck mass).  So the real issue is to understand
what makes certain excitations (such as light and fermions) massless.
We have known that symmetry breaking is a way to get gapless bosonic 
excitations. We will see that string condensation is another way to get 
gapless excitations. However, string condensations can generate
massless gauge bosons and massless fermions.

Second, we would like to clarify what do we mean by "origin of light and
fermions". We know that everything has to come from something. So when we ask
"where light and fermions come from", we have assumed that there are some
things simpler and more fundamental than light and fermions.  In the section
, we define local bosonic models which are simpler than models with
gauge fields coupled to fermions.  We will regard local bosonic models as more
fundamental (the locality principle).  We will show that light and fermions
can emerge from a local bosonic model if the model contains a condensation of
string-like object in its ground state.

After the above two clarifications, we can state more precisely the meanning
that string condensation provides another possible answer to the fundamental
questions about light and fermions. When we say gauge bosons and fermions 
originate from string condensation, we really mean that (nearly) massless 
gauge bosons and fermions originate from string condensation in a local
bosonic model .

Gapless phonon and symmetry breaking orders 

Before considering the origin of massless photon and massless fermions, let us
consider a simpler massless (or gapless) excitation - phonon. We can ask
three similar questions about phonon: What is phonon? Where phonon comes from?
Why phonon exists?  We know that those are scientific questions and we know
their answers.  Phonon is a vibration of a crystal. 
Phonon comes from a spontaneous translation symmetry breaking. Phonon exists
because the translation-symmetry-breaking phase actually exists in nature.  In
particular, the gaplessness of phonon is directly originated from and
protected by the spontaneous translation symmetry breaking.Many other gapless excitations, such as spin wave, superfluid mode , also
come from condensation of point-like objects that break certain symmetries.

It is quite interesting to see that our understanding of a gapless excitation
- phonon - is rooted in our understanding of phases of matter.  According to
  Landau's theory, phases of matter are different because they
have different broken symmetries.  The symmetry description of phases is very
powerful. It allows us to classify all possible crystals. It also provides the
origin for gapless phonons and many other gapless excitations. Until a few
years ago, it was believed that the condensations of point-like objects, and
the related symmetry breaking and order parameters, can describe all the orders
(or phases) in nature.

The existence of light and fermions implies the existence of new
orders 

Knowing light as a massless excitation, one may wonder maybe light, just like
phonon, is also a Nambu-Goldstone mode from a broken symmetry. However,
experiments tell us that a  gauge boson, such as light, is really
different from a Nambu-Goldstone mode in 3+1 dimensions.  Therefore it is
impossible to use Landau's symmetry breaking theory and condensation of
point-like objects to understand the origin and the masslessness of light.
Also, Nambu-Goldstone modes are always bosonic, thus it is impossible to
use symmetry breaking to understand the origin and the (nearly) masslessness
of fermions.  It seems that there does not exist any order that can give rise
to massless light and massless fermions.  Because of this, we put
light and electron into a different category than phonon. We regarded them as
elementary and introduced them by hand into our theory of nature.

However, if we believe light and electrons, just like phonon, exist for a
reason, then such a reason must be a certain order in our vacuum that protect
the masslessness of light and electron. 
(Here we have assumed that
light and electron are not something that we place in an empty vacuum.  Our
vacuum is more like an "ocean" which is not empty. Light and electron are
collective excitations that correspond to certain patterns of "water"
motion.) 
Now the question is that what kind of order can give rise to light
and electron, and protect their masslessness.  

If we really believe in the equality between light, electron and phonon, then
the very existence of light and fermions indicates that our understanding of
states of matter is incomplete. We should deepen and expand our understanding
of the states of matter. There should be new states of matter that contain new
kind of orders.  The new orders will  produce light and electron, and protect
their masslessness.

Topological order and quantum order 

After the discovery of fractional quantum Hall (FQH)
effect, it became clear that the Landau's symmetry
breaking theory cannot describe different FQH states, since those states all
have the same  symmetry. It was proposed that FQH states contain a new
kind of order - topological order. Topological order is new
because it cannot be described by symmetry breaking, long range correlation,
and local order parameters.  Non of the usual tools that we used to
characterize phases applies to topological order. Despite of this, topological
order is not an empty concept.  Topological order can be characterized by a new
set of tools, such as the number of degenerate ground states, quasiparticle
statistics, and edge states.  It was shown that the ground state degeneracy of
a topological ordered state is a universal property since the degeneracy is
robust against any perturbations. Such a topological degeneracy
demonstrates the existence of topological order. It can also be used to perform
fault tolerant quantum computations.
 


 

A classification of different orders in matter.
(We view our vacuum as one kind of matter.)
 


Recently, the concept of topological order was generalized to quantum
order. Quantum order is used to describe new kinds of
orders in gapless quantum states. One way to understand quantum order is to
see how it fits into a general classification scheme of orders (see Fig.
).  First, different orders can be divided into two classes:
symmetry breaking orders and non-symmetry breaking orders. The symmetry
breaking orders can be described by a local order parameter and can be said to
contain a condensation of point-like objects. All the symmetry breaking orders
can be understood in terms of Landau's symmetry breaking theory. The
non-symmetry breaking orders cannot be described by symmetry breaking, neither
by the related local order parameters and long range correlations. Thus they
are a new kind of orders. If a quantum system (a state at zero temperature)
contains a non-symmetry breaking order, then the system is said to contain a
non-trivial quantum order. We see that a quantum order is simply a
non-symmetry breaking order in a quantum system.

Quantum order can be further divided into many subclasses. If a quantum state
is gapped, then the corresponding quantum order will be called topological
order. The low energy effective theory of a topological ordered state will be
a topological field theory. The second class of quantum orders
appear in Fermi liquids (or free fermion systems). The different quantum
orders in Fermi liquids are classified by the Fermi surface
topology.
The quantum orders from string condensations 

In this paper, we will concentrate on the third class of quantum orders - the
quantum orders from string condensation. This class of
quantum orders shares some similarities with the symmetry breaking orders of
"particle" condensation. We know that different symmetry breaking orders can
be classified by symmetry groups. Using group theory, we can classify all the
230 crystal orders in three dimensions. The symmetry also produces and
protects gapless Nambu-Goldstone bosons. Similarly, as we will see later in
this paper, different string condensations (and the corresponding quantum
orders) can be classified by a mathematical object called projective symmetry
group (PSG). Using PSG, we can classify over 100
different 2D spin liquids that all have the same symmetry. Just
like symmetry group, PSG can also produce and protect gapless excitations.
However, unlike symmetry group, PSG produces and protects gapless gauge bosons
and gapless fermions. Because of this, we can
say light and massless fermions can have a unified origin. They can come from
string condensations.



We used to believe that to have light and fermions in our theory, we have to
introduce by hand a fundamental  gauge field and anti-commuting fermion
fields, since at that time we did not know any collective modes that behave
like gauge bosons and fermions. Now, we know that
gauge bosons and fermions appear commonly and naturally in quantum ordered
states, as fluctuations of condensed strings and ends of open strings. 
This raises an issue: do light and fermions come from a
fundamental  gauge field and anti-commuting fields as in the 123
standard model or do they come from a particular quantum order in our vacuum?
Clearly it is more natural to assume light and fermions come from a quantum
order in our vacuum.  From the connection between string condensation, quantum
order, and massless gauge/fermion excitations, it is very tempting to 
propose the following answers to the fundamental questions about
light and (nearly) massless fermions:
What are light and fermions?  

Light is a fluctuation of condensed strings of arbitrary sizes.
Fermions are ends of condensed  strings.
  
Where light and (nearly) massless fermions come from?   

Light and the fermions come from the collective motions of 
string-like objects that fill our vacuum.
  

Why light and (nearly) massless fermions exist?    

Light and the fermions exist because our vacuum 
chooses to have a string condensation.
  
Had our vacuum chosen to have a "particle" condensation, there would be only
Nambu-Goldstone bosons at low energies. Such a universe would be very boring.
String condensation and the resulting light and (nearly) massless fermions
provide a much more interesting universe, at least interesting enough to
support intelligent life to study the origin of light and massless fermions.

The string picture of fermions explains why there is always an even number of
fermions in our universe.  The string picture for gauge bosons and fermions
also has an experimental prediction: all fermions must carry certain gauge
charges.  At first sight, this prediction appears to contradict
with the known experimental fact that neutron carry no gauge charges. Thus one
may think the string picture of gauge bosons and fermions has already been
falsified by experiments.  Here we would like to point out that the string
picture of gauge bosons and fermions can still be correct if we assume the
existence of a new discrete gauge field, such as a  gauge field, in our
universe. In this case, neutrons and neutrinos carry a non-zero charge of the
discrete gauge field. Therefore, the string picture of gauge bosons and
fermions predict the existence of discrete gauge excitations (such as gauge
flux lines) in our universe.

We would like to remark that, despite the similarity, the above string picture
of gauge bosons and fermions is different from the picture of standard
superstring theory. In standard superstring theory, closed strings correspond
to gravitons, and open string correspond to gauge bosons. All the elementary
particles correspond to different vibration modes of small strings in the
superstring theory.  Also, the fermions in the standard superstring theory
come from the fermion fields on the world sheet.  In our string picture, the
vacuum is filled with large strings. The massless gauge bosons correspond to
the fluctuations of large closed strings and fermions  correspond to the ends
of open strings.  Anti-commuting fields are not needed to produce (nearly)
massless fermions. Massless fermions appear as low energy collective modes in
a purely bosonic system. Also the strings in our string picture can have
branches.  

The string picture for gauge theories have a long history.  The closed-string
description of gauge fluctuations is intimately related to the Wilson loop in
gauge theory. The relation between dynamical gauge
theory and a dynamical Wilson-loop theory was suggested in P7947,P981 .
KS7595  studied the Hamiltonian of a non-local model - lattice gauge
theory. It was found that the lattice gauge theory contains a string structure
and the gauge charges can be viewed as ends of strings.  In S8053,ID89 
various duality relations between lattice gauge theories and theories of
extended objects were reviewed. In particular, some statistical lattice gauge
models were found to be dual to certain statistical membrane
models. This duality relation is directly connected to the
relation between gauge theory and closed-string theory in quantum models.

Emerging fermions from local bosonic models also have a complicated history.
The first examples of emerging fermions/anyons were the fractional quantum
Hall states, where fermionic/anyonic excitations were
obtained theoretically from interacting bosons in magnetic
field. In 1987, fermion fields and gauge fields were introduced
to express the spin-1/2 Hamiltonian in the slave-boson
approach. However, writing a bosonic Hamiltonian in terms
of fermion fields does not imply the appearance of well defined fermionic
quasiparticles.
Emerging fermionic excitations can appear only in deconfined phases of the
gauge field.  WWZcsp,KW8983,RS9173,Wsrvb  constructed several
deconfined phases where the fermion fields do describe well defined
quasiparticles. However, depending on the property of deconfined phases, those
quasiparticles may carry fractional statistics (for the chiral spin
states) or Fermi statistics (for the 
deconfined states). 

Also in 1987, in a study of resonating-valence-bond (RVB) states, emerging
fermions (the spinons) were proposed in a nearest neighbor dimer model on
square lattice. But, according to the
deconfinement picture, the results in KRS8765,RK8876  are valid only when
the ground state of the dimer model is in the  deconfined phase. It
appears that the dimer liquid on square lattice with only nearest neighbor
dimers is not a deconfined state, and thus it is not clear
if the nearest neighbor dimer model on square lattice has the
fermionic quasiparticles or not.  However, on triangular lattice,
the dimer liquid is indeed a  deconfined state. Therefore,
the results in KRS8765,RK8876  are valid for the triangular-lattice dimer
model and fermionic quasiparticles do emerge in a dimer liquid on triangular
lattice.  

All the above models with emerging fermions are 2+1D models, where the
emerging fermions can be understood from binding flux to a charged
particle. Recently, it was pointed out in LW0360  that the
key to emerging fermions is a string structure. Fermions can generally appear
as ends of open strings. The string picture allows a construction
of a 3+1D local bosonic model that has emerging fermions.

Comparing with those previous results, the new features discussed in this
paper are: (A) Massless  gauge bosons and fermions can
emerge from local bosonic models  as a result of string condensation.
(B) Massless fermions are protected by the string condensation (and the
associated PSG).  (C) String condensed states represent a new kind of phases
which cannot be described Landau's symmetry breaking theory. Different string
condensed states are characterized by different PSG's. 
(D) QED and QCD can emerge from a local bosonic model on cubic lattice.
The effetive QED and QCD has  families of leptons and quarks. Each family
has one lepton and two flavors of quarks.

The bottom line is that, within local bosonic models, massless fermions do not
just emerge by themselves. Emerging massless fermions, emerging massless gauge
bosons, string condensations, and PSG are intimately related. They are just
different sides of same coin
- quantum order.

According to the picture of quantum order, elementary particles (such as
photon and electron) may not be elementary after all. They may be collective
excitations of a local bosonic system below Planck scale.  Since we cannot do
experiments close to Planck scale, it is hard to determine if photon and
electron are elementary particles or not. In this paper, we would like to show
that the string picture of light and fermions is at least self consistent by
studying some concrete local boson models which produce massless gauge bosons
and massless fermions through string condensations.  The local boson models
studied here are just a few examples among a long list of local boson
models
 that contain
emerging fermions and gauge fields.

Here we would like to stress that the string picture for the actual gauge
bosons and fermions in our universe is only a proposal at moment.  Although
string condensation can produce and protect massless photons, gluons, quarks,
and other charged leptons, we do not know at moment if string condensations
can produce neutrinos which are chiral fermions, and the weak-interaction
 gauge field which couples chirally to the quarks and the leptons.
Also, we do not know if string condensation can produce an odd number of
families of quarks and leptons. The QED and QCD produced by the known string
condensations all contain an even number of families so far. The correctness
of string condensation in our vacuum depend on resolving the above problems.
Nature has four fascinating and somewhat strange properties: gauge
bosons, Fermi statistics, chiral fermions, and gravity.  The string
condensation picture provides a natural explanation for the first two
properties. Two more to go.

On the other hand, if we concern about a condensed matter problem: How to use
bosons to make artificial light and artificial fermions, then the string
picture and quantum order do provide an answer. To make artificial light and
artificial fermions, we simply let certain strings to condense.

In some recent work, quantum orders and their connection to emerging gauge
bosons and fermions were studied using PSG's, without realizing their
connection to string condensation. In this
paper, we will show that the quantum ordered states described by PSG's are
actually string condensed states. The gauge bosons and fermions produced and
protected by the PSG's have a very natural string
interpretation. Quantum order, PSG, and string condensation
are different parts of the same story.  Here we will summarize and expand
those previous work and try to present a coherent picture for quantum order,
PSG, and string condensation, as well as the associated emerging gauge bosons
and fermions.

Organization 

Section  reviews the work in LW0360 . We will study an exactly
soluble spin-1/2 model on square lattice.  The model was
solved using slave-boson approach. This allowed us to identify
the PSG that characterizes the non-trivial quantum order in the ground
state. Here, following LW0360 , we will solve the model from
string condensation point of view.  Since the ground state of the model can be
described by both string condensation and PSG, this allows us to demonstrate
the direct connection between string condensation and PSG in section
.  The model is also one of the simplest models that
demonstrates the connection between string condensation and emerging gauge
field and fermions.  

However, the above exact soluble model does not contain
gapless gauge boson and gapless fermions. If we regard the lattice scale as
the Planck scale, then gauge bosons and fermions do not "exist" in our model
in the sense discussed in section .  In section , we
will discuss an exact soluble local bosonic model that contain massless Dirac
fermions.  In sections  and , we will discuss local
bosonic models that give rise to massless electrons, quarks, gluons, and
photons.  Gauge bosons and fermions "exist" in those latter models.

Local bosonic models 

In this paper, we will only consider local bosonic models.  Local bosonic
models are important since they are really local.  We note that a fermionic
model are in general non local since the fermion operators at different sites
do not commute, even when the sites are well separated. Due to their intrinsic
locality, local bosonic models are natural candidates for the fundamental
theory of nature.  In the following we will give a detailed definition of
local bosonic models.


To define a physical system, we need to specify (A) a total Hilbert space, (B)
a definition of a set of local physical operators, and (C) a Hamiltonian. With
this understanding, a local bosonic model is defined to be a model that
satisfies: (A) The total Hilbert space is a direct product of local Hilbert
spaces of finite dimensions. (B) Local physical operators are local bosonic
operators.  By definition, local bosonic operators  are operators acting
within a local Hilbert space or finite products of those operators for nearby
local Hilbert spaces.  Those operators are called local bosonic operators
since they all commute with each other when far apart. (C) The Hamiltonian is
a sum of local physical operators.

A spin-1/2 system on a lattice is an example of local bosonic models.  The
local Hilbert space is two dimensional which contains  and 
states. Local physical operators are , 
, , where ,  are the Pauli matrices.  


A free spinless fermion system (in 2 or higher dimensions) is not a
local bosonic model despite it has the same total Hilbert space as the
spin-1/2 system. This is because the fermion operators  on different
sites do not commute and are not local bosonic operators. More importantly,
the fermion hoping Hamiltonian in 2 and higher dimensions cannot be written as
a sum of local bosonic operators. (Note in higher dimensions, we cannot write
all the hoping terms  as product of local bosonic
operators. However, due to the Jordan-Wigner transformation, a 1D fermion
hoping  can be written as a local bosonic operators. Hence, a
1D fermion system can be a local bosonic model if we exclude  from
our definition of local physical operators.) 

The bosonic field theory without cut-off is not a local bosonic model. This is
because the local Hilbert space does not have a finite dimension.
A lattice gauge theory is not a  local bosonic model. This is because its
total Hilbert space cannot be a direct product of local Hilbert spaces.

Another counter example of local bosonic model is a quantum closed-string
model. A quantum closed-string model on lattice can be defined in the
following way.  Let us consider only strings that cover nearest neighbor
links.  For every closed-string configuration, we assign a
quantum state.  (Each closed-string configuration can contain multiple closed
strings with or without overlap).  All those quantum states form a basis of
the total Hilbert space of the quantum closed-string model. Just like lattice
gauge theory, the quantum closed-string model is not a local bosonic model
since the total Hilbert space cannot be a direct product of local Hilbert
spaces. It turns out that quantum closed-string models and lattice gauge model
are closely related.  In fact some quantum closed-string models (or
statistical membrane models) are equivalent to lattice gauge
models.

 spin liquid and string condensation on square lattice 

Hamiltonians with closed-string condensation 

Let us first consider an arbitrary spin-1/2 model on a square lattice.  The
first question that we want to ask is what kind of spin interaction can given
rise to a low energy gauge theory. If we believe the connection between gauge
theory and closed-string theory, then
one way to obtain a low energy gauge theory is to design a spin interaction
that allow strong fluctuations of large closed-strings, but forbid other types
of fluctuations (such as local spin flip, open-string fluctuations, ). We
hope the presence of strong fluctuations of large closed-strings will lead to
condensation of closed strings of arbitrary sizes, which in turn gives rise to
a low energy gauge theory.

 


 

An open-string excitation on top of the ground state of .
 

Let us start with
 
where  labels the lattice sites,  are the Pauli
matrices, and  (or ) is a sum over even sites with
 (or over odd sites with 
). The ground state of , , has spins pointing to
-direction on even sites and to -direction on odd sites (see Fig.
). Such a state will be defined as a state with no string.


To create a string excitation, we first draw a string that connect nearest
neighbor even  plaquettes (see Fig. ). We then flip the
spins in the string.  Such a string state is created by the following string
creation operator (or simply, string operator):
 
where the product  is over all the sites on the string, 
if  is even and  if  is odd.  A generic string state
has a form
 
where , , ... are non-overlapping strings.  The Hamiltonian has no
string condensation since its ground state  contains no strings.  To
obtain a Hamiltonian with closed-string condensation, we need to first find a
Hamiltonian whose ground state contains a lot of closed strings of arbitrary
sizes and do not contain open strings.

Let us first write down a Hamiltonian such that closed strings cost no energy
and any open strings cost a large energy.  One such Hamiltonian has a form
 
We find the no-string state  is one of the ground state of 
(assuming ) with energy . All the closed-string states, such
as , are also ground state of  since
. 
An open-string state  is also an eigenstate of  but with
energy . We see that each end of open string cost an energy
. We also note that the energy of closed strings does not depend on the
length of closed strings. Thus the closed strings in  have no tension. We
can introduce a string tension by adding the  to our Hamiltonian. The
string tension will be  per site (or per segment).  We note that, any
string state  is an eigenstate of .  Thus, strings
described by  do not fluctuate and hence cannot condense.  To make
strings to fluctuate, we need a -term
 
where  labels the odd plaquettes and  is the closed string
around the plaquette .  In fact
 
This way, we obtain the Hamiltonian of our spin-1/2 model
 

String condensation and low energy effective theory 

When  in HUJg , 
the model is exactly soluble since 
. All the eigenstates of  can be obtained
from the common eigenstates of . Since , the
eigenvalues of  are simply . Thu
s all the eigenstates of
 are labeled by  on each plaquette. (Note, this is not true
for finite systems where the boundary condition introduce additional
complications.) The energies of those eigenstates are sum of
eigenvalues of  weighted by  and .

 


 

The proposed phase diagram for the  model.  is assumed to be
positive. The four string condensed phases are characterized by a pair of
PSG's .
MO marks an magnetic ordered state.
 

From the results of exact soluble model, we suggest a phase diagram of our
model as sketched in Fig. .  We will show that
the phase diagram contains four
different string condensed phases and one string non-condensed phase. All the
phases have the same symmetry and are distinguished only by their different
quantum orders.

Let us first discuss the phase with . We will assume
 and . In this limit, all states containing open strings will
have an energy of order . The low energy states contain only closed strings
and satisfy
 
For infinite systems, the different low energy states are labeled by
the eigenvalues of  on odd plaquettes:
 
In particular, the ground state is given by
 

All the closed-string operators  commute with . Hence
the ground state  of  satisfies 
 
Thus the  ground state has a closed-string condensation.
The low energy excitations above the ground state can be obtained by flipping
 from  to  on some odd plaquettes.

If we view   on odd plaquettes as the flux in  gauge theory, we
find that the low energy sector of model is identical to a  lattice gauge
theory, at least for infinite systems. This suggests that the low energy
effective theory of our model is a  lattice gauge theory.

However, one may object this result by pointing out that the low energy sector
of our model is also identical to an Ising model with one spin on each the odd
plaquette. Thus the the low energy effective theory should be the Ising model.
We would like to point out that although the low energy sector of our model is
identical to an Ising model for infinite systems, the low energy sector of our
model is different from an Ising model for finite systems.  For example, on a
finite even by even lattice with periodic boundary condition, the ground state
of our model has a four-fold degeneracy. The Ising model
does not have such a degeneracy.  Also, our model contains an excitation that
can be identified as  charge (see below). Therefore, the low energy
effective theory of our model is a  lattice gauge theory instead of an
Ising model.  The  excitations on odd plaquettes can be viewed as
the  vortex excitations in the  lattice gauge theory.

 


 

A hopping of the  charge around four nearest neighbor even plaquettes.
 

Three types of strings and emerging fermions 

What is the  charge excitations?  We note that, in the closed-string
condensed state, the action of the closed-string operator stringOP  on the
ground state is trivial.  This suggests that the action of the open-string
operators on the ground state only depend on the ends of strings, since two
open strings with the same ends only differ by a closed-string.  Therefore, an
open-string operator create two particles at its ends when acting on the
string condensed state.  Since the strings in stringOP  only connect even
plaquettes, the particle corresponding to the ends of the open strings always
live on the even plaquettes. We will call such a string T1 string.  Form the
commutation relation between  and the open-string operators, we
find that the open-string operators flip the sign of  at its
ends.  Thus each particle created by the open-string operators has an energy
.  Now, let us consider the hopping of one such particle around four
nearest neighbor even plaquettes (see Fig.  ). We see that the
product of the the four hopping amplitudes is given by the eigenvalue of 
 on the odd plaquette in the middle of the four even
plaquettes. This is exactly the relation between charge and
flux.  Thus if we identify  on odd plaquettes as  flux,
then the ends of strings on even plaquettes will correspond to the 
charges.  We note that, due to the closed-string condensation, the ends of
open strings are not confined and have only short ranged interactions between
them.  Thus the  charges behave like quasiparticles with no string
attached.

Just like the  charges, a pair  vortices is also created by an open
string operator.  Since the  vortices correspond to flipped 
 on odd  plaquettes, the open-string operator that create 
vortices is also given by stringOP , except now the product is over a
string that connect odd  plaquettes.  We will call such a string T2
string. (The strings connecting even  plaquettes were called T1
strings.)

We would like to point out that the reference state (the no string state)
for the T2 string is different from that of the T1 string.  
The no-T2-string is given
by  with spin pointing in -direction on even sites and
-direction on odd sites. Since the T1 and T2 strings have different
reference state, we cannot have a dilute gas of the T1 strings and the T2
strings at the same time.  One can easily check that the T2 string operators
also commute with . Therefore, the ground state , in
addition to the T1 closed-string condensation, also has a T2 closed-string
condensation.  

The hopping of a  vortex is induced by a short T2 open-string.  Since the
T2 open-strings operators all commute with each other, the  vortex behave
like bosons.  Similarly, the  charges also behave like bosons. However,
T1 open-string operators and T2 open-string operators do not commute.  As a
result, the ends of T1 string and the ends of T2 string have nontrivial mutual
statistics.  As we have already shown that moving a  charge around a
 vortex generate a phase , the  charges  and the  vortices
have a semionic mutual statistics.

The T3 strings are defined as bound states of T1 and T2 strings.  The ground
state also has a condensation of T3 closed-strings. The ends of T3 string, as
bound states of the  charges  and the  vortices, are
fermions . We note that the ends of T3 strings, and hence the fermions,
live on the links. It is interesting to see that string condensation in our
model directly leads to  gauge structure and three new type of
quasiparticles:  charge,  vortex, and fermions. Fermions, as ends of
open T3 strings, emerge from our purely bosonic model.

Since ends of T1 string are  charges, the T1 string can be viewed as
strings of  "electric" flux. Similarly, the T2 string can be viewed as
strings of  "magnetic" flux.

Classification of different string condensations by PSG 

Four classes of string condensations 

As we have seen in last section that when , , and , the ground
state of our model is given by
 
We will call such a phase  phase to stress the low energy  gauge
structure. In the  phase, the T1 string operator  and the T2
string operator  have the following expectation values
 

When , , and , the ground state is given by
 
We see that there is -flux through each odd plaquette. We will call such
a phase -flux phase. The T1 string operator and the T2 string operator
have the following expectation values
 
where  is the number of odd-plaquettes enclosed by the T1 string
.

When , , and , the ground state is 
 
The ground state has a  charge on each even plaquette. We will call such
a phase -charge phase. The T1 string operator and the T2 string operator
have the following expectation values
 
where  is the number of even-plaquettes enclosed by the T2 string
. Note that the -flux phase and the -charge phase, different
only by a lattice translation, are essentially the same phase.

When , , and , the ground state becomes
 
There is a  charge on each even plaquette and -flux through each odd
plaquette. We will call such a phase -flux-charge phase.  The T1 string
operator and the T2 string operator have the following expectation values
 

PSG and ends of condensed strings 

From the different  and , we see that the above
four phases have different string condensations. However, they all have the
same symmetry.  This raises an issue. Without symmetry breaking, how do we
know the above four phases are really different phases? How do we know that it
is impossible to change one string condensed state to another without a phase
transition?

In the following, we will show that the different string condensations can be
described by different PSG's (just like different symmetry breaking orders can
be described by different symmetry groups of ground states.) In
Wqoslpub,Wqogen , different quantum orders were introduced via their
different PSG's. The connection between string condensation and PSG allows us
to connect string condensation to the quantum order introduced in
Wqoslpub,Wqogen .  In particular, the PSG's are shown to be a universal
property of a quantum phase, which can be changed only by phase transitions.
Thus the different PSG's for the different string condensed states indicate
that those different string condensed states belong to different quantum
phases.

When closed-strings condense, the ends of open strings behave like independent
particles. Let us consider two particles states  described by
the two ends of a T1 string. Note that the ends of the T1 strings, and hence
the  charges, only live on the even plaquettes. Here  and 
 label the even plaquettes. For our model ,  is
an energy eigenstate and the  charges do not hop. Here we would like to
add a term 
 
to the Hamiltonian. The -term 
makes the  charges to hop among the even plaquettes with a hopping
amplitude of order . The dynamics of the two  charges is described by
the following effective Hamiltonian in the two-particle Hilbert space
 
where  describes the hopping of the first particle  and
 describes the hopping of the second particle .  Now we can
define the PSG in a string condensed state. The PSG is nothing but the
symmetry group of the hopping Hamiltonian .

Due to the translation symmetry of the underlying model , we
may naively expect the hopping Hamiltonian of the  charge  also 
have a translation symmetry
 
The above implies PSG = translation symmetry group.  It turns out that
HTxy  is too strong. The underlying spin model can have translation
symmetry even when  does not satisfy HTxy .  However, the
possible symmetry groups of  (the PSG's) are strongly constrained by
the translation symmetry of the underlying spin model. In the follow, we will
explain why the PSG can be different from the symmetry group of the physical
spin model, and what conditions that the PSG must satisfy in order to be
consistent with the translation symmetry of the spin model.

We note that a string
always has two ends. Thus a physical state always has an even number of 
charges. The actions of translation on a two-particle state are given by
 
The phases  and 
 come from the ambiguity of the location of the string that connect 
 and .  the  phases can be different if the string connecting
the two  charges has different locations.   and
 satisfy the algebra of translations
 
 and  are direct products of translation
operators on the single-particle states. Thus, in some sense, the
single-particle translations are square roots of two-particle translations.

The most general form of single-particle translations is given by
 and , where the actions of operators
 and  are defined as
 
In order for the direct product 
 and 
 to reproduce the translation algebra T2alg , we only
require  and  to satisfy
 
or
 
The operators  and  generate a group.
Such a group is the PSG introduced in Wqoslpub . The two different
algebra Talg1  and Talg2  generate two different PSG's, both are
consistent with the translation group acting on the two-particle states. We
will call the PSG generated by Talg1   PSG and the PSG generated by
Talg2   PSG.

Let us give a more general definition of PSG. A PSG is a group. It is a
extension of symmetry group (SG), a PSG contain a normal subgroup (called
invariant gauge group or IGG) such that
 

For our case, the SG is the translation group 
.
For every element in SG, , there are one or several elements
in PSG, , such that .  The IGG in our PSG is
formed by the transformations  on the singe-particle states that satisfy
. We find that IGG is generated by
  
,  and  generate the  and
 PSG's.

Now we see that the underlying translation symmetry does not require the
single-particle hopping Hamiltonian  to have a translation symmetry.
It only require  to be invariant under the  PSG or the 
PSG. When  is invariant under the  PSG, the hopping Hamiltonian
has the usual translation symmetry. When  is invariant under the
 PSG, the hopping Hamiltonian has a magnetic translation symmetry
describing a hopping in a magnetic field with -flux through each odd
plaquette.

PSG's classify different string condensations 

After understand the possible PSG's that the hopping Hamiltonian of the ends
of strings can have, now we are ready to calculate the actual PSG's.  Let us
consider two ground states of our model . One has 
 (for ) and the other has 
(for ).  Both ground states have the same translation symmetry in 
 and  directions. However, the corresponding single-particle
hopping Hamiltonian  has different symmetries.  For the 
 state, there is no flux through odd plaquettes and 
has the usual translation symmetry. It is invariant under the  PSG. While
for the  state, there is -flux through odd
plaquettes and  has a magnetic  translation symmetry. Its PSG is the
 PSG.  Thus the  state and the 
 state have different orders despite they have the same
symmetry.  The different quantum orders in the two states can be characterized
by their different PSG's. 


 


 

The proposed phase diagram for the  model. 
 is assumed to be
positive. The four string condensed phases are characterized by a pair of
PSG's . FM marks a ferromagnetic phase.
 

The above discussion also apply to the  vortex and T2 strings. Thus the
quantum orders in our model are described by a pair of PSG's 
, one for the  charge and one for the  vortex.  The
PSG pairs  allows us to distinguish four
different string condensed states of model .(See Fig.
.) 

Now let us assume  in our model:
 
The new physical spin model has a larger translation symmetry generated by
 and  (see Fig. ). Due to the
enlarged symmetry group, the quantum orders in the new system should be
characterized by a new PSG. In the following, we will calculate the new PSG.

The single-particle states are given by . When  is even, 
 corresponds to a  charge and when  is odd, 
corresponds to a  vortex. We see that a translation by  (or )
will change a  charge to a  vortex or a  vortex to a 
charge. Therefore the effective  single-particle hopping Hamiltonian 
only contain hops between even plaquettes or odd plaquettes.  The
single-particle Hamiltonian  is invariant under the following two
transformations  and :
 
We note that . Therefore both  and
 correspond to the identity element of the symmetry group of
two-particle states.   generate the IGG of the new PSG.
The new IGG is .

The translations of single-particle states by  and by 
are generated by  and . The translation
by  and by  are given by
 
Since  and  are the translations of the
 charge and the  vortex discussed above, we find 
 
where  for the  state with 
and  for the  state with .
Also  and  must satisfy
 
since on the two-particle states
 
Therefore,  may take the following
possible values , , , and .
Only choices  and  are consistent with
TxyTxyeta  and we have
 
We like to point out that the different choices of  do not lead
to different PSG's. This is because if  is a symmetry of the 
, then  is also a symmetry of the 
. However, the change  will change the sign of
. Thus  and  will lead to the same PSG. But
the different signs of  will lead to different PSG's.

 and  generate the new PSG.  The single-particle
Hamiltonian  is invariant under such a PSG.   and 
correspond to two different PSG's that characterize two different quantum
orders. The ground state for  and  (see HV ) is described
by the  PSG.  The ground state for  and  is described
by the  PSG. The two ground states have different quantum orders and
different string condensations.

Different PSG's from the ends of different condensed strings 

In this section we still assume  and consider only the translation
invariant model HV .
In the above we discussed the PSG for the ends of one type of condensed
strings in different states.  In this section, we will concentrate on only one
ground state. We know that the ground state of our spin-1/2 model contain
condensations of several type of strings. We like to calculate the the
different PSG's for the different condensed strings.

The PSG's for the condensed T1 and T2 strings were obtained above.  Here we
will discuss the PSG for the T3 string.  Since the ends of the T3 strings live
on the links, the corresponding single-particle hopping Hamiltonian 
 describes fermion hopping between links.  Clearly, the symmetry group (the
PSG) of  can be different from that of .

 


 

Fermion hopping around a plaquette, around a square, and around a
site.
 

Let us consider fermion hopping around some small loops. The four hops of a
fermion around a site  (see Fig. ) are generated by 
, , , and .  The total amplitude
of a fermion hopping around a site is 
. The fermion hopping around a site always sees -flux.
The four hops of a fermion around a plaquette  (see Fig. ) are
generated by , , 
, and , where  is the lower left corner of the
plaquette . The total amplitude of a fermion hopping around a plaquette
is given by 
. When , the ground state has 
. However, since site  is next to the end of T3 string, we have
. In this case, the fermion hopping around a
plaquette sees -flux. For  ground state, we find that
fermion hopping around a plaquette sees no flux.

Let us define the fermion hopping  as the combination of
two hops

and the fermion hopping  as the combination of 
 (see Fig.
). Under such a definition, a fermion hopping around a square 
 correspond to a
fermion hopping around a site and a fermion hopping around a plaquette
discussed above (see Fig. ). Therefore, the total amplitude for a
fermion hopping around a square is given by the sign of : . 
We find the translation
symmetries  of the fermion hopping  satisfies
 
which is different from the translation algebra for  TxTyeta .
 is also invariant under :
 
 generate the symmetry group - the fermion PSG - of
.  We will call the fermion PSG TxTyetaf 
for  the  PSG and the
fermion PSG for  the  PSG. We see that the quantum orders in
the ground state can also be characterized using the fermion PSG. The quantum
order in the  ground state is characterized by the  PSG and the
quantum order in the  ground state is characterized by the  PSG.

In Wqoexct , the spin-1/2 model HV  (with ) was viewed as a
hardcore boson model. The model was solved using slave-boson approach by
splitting a boson into two fermions. Then it was shown the fermion hopping
Hamiltonian for  and  states have different symmetries, or invariant
under different PSG's. According to the arguments in Wqoslpub , the
different PSG's imply different quantum orders in the  and  ground
state states.  The PSG's obtained in Wqoexct  for the  and 
phases agrees exactly with the fermion PSG's that we obtained above.  This
example shows that the PSG's introduced in Wqoexct,Wqogen  
are the symmetry groups of the hopping Hamiltonian of the ends of condensed
strings. The PSG description and the string-condensation description of
quantum orders are intimately related.

Here we would like to point out that the PSG's introduced in
Wqoslpub,Wqogen  are all fermion PSG's. They are only one of many
different kinds of PSG's that can be used to characterize quantum orders.  In
general, a quantum ordered state may contain condensations of several types of
strings. The ends of each type of condensed strings will have their own PSG.

Massless fermion and PSG in string condensed state 

In Wqoslpub,WZqoind , it was pointed out that PSG can protect
masslessness of the emerging fermions, just like symmetry can protect the
masslessness of Nambu-Goldstone bosons.  In this section, we are going to
study an exact soluble spin- model with string
condensation and emerging massless fermions.  Through this soluble model, we
demonstrate how PSG that characterizes the string condensation can protect
the masslessness of the fermions.  The exact soluble model that we are going
to study is motivated by Kitaev's exact soluble spin-1/2 model on honeycomb
lattice.


Exact soluble spin- model 

The exact soluble model is a local bosonic model on square lattice.
To construct the model, we start with four Majorana fermions
,  and one complex fermion .
 satisfy
 

We note that 
  
form a commuting set of operators. Using such a commuting set of operators, we
can construct the following exact soluble interacting fermion model
 
where , ,
, and  is real.  
We will call  a  flux
operator.  To obtain the Hilbert space within which the Hamiltonian 
acts, we group  into two complex fermion
operators
 
on each site.  The complex fermion operators  and  generate
an eight dimensional Hilbert space on each site.  


Since  commute with each other, we can find the common
eigenstates of the  operators: , where
 is the eigenvalue of , and  labels different
degenerate common eigenstates . Since  and 
 ,  satisfies 
 and .
Within the subspace with a fixed set of :
, the Hamiltonian has a form
 
which is a free fermion Hamiltonian. Thus we can find all the many-body
eigenstates of :
 and their energies  in each
subspace.  This way we solve the interacting fermion model exactly. 

We note that the Hamiltonian  can only change the fermion number on each
site by an even number. Thus the  acts within a subspace which has an even
number of fermions on each site. We will call the subspace physical Hilbert
space. The physical Hilbert space has only four states per site.  When defined
on the physical space,  becomes a local bosonic system which actually
describes a spin  system (with no spin rotation
symmetry).  We will call such a system spin- system.  To
obtain an expression of  within the physical Hilbert space, we introduce
two Majorana fermions  and  to represent
: .  We note that
, , act within the  four dimensional
physical Hilbert space on each site, and thus are 4 by 4 matrices.  Also
, thus the four 4 by 4 matrices
 satisfy the algebra of Dirac matrices.  Therefore we can express
 in terms of Dirac matrices :
 
We can also define the 
 
where we have used  and 
 for states
with even numbers of fermions.  With the above definition of  and
, we find that
 
and
 
We also have
 
The above relations allows us to write  in terms of 4 by 4 Dirac matrices.
For example
 
and
 

The physical states in the physical Hilbert space are invariant under local
 gauge transformations generated by
 
where  is an arbitrary function with only two values  and
 the number of fermions on site .  We
note that the  gauge transformations change 
. The projection into the physical Hilbert space with even
fermion per site makes our theory a  gauge theory.

Since the Hamiltonian  in Hfmassless  is  gauge invariant: 
, eigenstate of  within the physical Hilbert space can be obtained
from  by projecting into the physical Hilbert
space: . The projected state 
 (or the physical state), if non-zero, is an eigenstate of
the spin- model with energy .
The  gauge invariance implies that
 
if  and  are  gauge equivalent
 

Let us count the states to show that the projected states 
 generate all states in the physical Hilbert space.
Let us consider a periodic lattice with  sites.
First there are  choices of . We note that 
there are  different  gauge transformations. But the
constant gauge transformation  does not change
. Thus there are  different 's
in each  gauge equivalent class. Therefore, there are
 different  gauge equivalent classes of
's. We also note that
 
Thus, among the  different classes of 's,
 of them satisfy 
 and have even numbers of  and
 fermions.  The other  of them satisfy 
 and have odd numbers
of  and  fermions.

For each fixed , there are  many-body states of
the  fermions,  in  runs from
1 to .  Among those  many-body states,
 of them have even numbers of  fermions and
 of them have odd numbers of  fermions.  In order
for the projection  to be non-zero, the total
number of fermions must be even.  A physical state has even numbers of
 fermions and even numbers of 
fermions, or it has odd numbers of 
fermions and odd numbers of  fermions.  Thus there are

 distinct physical states that can be produced by the
projection.  Thus the projection produces all the states in the physical
Hilbert space.


Physical properties of the spin- model 

Let us define a closed-string operator to be
  
where  is an closed oriented string 
 formed by nearest neighbor links. The closed
string operators act within the physical Hilbert space and commute with the
Hamiltonian Hfmassless .  Thus there is a string condensation since
 in the ground state of Hfmassless .  The above
strings correspond to the T3 string discussed in section . Unlike
the spin-1/2 model, we do not have condensed T1 and T2 closed strings in the
spin- model.

We can also define open-string operators that act within the physical
Hilbert space
 
where  is an open oriented string 
 formed by nearest neighbor links.   correspond to the open T3
string defined in section .  Just like the spin-1/2 model HV ,
the ends of such strings correspond to gapped fermions (if 
). The ends of  strings only differ from the ends of 
strings by a local bosonic operator. Thus the ends of  strings are also
fermions.


 


 

A particle can hop between different sites .
 

To really prove the ends of   strings are fermions, we need to show the
hopping of the ends of  strings satisfy the fermion hopping algebra
introduced in LW0360 :
 
where  describes the hopping from site  to site .  It was shown
that the particles are fermions if their hopping satisfy the algebra
fhopalg1 .  We note that the ends of the  strings live on the sites.
The labels  in the above equation correspond to lattice sites 
.  The hops between sites  in Fig. are given by
 
Note that the hops between nearest neighbors are taken from the Hamiltonian
Hfmassless . 
Since  commute with each other, the algebra of the
above hopping operators is just that of fermion hopping operators. In
particular, the above hopping operators satisfy the fermion hopping algebra
fhopalg1 .  Hence, the ends of the  strings are fermions.

For each fixed configuration , there are 
different states (with even or odd numbers of total  fermions). Their
energy are given by the fermion hopping Hamiltonian Hsmassless .  Let
 be the ground state energy of Hsmassless .  The
ground state and the ground state energy of our spin- model
Hfhop  is obtained by choosing a configuration  that
minimize .  We note that  is
invariant under the  gauge transformation Z2trans . 

When , the ground state of Hfmassless  has  which
minimize the dominating  term.  The ground state
configuration is given by
 
The  fermion hopping Hamiltonian Hsmassless  for the above
configuration describes fermion hopping with -flux per plaquette.  
The fermion spectrum has a form
 
The low energy excitations of such a hopping
Hamiltonian are described by two two-component massless Dirac fermions in
2+1D.  We see that the ends of the  strings are massless Dirac fermions.

Our model also contain  gauge excitations. The  vortices are created
by flipping  to  in some plaquettes.  The 
vortex behaves like a -flux to the gapless fermions. Thus the gapless
fermions carry a unit  charge. The low energy effective theory of our
model is massless Dirac fermions coupled to a  gauge field.

Projective symmetry and massless fermions 

We know that symmetry breaking can produce and protect gapless Nambu-Goldstone
modes. 
In Wqoslpub,WZqoind , it was proposed that, in addition to symmetry
breaking, quantum order can also produce and protect gapless excitations.  The
gapless excitations produced and protected by quantum order can be gapless
gauge bosons and/or gapless fermions. In this paper we show that the quantum
orders discussed in Wqoslpub,WZqoind  are due to string condensations.
Therefore, more precisely it is string condensations that produce and protect
gapless gauge bosons and/or gapless fermions.  The string condensations and
gapless excitations are connected in the following way.  Let us consider a
Hamiltonian that has a symmetry described by a symmetry group .  We assume
the ground state has a string condensation.  Then, the hopping Hamiltonian for
the ends of condensed string will be invariant under a larger group - the
projective symmetry group , as discussed in section .  
is an extension of the symmetry group ,  contain a normal
subgroup  such that .  The relation between  and gapless
gauge bosons is simple.  Let  be the maximum continuous subgroup of
. Then the gapless gauge bosons are described by a gauge theory with
 as the gauge group. Some times the ends of strings
are fermions.  However, the relation between gapless fermions and  is
more complicated.  Through a case by case study of some
's, we find that certain 's indeed guarantee
the existence of gapless fermions.

In this section, we are going to study a large family of exact soluble
local bosonic models which depends on many continuous parameters.
The ground states of the local bosonic models have a string condensation and
do not break any symmetry. We will show that the projective symmetry of the
ends of condensed strings protects a massless fermion. As a result, our exact
soluble model always has massless fermion excitations regardless the value of
the continuous parameters (as long as they are within a certain range).
This puts the results of Wqoslpub,WZqoind , which were based on mean-field
theory, on a firmer ground. 

The exact soluble local bosonic models are the spin- model
 
where  and  are given in gaab  and gapma .
We will discuss a more general Hamiltonian later.

The Hamiltonian is not invariant under  parity .  But it has a
 parity symmetry if  is followed by a spin rotation 
.  That is 
with
 
Similarly for  parity , we have
 with
 

In the fermion representation  and 
generate the following transformations
 

Now let us study how the symmetries  and 
are realized in the hopping Hamiltonian Hsmassless  for the ends of
condensed strings.  As discussed in section , the hopping
Hamiltonian may not be invariant under the symmetry transformations 
and  directly.  The hopping Hamiltonian only has a
projective symmetry generated by a symmetry transformation followed by a 
gauge transformation . Since the -flux configuration does not
break any symmetries, we expect the hopping Hamiltonian for the -flux configuration to be invariant under 
,
,
, and
,
where  and   are the
corresponding gauge transformations.
The action of  and  on the  fermion
are given by
 
For the -flux configuration spiflux , we need to choose the following
 and  in order for the combined transformation
 and  to be the
symmetries of the hopping Hamiltonian Hsmassless 
 
The hopping Hamiltonian is also invariant under a global  gauge
transformation
 
The transformations 
 generate the PSG of the hopping
Hamiltonian. 

To show that the above PSG protects the masslessness of the fermions,
we consider a more general Hamiltonian by adding
 
to , where  is an open string connecting
site  and site  and  is given in WCopen .
The new Hamiltonian is still exactly soluble.  We will choose 
 such that the new Hamiltonian has the translation symmetries and the
 parity symmetries.  In the following, we would like to show that the
new Hamiltonian with those symmetries always has massless Dirac fermion
excitations (assuming  is not too big comparing to ).

When  is not too large, the ground state is still described by
the -flux configuration. The new hopping Hamiltonian
for -flux configuration has a more general form
 
The symmetry of the physical spin- Hamiltonian requires
that the above hopping Hamiltonian to be invariant under the PSG discussed
above. Such an invariance will guarantee the existence of massless fermions.

The invariance under  and  require that
 
In the momentum space, 
 
where
 
We note that   and  are periodic function in the
Brillouin zone. They also satisfy
 
where  and .
In the momentum space, we can rewrite  as
 
where .
The sum  is over the reduced
Brillouin zone:  and .
 has a form
 


Note that the transformation: 
 changes  to
 with
. Thus
the invariance under  requires that
 
or
 
In the momentum space, the above becomes
 
Similarly, the invariance under  requires that
 
or
 
In the momentum space
 


We see that the translation  and  parity 
symmetries of the spin- Hamiltonian require
that  and hence .
Similarly, the translation  and  parity 
symmetries require that . 
Thus  and  symmetries require that
.
Using epseps , we find
that  implies that .  The
spin- Hamiltonian Hfhop  has (at least) two
two-component massless Dirac fermions if it has two translation  and
two parity  symmetries.  We see that string condensation
and the associated projective symmetry produce and protect massless Dirac
fermions.

Massless fermions and string condensation on cubic lattice 

The above calculation and the 2D model can be generalized to 
3D cubic lattice.
We introduce six Majorana fermions ,
where . 
One set of commuting operators on square lattice has a form
 
Using
 and a complex fermion , 
we can construct an exact soluble interacting Hamiltonian
on cubic lattice
 
where  sum over all the square faces of the cubic lattice. 
,
,
, and
 label the four corners of the square .
The Hilbert space of system is generated by complex fermion
operators  and
 
and there are 16 states per site.

A physical Hilbert space is defined as a subspace with even numbers of
fermions per site. The physical Hilbert space has 8 states per site.  When
restricted in the physical Hilbert space,
 defines our
spin- system, which is a local bosonic system .

When , our spin- model has two four-component
massless Dirac fermions as its low lying excitations.  The model also has a
 gauge excitations and the massless Dirac fermions carry unit  gauge
charge.  Again, the model has a string condensation in its ground state. Both
the  gauge excitation and the massless fermion are produced and protected
by the string condensation and the associated PSG.

Artificial light and artificial massless electron 
on cubic lattice  

In this section, we are going to combine the above 3D model and the rotor
model discussed in MS0204  and Walight  to obtain a quasi-exact
soluble local bosonic model that contains massless Dirac fermions coupled to
massless  gauge bosons.

3D rotor model and artificial light 

A rotor is described by an angular variable . The angular momentum of
, denoted as , is quantized as integers.  The 3D rotor model under
consideration has one rotor on every link of a cubic lattice.  We use 
 to label the nearest neighbor links.   and 
label the same links. For convenience, we
will define  and
.
The 3D rotor Hamiltonian has a form
 
Here  label the sites of the cubic lattice, and 
.  The  sum over all the square faces of
the cubic lattice.  , , , and  label the four
corners of the square .

When  and , the state with all 
is a ground state. Such a state will be regarded as a state with no strings.
We can create a string from the no-string state using the following string
operator
 
where  is a string formed by the nearest neighbor links, and  is a
product over all the nearest neighbor links  on the string.  Since
the closed-string operator  commute with  when
,  generate a large set of degenerate ground
states.  The degenerate ground states are described by closed strings.

There is another way to generate the degenerate
ground states. We note that all the
degenerate ground states satisfy .  Let
 be the common eigenstate of :

.  Then the projection into 
 subspace:  give us a degenerate ground
state.  We note that 
 
generate a  gauge transformation
, where
 
Thus two  gauge equivalent configurations  and
 give rise to the same projected state
 
We find that the degenerate ground states are described by  gauge
equivalent classes of . The degenerate ground states also have
a  gauge structure.

When  but , the degeneracy in the ground states are lifted.  One
can show that, in this case,  is an energy
eigenstate with an energy 
. Clearly two 
gauge equivalent configurations  and  have
the same energy. The non-zero  makes the closed strings to fluctuate and
vanishing  means that the sting has no tension.  Thus  ground state
has strong fluctuations of large closed strings, and the ground state has a
closed-string condensation.
When ,  is no longer an eigenstate.
The fluctuations of  describe a dynamical  gauge
theory with  as the gauge potential.
(Quasi-)exact soluble QED on cubic lattice 

To obtain massless Dirac fermions and  gauge bosons from a local bosonic
model, we mix the
spin- model and the rotor to get
 
where 


.
If we restrict ourselves within the physical Hilbert space with even numbers
of fermions per site, the above model is a local bosonic model.

Let us first set . In this case, the above model can be solved exactly.
First let us also set . In this case  and 
 commute with  and commute with each other. Let
 be the common eigenstates of 
 and , where 
labels different degenerate common eigenstates.  Within the subspace expanded 
by  , , the
 reduces to
 
which is a free fermion hopping model. Let 
 be the many-fermion eigenstate of the above fermion hopping model
and let  be its energy. Then
 is also an eigenstate of
 with energy . 

We note that 
) 
commute with each other and commute with . Thus the
eigenstates of   can be obtained from the eigenstates
of  by projecting into the subspace with
: 
 
The above state is an eigenstate of  with an energy
 
waveF  and UEthsn  are our exact solution of .  (We
have implicitly assumed that  also perform the projection
into the physical Hilbert space of even numbers of fermions per site.)

When  is positive and large, the low energy excitations only appear in the
sector . Those low energy eigenstates are given by 
 where  is the projection into the
 subspace and the even-fermion subspace. Their energy is
.

Let us further assume that  and .
In this limit, the ground state have 
and . 
We can choose 
 
to describe such a configuration. 
For such a configuration, thshop  describes a staggered fermion
Hamiltonian.The ground state wave function
 is an eigenstate of the
 closed-string operator  with eigenvalue . It is
also a eigenstate of the  closed-string operator  with
eigenvalue  where  is the number of the square plaquettes
enclosed by . We see that there is a condensation of closed 
and  strings in the  ground state.  In such a string condensed
state, there are gapless fermionic excitations, which are described by
fermion-hopping in -flux phase.

In the momentum space, the fermion hopping Hamiltonian thshop 
for the -flux configuration has a form
 
where
 
and
,
, and
.
Here  are the Pauli matrices and  is the 2 by 2 identity
matrix.  The momentum summation  is over a range 
, , and .  Since
, , we find the fermions have a
dispersion
  
We see that the dispersion has two nodes at  and .
Thus, thshop  will give rise to 2 massless four-component Dirac
fermions in the continuum limit.

After including the  gauge fluctuations described by 
and the  gauge fluctuations described by , the massless
Dirac fermions interact with the  and the  gauge fields as fermions
with unit charge. Therefore the total low energy effective theory of our model
is a QED with 2 families of Dirac fermions of unit charge (plus an extra 
gauge filed).  We will call those fermions artificial electrons.  The
continuum effective theory has a form
 
where  is the lattice constant, ,
, , 
,  are  Dirac
matrices, and . 

We like to pointed out the constant  is psiU1c  is of order . Thus
the coefficient of the  term  when .
For a finite , the  gauge field will have a non-trivial dynamics.  We
also like to point out that, without fine tuning, the speed of artificial
light, , and the speed of artificial electrons, ,
do not have to be the same in our model.  Thus the Lorentz symmetry is not
guaranteed.

We would like to remark that, for finite ,
the  closed-string operators no longer condense. A necessary (but not
sufficient) condition for closed strings to condense is that the ground state
expectation value of the closed-string operator satisfy the perimeter law
 
where  is the length of the closed string and   are constants
for large closed strings. We note that the closed-string operators are the
Wilson loop operator of the  gauge field. If the 3+1D  gauge
theory is in the Coulomb phase where the artificial light is gapless, it was
found that 
where  depend on the shape of the closed string  even in the
large-string limit. Thus the closed strings in our model do not exactly
condense. The  Coulomb phase is, in some sense, similar to the
algebraic-long-range order phase of 1+1D interacting boson model where the
bosons do not exactly condense but the boson operator has an
algebraic-long-range correlation.


Emerging chiral symmetry from PSG 

psiU1c  describes the low energy dynamics of the ends of open strings (the
fermion ) and the "condensed" closed strings (the  gauge field).
The fermions and gauge boson are massless and interact with each other. Here
we would like to address an important question: after integrating out high
energy fermions and gauge fluctuations, do fermions and gauge boson remain to
be massless? In general, interaction between massless excitations will
generate a mass term for them, unless the masslessness is protected by
symmetry or some other things.  We know that due to the  gauge
invariance, the radiative corrections cannot generate counter term that break
the  gauge invariance. Thus radiative corrections cannot generate mass
for the  gauge boson.  For the fermions, if the theory has a chiral
symmetry , 
, then the radiative corrections cannot generate counter
terms that break the chiral symmetry and thus cannot generate mass for fermions.
Although the low energy effective theory psiU1c  appears to have the chiral
symmetry, in fact it does not. This is because that
psiU1c  is derived from a lattice model. It contains many other higher
order terms summarized by the  in psiU1c . Those higher order terms
do not have the chiral symmetry. To see this, we note that the action of
 on  is realized by a 4 by 4 matrix 
. We also note that the periodic
boundary conditions of  in the reduced Brillouin zone are given
by
 
We find that the action of  is incompatible with the periodic boundary
conditions since  does not commute with  and
. Therefore the chiral symmetry generated by 
cannot be realized on lattice.  Due to the lack of chiral symmetry, it appears
that the radiative corrections can generate a mass term
 
which is allowed by the symmetry.

The lack of chiral symmetry on lattice makes it very difficult to study
massless fermions/quarks in lattice gauge theory. In last a few years, this
problem was solved using the Ginsparg-Wilson
relation. In the following, we would like to
show that there is another way to solve the massless-fermion/chiral-symmetry
problem. We will show that our model has an emerging chiral symmetry that
appear only at low energies. The low energy chiral symmetry comes from the
non-trivial quantum order and the associated PSG in the string condensed
ground state.  
The Dirac operator in our model satisfies a linear relation
 
in contrast to the non-linear Ginsparg-Wilson relation
 
Because of the low energy chiral symmetry, all the  families
of Dirac fermions remain massless even after we include the radiative
corrections from the interaction with the  gauge bosons.


To see how the string condensation and the related PSG protect the massless
fermions, we follow closely the discussion in section .
The Hamiltonian 3DQED  is a mixture of the rotor model and the
spin- model.
The symmetry properties of the rotor part is simple. Here, we will concentrate
on the spin- part.
3DQED 
is not invariant under the six parity transformations:
 and  that generate 
,
,
,
,
, and
.
But it is invariant under parity  and  
followed by spin rotations
  and
 respectively.
In the fermion representation  and
 
generate the following transformations
 

The symmetries , , and
 are realized in the hopping Hamiltonian
thshop  through PSG.  The hopping Hamiltonian is invariant only under the
symmetry transformations followed by proper  gauge transformations 
.  Since the -flux configuration  of the
spin- sector and the zero-flux configuration 
 of the rotor sector do not break any symmetries, we expect the hopping
Hamiltonian thshop  to be invariant under ,
, and
.  The action of 
and  on the  fermion are standard
coordinate transformations.  The action of  on the
 fermion are given by
 
For the -flux configuration 3Dconf , we need to choose the following
, , and  in order for the combined
transformation , , and
 to be the symmetries of the
hopping Hamiltonian thshop 
 
The hopping Hamiltonian is also invariant under a global  gauge
transformation
 
The transformations ,
,
 generate a PSG (a part
of the full PSG) of the hopping Hamiltonian.  

To study the robustness of massless fermions,
we consider a more general Hamiltonian by adding
 
to , where  is an open string
connecting site  and site  and  
an open-string operator
 
The new Hamiltonian is still exactly soluble, when .  We will choose
 such that the new Hamiltonian has the translation symmetries
and the  parity symmetries.  We find that the resulting projective
symmetry imposes enough constraint on the hopping Hamiltonian for the ends of
condensed strings such that the Hamiltonian always has massless Dirac fermions
(assuming  is not too big comparing to  and ).
Despite the PSG transformations
 are not needed for the
existence of the massless fermions, we will still include them in the
following discussion.


For small , the ground state is still described by
the -flux configuration. The new hopping Hamiltonian
for -flux configuration has a more general form
 
The symmetry of the generalized  requires that the above hopping
Hamiltonian to be invariant under the PSG generated by
, 
, 
.

The invariance under  require that
 
In the momentum space, 
 
where
 
We note that   are periodic function in the
lattice Brillouin zone . 
They also satisfy
 
The  in thshopK  now has a form
 

Just as discussed in section ,
the invariance under  requires that
 
or
 
In the momentum space, the above becomes
 
where .
Similarly, the invariance under  requires that
 
In the momentum space
 
The invariance under  requires that
 
In the momentum space
 

The invariance under  requires that
 
or
 
In the momentum space
 
The invariance under  requires that
 
or
 
The invariance under  requires that
 
or
 


We see that 3Depsepsx  require that  and
.  3Depsepsz  require that 
 and .  Thus the
. When combined with 3Depseps , 3Depsepsx , and
3Depsepsz , we find
 
Therefore  when .  The two translation 
and the three parity  symmetries of 
guarantee the existence of at least 2 four-component massless Dirac fermions.
Or more precisely, no symmetric local perturbations in the local bosonic model
 can generate mass terms for the two massless Dirac fermions in the
unperturbed Hamiltonian.

Since the mass term in the continuum effective field theory is not allowed by
the underlying lattice PSG, we say that our model has an emerging chiral
symmetry. The masslessness of the Dirac fermion is protected by the quantum
order and the associated PSG.


QED and QCD 
from a bosonic model on cubic lattice 

In this section, we are going to generalize the results in RS8909  and
Wlight  and use a bosonic model on cubic lattice to generate QED and QCD
with  families of massless quarks and leptons.
To describe the local Hilbert space on site  in our bosonic model, it is
convenient to introduce fermions  and ,
where ,  
and .   is
in the fundamental representation of a  group.
 is in the fundamental representation of a 
color group and a  group.  The Hilbert space of fermions
is bigger than the Hilbert space of our boson model. Only a physical subspace
of the fermions Hilbert space becomes the Hilbert space of our boson model.
The physical states on each site is formed by color singlet states 
that satisfy  
 
where  is assumed to be even.  
Once restricted within the physical
Hilbert space, the fermion model becomes our local bosonic model.

In the fermion representation,
the local physical operators in our bosonic model are given by
 
We note that by definition .
The Hamiltonian of our boson model is given by
 
Let us assume, for the time being, .
In terms of fermions, the above Hamiltonian can be rewritten as
 
Using path integral, we can rewrite the above model as
 
where 
, and  and  are 
complex matrices that satisfy 
 
When , the Lagrangian may contain terms that mix 
and :
 
where  is a  constant.
We note that the above Lagrangian describes a  lattice
gauge theory coupled to fermions.

The field  in the Lagrangian is introduced to enforce the constraint
 
As in standard gauge theory, the above constraint really means a constraint
on physical states. all physical states must satisfy
 
The above is the needed constraint to obtain the Hilbert space of
our bosonic model.

Here we would like to stress that writing a bosonic model in terms of
gauge theory does not imply the existence physical gauge bosons at low energy.
Using projective construction, we can write any model in terms of a gauge
theory of any gauge group. The existence of low energy
gauge fluctuations is a property of ground state. It has nothing to do with
how we write the Hamiltonian in terms of this or that gauge theory.

Certainly, if the ground state is known to have certain gauge fluctuations,
then writing Hamiltonian in term of a particular gauge theory that happen to
have the same gauge group will help us to derive the low energy effective
theory.  Even when we do not know the low energy gauge fluctuations in the
ground state, we can still try to write the Hamiltonian in a form that
contains certain  gauge theory and try to derive the low energy effective
gauge theory.  Most of the times, we find the gauge fluctuations in the low
energy effective theory is so strong that the gauge theory is in the confining
phase. This indicates that we have chosen a wrong form of Hamiltonian.
However, if we are lucky to choose the right form of Hamiltonian with right
gauge group, then the gauge fluctuations in the low energy effective theory
will be weak and the gauge fields ,  and 
will be almost like classical fields. In this case, we can say that the ground
state of the Hamiltonian contains low energy gauge fluctuations described by
,  and . In the following, we will show
that the  fermion model pathint  is the right form for
us to write the Hamiltonian SUNfspin  of our bosonic model.

After integrating out the fermions, we obtain the following effective theory
for ,  and 
 
where  does not depend on . We see that, in the large 
limit, ,  and  indeed becomes classical
fields with weak fluctuations.

In the semi-classical limit, the ground state of the system is given by the
ansatz  that
minimize the energy .  We will assume that such an ansatz have
 flux on every plaquette and takes a form
 
(If the -flux ansatz does not minimize the energy, we can always modify
the Hamiltonian of our bosonic model to make the -flux ansatz to have the
minimal energy.) Despite the  dependence, the above ansatz actually
describe translation, rotation, parity, and charge conjugation symmetric
states. This is because the symmetry transformed ansatz, although not equal to
the original ansatz, is gauge equivalent to the original ansatz.

The mean-field Hamiltonian for fermions has a form 
 
The fermion dispersion has two nodes at  and .
Thus there are  massless four-component Dirac fermions in the
continuum limit.  They correspond to quarks and leptons of  different
families.  Each family contains six quarks (two flavors times three colors)
that carry  colors and
charge  for the  gauge field, and one lepton   that carry no
 colors and charge  for the  gauge field.


Including the collective fluctuations of the ansatz, 
the  fermion theory has a form
 
where  are  hermitian matrices, describing  and
 gauge fields. In the continuum limit, the above becomes 
 
with 
, 
, 
, 
, , and  are  Dirac
matrices.  and  are Dirac
fermion fields.   form a fundamental representation of color
. 

If we integrate out  and  in aUSU  first, we will 
recover the bosonic model SUNfspin . 
If we integrating out the high energy fermions
first, the  gauge field  will acquire a dynamics.  We
obtain the following low energy effective theory in continuum limit
 
where the velocity of the  gauge bosons is
, and  represents higher derivative terms and the
coupling constant  is of order .  

In the large  limit, fluctuations of the gauge fields are weak. The model
U1SU3cd  describes a  gauge theory coupled weakly to
 families of massless fermions.  Therefore, our bosonic model can
generate massless artificial quarks and artificial leptons that couple to
artificial light and artificial gluons. As discussed in Wlight , the PSG
of the ansatz U1a  protects the masslessness of the  artificial quarks and
the artificial leptons. Our model has an emerging chiral symmetry.


Conclusion 

In this paper, we studied a new class of ordered states - string condensed
states - in local bosonic models. The new kind of orders does not break any
symmetry and cannot be described by Landau's symmetry breaking theory. We show
that different string condensation can be characterized (and hopefully,
classified) by the projective symmetry in the hopping Hamiltonian for ends of
condensed strings. Similar to symmetry breaking states (or "particle"
condensed states), string condensed states can also produce and protect
gapless excitations. However, unlike symmetry breaking states which can only
produce and protect gapless scaler bosons (or Nambu-Goldstone modes), string
condensed states can produce and protect gapless gauge
bosons and gapless fermions. It is amazing to see that gapless fermions can
even appear in local bosonic models.

Motivated by the above results, we propose the following locality principle:
The fundamental theory for our universe is a local bosonic model. 
Using several local bosonic models as examples, we try to argue that the
locality principle is not obviously wrong, if we assume that there is a string
condensation in our vacuum. The string condensation can naturally produce and
protect massless photons (as well as gluons) and (nearly) massless
electrons/quarks.  However, to really prove the string condensation in our
vacuum, we need to show that string condensation can generate chiral fermions.
Also, the above  locality principle has not taken quantum gravity into
account. It may need to be generalized to include quantum gravity.
In any case, we can say that we have a plausible understanding where light and
fermions come from. The existence of light and fermions is no longer mysterious
once we realize that they can come from local bosonic models via string
condensations.

The string condensation and the associated PSG also provide a new solution to
the chiral symmetry and the fermion mass problem in lattice QED and lattice
QCD. We show that the symmetry of a lattice bosonic model leads to PSG of the
hopping Hamiltonian for the ends of condensed strings.  If the ends of
condensed strings are fermions, then PSG can some times protect the
masslessness of the fermions, even though the chiral symmetry in the
continuum limit cannot be generalized to the lattice.  Thus PSG can lead to an
emerging chiral symmetry that protect massless Dirac fermions.

In this paper, we have been stressing that string condensation and the
associated PSG can protect the masslessness of fermions. However, most
fermions in nature do have masses, although very small comparing to the Planck
mass. One may wonder where those small masses come from. Here we would like to
point out that the PSG argument for masslessness only works for radiative
corrections. In other words, the fermions protected by string condensation and
PSG cannot gain any mass from additive radiative corrections caused by high
energy fluctuations. However, if the model has infrared divergence, then
infrared divergence can give the would-be-massless fermions some masses. The
acquired masses should have the scale of the infrared divergence. The 3+1D QED
model studied in this paper do not have any infrared divergence. Thus, the
artificial electrons in the model are exactly massless.  But in the 
spin model, the  gauge coupling  runs as
  
where  is the cut-off scale.
Thus when ,  has a logarithmic infrared divergence.  In
general, for models with  and  gauge interactions and a right
content of fermions, the  gauge interactions can have a weak
logarithmic infrared divergence in 3+1D. This weak
divergence could generate mass of order , where  is
the Planck mass or the GUT scale (the cut-off scale of the lattice theory),
 and  is the dimensionless gauge coupling constant at the
Planck scale.  An  can produce a desired separation
between the Planck mass/GUT scale  and the masses of observed fermions.  It is
interesting to see that, in order to use string condensation picture to
explain the origin of gauge bosons and nearly massless fermions, it is
important to have a four dimensional space-time.  When space-time has five or
more dimensions, the gauge-fermion interaction do not have any infrared
divergence. In this case, if a string condensation produces massless fermions,
those fermions will remain to be massless down to zero energy. In 2+1D, the
gauge interaction between massless fermions is so strong that one cannot have
fermionic quasiparticles at low energies. It is
amazing to see that 3+1 is the only space-time dimension that the gauge
bosons and fermions produced by string condensation have weak enough
interaction so that they can be identified at low energies and, at same time,
have strong enough interaction to have a rich non-trivial structure at low
energies.





This research is supported by NSF Grant No. DMR-01-23156
and by NSF-MRSEC Grant No. DMR-02-13282.



 61 
natexlab#1#1 bibnamefont  #1 bibfnamefont  #1 citenamefont  #1 url  #1  urlprefixURL   [2]#2 
 [2][]#2  

author Y.  Nambu  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 4  ,
  pages 380  (year 1960 ).

author J.  Goldstone  ,
  journal Nuovo Cimento  volume 19  ,
  pages 154  (year 1961 ).

author L. D.  Landau  ,
  journal Phys. Zs. Sowjet  volume 11  ,
  pages 26  (year 1937 ).

author D. C.  Tsui  ,
  author H. L.  Stormer  ,
  and  author A. C. 
  Gossard  , journal Phys. Rev. Lett. 
  volume 48  , pages 1559  (year 1982 ).

author R. B.  Laughlin  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 50  ,
  pages 1395  (year 1983 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Advances in Physics  volume 44  ,
  pages 405  (year 1995 ).

author X.-G.  Wen   and 
  author Q.  Niu  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 41  ,
  pages 9377  (year 1990 ).

author A. Y.  Kitaev  ,
  journal quant-ph/ pages 9707021 
  (year 1997 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 65  ,
  pages 165113  (year 2002 a  ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Physics Letters A  volume 300  ,
  pages 175  (year 2002 b  ).

author E.  Witten  ,
  journal Comm. Math. Phys.  volume 121  ,
  pages 351  (year 1989 ).

author I. M.  Lifshitz  ,
  journal Sov. Phys. JETP  volume 11  ,
  pages 1130  (year 1960 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal cond-mat/ pages 0210040 
  (year 2002 c  ).

author M.  Levin   and 
  author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal cond-mat/ pages 0302460 
  (year 2003 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 88  ,
  pages 11602  (year 2002 d  ).

author X.-G.  Wen   and 
  author A.  Zee  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 66  ,
  pages 235110  (year 2002 ).

author F.  Wegner  , journal J.
  Math. Phys.  volume 12  , pages 2259 
  (year 1971 ).

author J. B.  Kogut  ,
  journal Rev. Mod. Phys.  volume 51  ,
  pages 659  (year 1979 ).

author K. G.  Wilson  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. D  volume 10  ,
  pages 2445  (year 1974 ).

author A. M.  Polyakov  ,
  journal Phys. Lett. B  volume 82  ,
  pages 247  (year 1979 ).

author A. M.  Polyakov  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  volume 68  ,
  pages 1  (year 1998 ).

author J.  Kogut   and 
  author L.  Susskind  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. D  volume 11  ,
  pages 395  (year 1975 ).

author R.  Savit  , journal Rev.
  Mod. Phys.  volume 52  , pages 453 
  (year 1980 ).

author C.  Itzykson   and 
  author J.-M.  Drouffe  ,
  title Statistical field theory  
  (publisher Cambridge University Press ,
  address Cambridge , year 1989 ).

author T.  Banks  ,
  author R.  Myerson  , and 
  author J. B.  Kogut  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. B  volume 129  ,
  pages 493  (year 1977 ).

author D.  Arovas  ,
  author J. R.  Schrieffer  ,
  and  author F.  Wilczek  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 53  ,
  pages 722  (year 1984 ).

author G.  Baskaran  ,
  author Z.  Zou  , and 
  author P. W.  Anderson  ,
  journal Solid State Comm.  volume 63  ,
  pages 973  (year 1987 ).

author G.  Baskaran   and 
  author P. W.  Anderson  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 37  ,
  pages 580  (year 1988 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  author F.  Wilczek  , and 
  author A.  Zee  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 39  ,
  pages 11413  (year 1989 ).

author D.  Kheshchenko   and 
  author P.  Wiegmann  ,
  journal Mod. Phys. Lett.  volume 3  ,
  pages 1383  (year 1989 ).

author N.  Read   and 
  author S.  Sachdev  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 66  ,
  pages 1773  (year 1991 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 44  ,
  pages 2664  (year 1991 ).

author V.  Kalmeyer   and 
  author R. B.  Laughlin  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 59  ,
  pages 2095  (year 1987 ).

author S. A.  Kivelson  ,
  author D. S.  Rokhsar  ,
  and  author J. P. 
  Sethna  , journal Phys. Rev. B 
  volume 35  , pages 8865  (year 1987 ).

author D. S.  Rokhsar   and 
  author S. A.  Kivelson  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 61  ,
  pages 2376  (year 1988 ).

author N.  Read   and 
  author B.  Chakraborty  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 40  ,
  pages 7133  (year 1989 ).

author R.  Moessner   and 
  author S. L.  Sondhi  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 86  ,
  pages 1881  (year 2001 ).

author A.  D'Adda  ,
  author P. D.  Vecchia  ,
  and 
  author M.  Lu scher  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. B  volume 146  ,
  pages 63  (year 1978 ).

author E.  Witten  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. B  volume 149  ,
  pages 285  (year 1979 ).

author I.  Affleck   and 
  author J. B.  Marston  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 37  ,
  pages 3774  (year 1988 ).

author G.  Kotliar   and 
  author J.  Liu  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 38  ,
  pages 5142  (year 1988 ).

author S.  Sachdev   and 
  author K.  Park  ,
  journal Annals of Physics (N.Y.)  volume 298  ,
  pages 58  (year 2002 ).

author L.  Balents  ,
  author M. P. A.  Fisher  ,
  and  author S. M. 
  Girvin  , journal Phys. Rev. B 
  volume 65  , pages 224412 
  (year 2002 ).

author O. I.  Motrunich  
  and  author T.  Senthil  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 89  ,
  pages 277004  (year 2002 ).

author L. B.  Ioffe  ,
  author M. V.  Feigel'man  ,
  author A.  Ioselevich  ,
  author D.  Ivanov  ,
  author M.  Troyer  , and 
  author G.  Blatter  ,
  journal Nature  volume 415  ,
  pages 503  (year 2002 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 90  ,
  pages 016803  (year 2003 ).

author O. I.  Motrunich  ,
  journal cond-mat/ pages 0210684 
  (year 2002 ).

author A. Y.  Kitaev  ,
  journal unpublished   (year 2001 ).

author T.  Banks  ,
  author L.  Susskind  , and 
  author J.  Kogut  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. D  volume 13  ,
  pages 1043  (year 1976 ).

author A.  Zee  ,
  journal Emergence of spinor from flux and lattice hopping, in M. A.
  B. Beg Memoral Volume (World Scientific)   (year 1992 ).

author P.  Ginsparg   and 
  author K.  Wilson  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. D  volume 25  ,
  pages 2649  (year 1982 ).

author H.  Neuberger  ,
  journal Phys. Lett. B  volume 417  ,
  pages 141  (year 1997 ).

author P.  Hasenfratz  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. B  volume 525  ,
  pages 401  (year 1998 ).

author M.  Lu scher  ,
  journal Phys. Lett. B  volume 428  ,
  pages 342  (year 1998 ).

author N.  Read   and 
  author S.  Sachdev  ,
  journal Nucl. Phys. B  volume 316  ,
  pages 609  (year 1989 ).

author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. B  volume 60  ,
  pages 8827  (year 1999 ).

author F.  Wilczek  ,
  journal Rev. Mod. Phys.  volume 71  ,
  pages S85  (year 1999 ).

author C. J.  Hogan  ,
  journal Rev. Mod. Phys.  volume 72  ,
  pages 1149  (year 2000 ).

author T.  Appelquist   and 
  author D.  Nash  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 64  ,
  pages 721  (year 1990 ).

author W.  Rantner   and 
  author X.-G.  Wen  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 86  ,
  pages 3871  (year 2001 ).

author M.  Franz   and 
  author Z.  Tesanovic  ,
  journal Phys. Rev. Lett.  volume 87  ,
  pages 257003  (year 2001 ).











