 









 
unsrt  
 

  
Chiral Symmetry and Vertex Symmetry in the extended Moeller-Rosenfeld Model 
 
 
Sultan Catto
Physics Department
 The Graduate School and University Center
365 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10016-4309
 and 
 Center for Theoretical Physics 
The Rockefeller University 

1230 York Avenue
 New York NY 10021-6399 
 
 
 

  
Vertex symmetry for interacting fermions will be shown to lead to 
a Lagrangian exhibiting  invariance associated with the subgroup 
 generated by C-odd and C-even spin operators.
Approximate  vertex symmetry as well as chiral invariance will then be shown to follow from a principle of maximum smoothness (Moller-Rosenfeld) of the bound state quark wave function.
 

PACS numbers: 12.40.Aa, 12.40.Qq, 11.30.Pb

 

 Work supported in part by DOE contracts No. DE-AC-0276 ER 03074 and 03075, and PSC-CUNY Research Awards.
Introduction 

In this paper we shall connect some approximate 
symmetries of nuclear forces to what is believed to be the fundamental 
theory of nuclear forces: Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). Ideally we should be
able to calculate all hadronic constants like the meson-baryon, meson-meson
coupling constants (more generally the invariant form factors) and baryon and
meson masses to give the strength and the range of nuclear forces, starting
from the dynamics of quarks and gluons. We are still far from this goal. 
However, we can set ourselves more modest objectives. As an intermediate step
we might concentrate on the properties of the coupling of mesons to quarks,
then try to infer general properties of hadronic interactions from the
assumed properties of the former. If we study the nucleon-nucleon interaction,
say from the nucleon-nucleon, meson-nucleon scattering, or the spectra of
light nuclei, two kinds of approximate symmetries emerge: (a) A Wigner 
symmetry combining isospin with spin and broken by spin dependent terms; (b) An
approximate chiral symmetry broken by the pion mass. Recently more evidence
has accumulated in nuclear physics extending the domain of validity to more 
hadronic processes. The important role played by the  
exchange along nucleon exchange in phenomena exhibiting chiral symmetry points 
out to a possible link of the  symmetry (which puts  and  
in the same multiplet) with chiral symmetry. In turn this relation can only 
arise from the combination of the  and chiral symmetries at the deeper 
quark level as a consequence of QCD. Another piece of evidence comes from the
role the scalar mesons (f) and () play in decay 
processes. Scalar meson couplings calculated by this method will be shown 
to be consistent with chiral and  symmetries at the quark level. This
fundamental  symmetry leads to a universal coupling of 
quarks to pseudoscalar, vector mesons as well as to scalar and pseudovector 
mesons. In turn the exchange of all these mesons between nucleons yield 
nuclear forces exhibiting an approximate chiral  symmetry.
Arguments supporting this view will be given in this paper. It will be shown 
that for relativistic quarks the potential is invariant under chiral 
transformations and the  group except for definite spin dependent terms
and mass differences between mesons.
     
Starting from field theory of free and interacting quarks we will first examine quark spin and solve a quantum mechanical bound state problem as an approximation to field theory bound state problem by extracting a potential . We will then study the general properties of the confining (long range) part of  and its short range part and address models leading to a spin independent or  invariant potentials (where  is the number of flavors). 
For relativistic quarks we will show that the potential is invariant under chiral transformations 
and the  group except for definite spin dependent terms and mass 
differences between mesons, and show invariance of the potential using a larger group structure.

 
Quark-meson couplings 
The fundamental couplings in QCD are the self coupling of the gluons and the
gluon-quark couplings which are determined uniquely by the gauge principle of 
local color invariance . Through this interaction quarks are 
assumed to form  (meson) and  (baryon) bound states. Because
of asymptotic freedom, quarks behave like quasi-free particles at small 
separation. There is a vertex function between the  meson bound
state and the quasi free  and . For each quantum state of the 
 system this vertex function can be approximated by a constant which
we shall call the quark-meson coupling constant . Then, under 
the additivity hypothesis the meson-nucleon coupling constant is

 
The relativistic coupling constants are defined in terms of an effective 
quark meson interaction Lagrangian

 
where ,  and

 

 

 
Also note that the  term in Eq.() is a total divergence
and can be omitted. The derivative (momentum dependent) interactions are
important since  is an effective Lagrangian and there is no 
renormalizability constraint in the Lagrangian. The constants  and  can
be calculated from QCD following a definite scheme. Forexample at short 
distances coupling is similar to the probability of dissociation of positronium
into its constituents, the massless photon field playing the role of the gluon
field. For group theoretical treatment of this problem see Barut and Aydin. Rather than embarking on such a calculation we can review the available phenomenological information on these couplings, starting from the nucleon-meson vertex.

Also note that because  is embedded in ,
there are two pseudoscalar fields , namely  and  and
two vector fields , namely  and , with
 being approximately  singlet. There is a similar doubling of
isosinglets for scalars and pseudovectors. We have the following 
identifications:
 
 

To determine the representation we start from the quarks  and
 (), with  the isospin index, and with further identifications

 

 
so that

 
Thus, each meson is described by its generalized coordinates and generalized
momenta (derivative field). The combination of these fields in the interaction
Hamiltonian generate the , , , 
and  representation of the chiral .

The Dirac  quark Lagrangian can be regarded as being 
 invariant since the  and  quarks can be taken to have negligible 
masses in the first approximation.

A mass term for the quarks that can be induced by a non-zero vacuum 
expectation value  of the isosinglet scalar field will behave like the neutral
component of , breaking the symmetry down to 
 and isospin .

Under the  subgroup of , the nucleon  and the
 resonance form the -dimensional representation contained in the
symmetric part of the product . The various derivative
couplings of  and  are contained in  
product representations of .

Let us now briefly look at the free quark approximation to QCD and vertex
symmetry for interacting fermions, then buildup the symmetry in the potential
approximation.  We shall later return also to embedding these structures
in larger groups and look at group decompositions.


 The Free Quark Approximation to QCD 
First consider the simplified case of colored quarks with no
flavor, interacting through the exchange of color gluons and obeying 
the Dirac equation

 
where m is the quark mass,  the color index and  the covariant derivative

 
where  is the quark-gluon coupling constant and the
's are the eight  Gell-Mann matrices associated 
with . When we consider a quark and an antiquark localized at 
very short distance separation, then, from asymptotic freedom 
we know that the renormalized strong fine structure constant 
 tends to zero at high momentum 
transfers (short spatial separation). In
such a situation the covariant derivative  can be replaced by
 and in the zeroth approximation we can treat the quark inside
the hadron as obeying the free Dirac equation for small , the
origin being the center of mass of the quark system in the hadron. Then we can write

 
where

 
                                 
 

 
and

 
 () are respectively 
creation operators for particle and antiparticle Wigner states for the 
Poincare  group corresponding to momentum  and spin component 
, i.e.

 
with
 

The exponential can be evaluated as

 
We also have the useful identity

 
The projection operators  project the 
large  or small  components of the free wave function. To 
simplify the formulae we have also omitted the color index. For a more
general description in terms of boost operators and Heisenberg algebras
satisfied by these operators we refer to our earlier paper.

We have the following conserved quantities

(a) Quark Number:

 
where

 
This is the number of quarks minus the number of antiquarks.

(b) Charges

Putting back the flavor index  in the case of  quarks
 

(c) Energy Momentum 

 
The Hamiltonian  is given by:

 

                                       
(d) Conserved Spin Operators       


We now make the Tani-Foldy-Wouthuysen transformation
which is the same as the Wigner transformation on particle states. 
Let us rewrite the Dirac equation in the form

 
( on a momentum eigenstate).

     The covariant states are obtained by applying on the vacuum 
the operator , the charge conjugate operator 
obtained by exchanging 's and 's. 

 
where we have used 

 
and Eq.(). To obtain the covariant state from the
Wigner state we must then apply a non-local operator on . We find

 
where

 
so that the operator

 
creates Wigner antiquark states and  creates quark states.
The non-local operator  is a unitary operator that connects
covariant states with Wigner states.

We can now transform the Hamiltonian with . Transforming Eq.() we find

 

Thus, the transformation diagonalizes  in a representation for
which  is diagonal. The expansion of Eq.() in 
 gives
the Schro dinger operator for the upper and lower components
separately, plus relativistic correction terms. Note that ,
unlike , commutes with the spin operators  and with 

 
or

 
Hence, the non-local objects

 
are constants of the motion. These are the non-covariant spin
operators that are conserved for free quarks and approximately
conserved in QCD. Thus the conserved generators of the relativistic 
but non-covariant  are

 
If we work with the set of generators 
 where 
 and  we must use the transformed
Hamiltonian  .

We now turn to another transformation of the Hamiltonian that
singles out a direction and therefore is valid on the light cone.
For extremely relativistic quarks the expansion of  in 
or the velocity square is not a good one. In this case we can remove
transverse components of , say   ( and  if 
the direction singled out is the third axis) by a unitary transformation. This
is the Cini-Touschek transformation rediscovered by Melosh.
It is given by

 
where

 

 
Then the transformed Hamiltonian takes the form

 
Note that  no longer commutes with  and 
 but only with the subset

 
that also generates an  group. Then

 

 
also generate rotations and the generators of the  group

 
commute with the original Hamiltonian .

The operators Eq.() are the Stech spin operators. They
were rediscovered and called -spin operators by Lipkin and
Meshkov. We have seen that they are not conserved quantities,
but their Cini-Touschek transforms  are conserved in the free
quark limit. This property was discovered by Melosh.

The importance of the spin operators  is that they also
occur in the symmetry of the vertex in which the singled out
direction is given by the momentum transfer.

The meaning of  can be elucidated by exhibiting the transformation
properties of the conserved quantities. We distinguish
between C-odd and C-even conserved covariant spin tensors. The
C-even tensor is given by

 
where

 
is conserved:

 
so that the  are time independent. These are related to the Wigner spin as

 

 

Hence they can be interpreted as quark spin plus antiquark spin and
are associated with the .

Note that  generate  but not the covariant quantities
.

The -odd conserved covariant tensor is

 
where

 
and 

 

Making the unitary  transformation we find the non-covariant
objects

 

 
These conserved quantities are the quark spin minus the antiquark spin and correspond to 
. The  generate
the  group of quark and antiquark spin. They 
correspond to . These are 
sometimes called the  spin and the  spin.

When we do the Cini-Touschek-Melosh transformation on  and
, the -odd operators  and 
the -even  commute with the Hamiltonian .

If now we let  then

 
and the -even subgroup of  becomes the chiral 
group whose generators commute with massless Dirac Hamiltonian,
so that

 

To sum up, the free Dirac Hamiltonian in the Foldy-Wouthuysen
form admits a  symmetry where  
corresponds to the dimension of the internal space and ,  
refer respectively to quarks and antiquarks. If a longitudinal direction is 
singled out by an additional term in the Lagrangian, then the Dirac Hamiltonian
can be transformed by a Cini-Touschek transformation relative to the 
longitudinal direction and the Hamiltonian has a  invariance associated with the
subgroup of  involving the -odd 
transverse spin and the -even longitudinal spin.



 Vertex Symmetry for Interacting Fermions 

     Consider the coupling of the fermion  to a boson . If
the virtual boson with momentum  is emitted by the fermion 
in momentum space so that the fermion wave function changes from  
 to , then  =  is the momentum transfer.
 and   may refer to states with different internal quantum
numbers such as  and  quarks.  In the approximation that these
states are degenerate in mass the momentum transfer  is space-like
and singles out a space direction.  Thus a Yukawa interaction term
will involve a direction in momentum space (the  direction) which
can be taken as the direction singled out by the Cini-Touschek
transformation.

     Then the interacting Hamiltonian can have a non-local (-dependent)  symmetry, provided the free boson Lagrangian also exhibits an  symmetry generated by C-even 
and C-odd spin operators.  Hence we need two kinds of bosons to achieve
vertex symmetry:  C-even bosons    and C-odd bosons .  Those
which have the same parity can be grouped in the same multiplet. 
Negative parity bosons will transform like the -states of the (
) system, so that we can choose multiplets of  bosons which
transform like  ( and 
 (.

     Let us write such a Yukawa coupling in the case of no internal
symmetry

 

 

 
where ,   and 
   are respectively free lagrangians for the
fermion, the pseudoscalar and the vector bosons, with 
 chosen so that the equations of motion also yield the subsidiary condition

 
essential for associating  with a  object, and  is the simplest non-derivative Yukawa coupling for the fermion-boson system.

We could now find the Fourier transform of  by introducing the Fourier
transforms ,  and
, , and then do a Cini-Touschek
transformation with respect to .  Instead we shall consider a
simplified situation corresponding to quasi-free heavy fermions
that will justify the static limit.  Then

 
correspond approximately to the particles and antiparticles. 
Writing  for the large quark mass, we can consider an effective
interaction of the quarks with mesons ( and ) 
that are in fact  bound states bound by gluon exchange forces.  
If  is quasi-free we can write

 

 

The first term is of the order  if  is the meson mass and
negligible in the static limit.  In the second term the operator

  
commutes with  and as a result does not mix particle states
with antiparticle states, so that putting  (particle wave
function) we can make the replacement

 
                
     For the vector meson  is not independent of the independent
variables  ( and we can write


.  Expressing
small components in terms of the large components in the free-Dirac
approximation, and neglecting total divergence terms we can make the replacement

 
                                               
In momentum space  gives the virtual space-like momentum  of
the mesons, so that if we call  and  the longitudinal and
transverse spin operators we have

 

 
and the interaction term takes the approximate form

                                                
with    and  forming an  triplet.  
 is 
a singlet.  If we interpret  in  space, then

 

 

 

 

 
with
 
Both  and   generate  and 
combine with an internal  to
give .  Performing a Cini-Touschek-Melosh transormation in
the  direction for the kinetic term we see that the generators
of this  commute with the transformed Hamiltonian including
the effective approximate interaction term.

     Here it is important to note that the Yukawa coupling Eq.()
is invariant under the local symmetry group  acting on the
five dimensional representation (, ) of .  
But this group does not leave  invariant since Eq.() that is a consequence
of the choice of  is not covariant under .  Only the non-local  is the
symmetry of .
If we include the
internal symmetry group , then we can write a Yukawa
interaction term that has  invariance instead of  in
our simplified example.  This is the group introduced by Salam et. al.  As is well known,  cannot be a symmetry of the Lagrangian.  But as far as we can separate positive and negative
frequency parts of  we have an approximate  symmetry for
the whole Lagrangian.  In OCD where the quarks are quasi-free inside
the hadron, such an approximation is justifiable because of
asymptotic freedom.  In that sense we may say that the approximate
vertex symmetry mixing spin and internal degrees of freedom like
isospin is better understood within the QCD framework.  The
covariant generalization involves the spin current densities
Eq.() and Eq.().  The corresponding covariant spin operators 
 and  that are conserved in the free quark approximation do not
lead to a close algebra in general.  However it can be shown  
that the matrix elements of the transverse part of 
and the longitudinal part of  between one particle 
states do lead to closure and to  symmetry in a special frame.

     Since mesons are extended objects, a quark-meson coupling such
as Eq.() cannot be a local interaction.  In general there will be
a form factor , where  is the momentum transfer at the vertex.
Expanding the form factor in powers of  is equivalent to writing
effective interactions involving higher derivatives of the meson
fields.  As an example we can write an effective Lagrangian with
pseudovector coupling for the pseudoscalar meson and a Pauli
coupling for the vector meson , so that

 
where  is a new coupling constant.  We can also write 

 
                                               
Taking the momentum  of the exchanged mesons to be space-like and
along the third (longitudinal) direction, we find

 
again exhibiting the W-spin invariance of the vertex.



Symmetry in the Potential Approximation 

     In the one boson exchange approximation between heavy quarks
we consider the case when the quarks emit two gluons that can turn
into a color singlet, C-even,  bound state (effectively a
pseudoscalar meson ) or the alternative case when they emit
three gluons that go into a color-singlet, C-odd,  bound state
(effectively a vector meson ).  Then the mesons   and
 will have
effective coupling constants ( for non derivative and  for
derivative couplings) arising from the expansion of their form
factors.  We can use these couplings also to describle the baryon
baryon potential due to meson exchange. Indeed the baryons
host three quasi-free quarks each.  Following the usual quark
additivity assumption we shall let one quark from each baryon
interact at a time, while the other (spectator) quarks remain idle.
When the active quarks emit several gluons in a colored state, that
state cannot propagate due to color confinement.  The active quarks
can make contact only through emission of two or three gluon color
singlet states which, in turn can create mesons in intermediate
states.  Hence  and  will also be effective coupling constants
for the baryon-meson interactions and will enter in the calculation
of effective baryon baryon potentials due to meson exchange.  Thus,
starting from a scenario in QCD we are able to justify the
Moeller-Rosenfeld model in which baryons exchange vector and
pseudoscalar mesons with symmetrical coupling constants. 
Accordingly we consider in the following the effective quark-meson
vertex with no renormalizability restriction on the form of the
Yukawa interaction.
     The   exchange between quarks will give for the Fourier
transform  of the potential

 
where  is the space-like momentum transfer (in a frame with ),
 is the meson mass,  the quark mass (that becomes the baryon mass
when we add the masses of the spectator quarks) and  the
pseudoscalar coupling constant.  Its Fourier transform gives the
potential due to , namely

 
where  and  are functions of , and  is the tensor operator

 
with

 
and

 
Similary, the exchange of the vector meson   gives in the same
approximation of neglecting recoil

 
In this limit we can also put

 

In this approximation the total potential  is

 
Introducing the projection operator
 
with eigenvalue  on spin singlet states, we have

 
Hence the potential is a superposition of two spin independent
potentials namely  and .  The tensor terms 
in  and  are
spin dependent and highly singular at .  If   and  have the
same mass and the same coupling constant these terms cancel,
resulting in a smooth wave function for the solution of the
Schro dinger equation with  as potential.  Rarita and 
Schwinger observed that even in the case
 the potential is smooth
enough for the Schro dinger equation to be soluble provided that   
.

In order to generalize this model to include isospin we note
that diagrams considered so far violate the Zweig rule according
to which disconnected quark diagrams are suppressed.  The  and  that are exchanged in these Zweig-forbidden diagrams are not only color singlets but also flavor singlets, i.e. they have zero
isospin or unitary spin.  Another effective interaction between
quarks will occur through the exchange of color singlet but flavor
carrying  bound states, such that  and  are associated 
with different flavor quantum numbers.  For example we can have

 
where the bracketed  and  form an intermediate bound state 
( or ) that is exchanged between a  quark and a  
quark.  Again we can call  the effective coupling constant 
() or (). 
If  is the mass of the exchanged meson and  the common mass of 
and  assumed to be degenerate, the potentials resulting from  and
 exchange will have respectively the forms Eq.() and 
Eq.(), so that for the equal coupling constant and equal mass case 
the total potential will have the form Eq.().  Including all the
charged and neutral states, the total  potential results from
the exchange of  mesons ,  and  mesons
 and , where  are isospin labels.  
Denoting the degenerate  pair by  we have the 
effective interaction term

 
                 
     Including the spin states, the quark doublet (particles) form
the  dimensional representation of  while the bound state    
is an  singlet. The ,  and  form the 
adjoint  dimensional representation of .  With respect to the 
 symmetry of the vertex,  is the 
singlet, while the  () consists of

 

The exchange of these mesons leads to the potential of the form

 
that commutes with the  generators found from 

 and 
. 
This potential is therefore spin and isospin independent in the
limit of degenerate masses and equal coupling.

     If the mass degeneracy is lifted by allowing  and 
to have different masses, a tensor force  occurs in the potential 
between  and , hence, between the proton and the neutron, so that the
deuteron acquires an electric quadrupole moment.  The right sign
and magnitude are found if the  is three to four times heavier
than the pion, in accordance with experiment.

     The  symmetry we have found is broken when we add to the
potential recoil terms associated with the one boson exchange. 
These are proportional to  (spin-orbit) and 
 (quadrupole) given by

 
 
                                                   
     Using  and  defined by Eq.() we can write the 
additional terms associated with  exchange as

 

     The exchange of the pseudoscalar  contributes no  or   
terms that may cancel the highly singular additional terms due to   
exchange.  A  term that can cancel the  term can only come
from the exchange of a scalar meson .  
Accordingly we can enlarge our scheme by adding a scalar field  with 
the Yukawa interaction

 
to the interaction term Eq.().  Then we have an additional
potential due to   exchange that reads

 

     In the total potential

 
the  terms cancel, leaving

 

     The term with  (where  is given by Eq.()) is spin
independent while the term in  breaks this symmetry.

 Chiral Symmetry in the Extended Moeller-Rosenfeld (M-R) Model. 

 The M-R model without isospin is based on  and  exchange. 
We have seen that, neglecting recoil, the model gives a spin-independent 
potential between the fermions.  Including recoil we
get a highly singular potential with spin dependent, spin orbit and
quadrupole terms.  The extended M-R model, with the inclusion of a
scalar -meson gives a spin independent potential broken only by
relativistic spin-orbit terms.  But now, for vanishing fermion
mass, the Lagrangian exhibits a higher symmetry, namely invariance
under  where  which rotates  and  
is a chiral group.  It follows that the extended model has both 
and chiral invariance.  If we introduce isovector fields    
(pseudoscalar),  (vector),  (scalar), the potential becomes

) 
where  is given by Eq.().  The new potential is both spin and
isospin independent except for spin dependent 
terms.  The generators of  are

 

      becomes    if the isospin is replaced by unitary
spin.  But the Lagrangian also has an additional chiral symmetry in
the zero quark mass limit.  If the masses of the  and  quarks are
neglected we have an  invariance in chromodynamics.
For free quarks, combination with spin leads to   
invariance. The  states belonging to the adjoint representation
will have both positive and negative parities.  Adding singlets   
and  we consider the  states

 

 
where  is the isospin index and  labels the independent spatial
components of mesons with spin .  Here , , ,
 have negative parity while the scalar mesons 
(, ) and the pseudovector mesons
(, ) have positive parity.  The scalar mesons  and
 are necessary to cancel the  terms due to  and 
 exchange respectively.  Thus the smoothing out of the wave functions for
bound states of light quarks (for which the recoil corrections are
important) enlarges the  vertex symmetry that combines spin
and isospin to include also the chiral symmetry .

     As indicated before, using the additivity principle for the
quarks inside the baryons and letting one quark in each baryon
exchange a meson at a time, both the  symmetry and the
chiral symmetry are reflected in the potential between two baryons.

     Note that the cancellation of the  terms requires the
degeneracy of  with  and  with .  
This corresponds to an  subgroup of  which seems 
to be broken less than .



Larger group structure 

Now  has  generators, whereas  has . Writing

 
and

 
Then part of the  that is in -rep is

 

In -rep of  part of  is

 
and in  of  it is

 

We now look at decomposition under  subgroup of
. Parts containing
 
 
terms have negative parity, while the parts with

 
have positive parity. These lead to combined parts in 

 
where we put the positive parity parts in the first half, and the negative parity
parts in the second half of this equation. Now that  is
a mixture of  and  we can now consider the  states
( negative and  positive parity parts) which transform like
 under  with
, ,
, , and
. For time-like meson momentum,
, , , , and for space-like
meson momentum in  direction 
, , ,  so that
, , , and
 vanish. The  occur in
,  parts. ,  parts
give the  generators

 
put together with above  giving the  generators of . One boson exchange of above
 gives on cancellation due to equality of meson coupling constant a potential of the form  

 
while the  term breaks the symmetry.

It is also possible to use non-compact form of . 

Making the  identifications  (), 

(),  (),  (),
 (),  (),
 (), under 
exchanging particles  with , 
  with ,  with
, and  with 
 also leads to the same potential including relativistic
corrections (recoil). 



Remarks on Symmetries Involving Spin and Internal Symmetries 

     We have seen that an approximate combination of spin and
internal degrees of freedom arises in effective Lagrangians where
the couplings of the  bound states to quarks () or baryons 
() are almost equal and the masses are almost degenerate.  The ,
 or  generators that close are not in general covariant. 
They are related to the covariant operators , 
 by a unitary transformation that is momentum 
dependent, hence non-local.  This
unitary transformation can be worked out for the free quark case. 
It serves as a model for the interacting case and works very well
in phenomenological applications.  The 
success of this procedure is now partially understood by the asymptotic freedom of
quarks interacting through gluon exchange.  At short spatial
separation quarks are quasi free, so that their positive and
negative frequency parts can be separated and they can be subjected
to Foldy-Wouthuysen-Tani or Cini-Touschek-Melosh type
transformations.  The vertex then exhibits an  type symmetry
for a quark emitting a meson with space-like momentum.  If the
meson momentum is time-like, the meson can only be coupled to a
quark-antiquark pair, each with a time-like momentum (in general
not on the mass shell).  In this case the effective interaction
Lagrangians of the form Eq.() and Eq.() have an  (no
flavor),  (isospin flavor) or  (unitary spin flavor)
symmetry with the correspondences (in the  case)

 
which give the usual  classification for the bound states . 
The spin dependence of the one-gluon exchange between  and   
introduces a  term that splits
 from  and  and leads to the mass formula for 

 
that was proposed in .  The  part comes from the exact
 limit valid for the spin independent confining potential.
This spin independence is only seen in the lattice approximation in
QCD.  We have found a partial justification in the Moeller-Rosenfeld model 
with quarks exchanging almost degenerate  bound
states.  The  part comes from short range one-gluon exchange
forces as shown by de Ru jula, Georgi and Glashow who find the
value of  to be proportional to , the QCD fine structure
constant and inversely proportional to the masses of the
constituent quarks.  Finally the  and  terms come from quark
mass difference.

     The spin independent confining force can be largely simulated
by an effective scalar field as shown by Schnitzer.

     A phenomenological bag model description of the hadron is
obtained by R. Friedberg and T. D. Lee if the phenomenological
scalar field (regarded as a function of invariants constructed out
of two-gluon fields and three-gluon fields) is assumed to have
different vacuum expectation values inside and outside the hadron. 
As shown by the same authors the large mass of the color and flavor
singlet can be understood by the contribution of the -gluon
annihilation diagram for .

     Once we have this phenomenological picture for hadrons we can
get non-trivial decay amplitude relations for mesons going into 
mesons or baryons decaying into baryons (by emission of mesons or
photons) by using the unitary transformation between the vertex
spin operators and the covariant spin operators.  The non-covariant
spin belongs to the -dimensional adjoint representation of . 
It is a function of the covariant spin operators of current algebra
and the momentum.  The momentum dependence can be taken into
account by consideration of the group  where the  is associated with the orbital angular momentum exhibiting the momentum dependence.  The  part can be described by the
quantum number , etc.. We have seen that in the
infinite momentum frame  converges to the longitudinal spin
 or  (with  being chosen as the 
longitudinal direction).  The pion operator  in 
current algebra becomes .  The conserved spin is
obtained by a unitary transformation of this operator.  It will
belong in general to a superposition of () ,
etc..  For a given matrix element of the pion operator between two
states (meson states for pionic decay of mesons, baryonic state for
pionic decays of baryons) only a limited number of these
representations () will contribute.  That will immediately
give non-trivial relations between meson-meson-pion amplitudes or
between baryon-baryon-pion amplitudes. -decays or vector meson
decays are handled in similar fashion.  The details of this
analysis can be found in the reviews of Meshkov for meson
decays, Hey for baryon decays or in the numerous original
articles exploring the unitary 
transformation between the  operators of the non-covariant 
constituent quarks and the  operators of current algebra generated 
by covariant current quarks. 
More model dependent and detailed descriptions of the bound states
and decay processes are obtained in a semi-classical field theory
of quarks bound by a confining (harmonic or linear) potential that
is from the outset taken to be spin independent.
 
     The chiral structure is related to the approximate zero mass
of the  and  quarks and the negligibly small mass of the pion. 
In quark phenomenology the  and  quark masses are usually taken
to be one third of the proton or neutron masses.  On the other
hand, if they are evaluated from the deviations from exact chiral
symmetry in current algebra, they are found to be of the order of
a few MeV.  The two pictures can be reconciled by putting massless
quarks in a bag (resulting from an effective scalar field) of
radius , assuming that the sphere of radius  is the boundary of
regions where the scalar field assumes different vacuum expectation
values.  Then, quarks behave as if they had a mass proportional to
 which can be adjusted to one third of the proton mass.  For an
attempt to understand the zero pion mass within this
phenomenological bag model based on QCD, see Friedberg and Lee's article.

 99 
 For a recent review of the pertinent literature see 
"Proceedings Baryons '92; Int. Conf. on the Structure of Baryons and Related 
Mesons." Ed. M. Gai (World Scientific, 1993).

 S. Catto, "Effective Hadronic Lagrangians Based on QCD: Potential Models and Skyrmions." To be published. arXiv:hep-th/0302101.

 Z.Z. Aydin and A. Barut, Nucl. Phys. B41 , 150 (1972); 
Nucl. Phys. B42 , 291 (1972).

 For a review, see H.D. Politzer, Physics Reports 14C , 130
(1974).
 
 S. Catto and F. Gu rsey, Phys. Rev. D29 , 653 (1984).

 S. Tani, Prog. Theor. Phys. Kyoto 6 , 267 (1951); See also
M.H.L. Pryce, Proc. Roy. Soc. A195 , 62 (1948).

 L. Foldy and S.A. Wouthuysen, Phys. Rev. 78 , 29 (1950).

 M. Cini and B. Touschek, Nuovo Cimento 7 , 422 (1958).

 J. Melosh, Phys. Rev. D9 , 1095 (1974).

 B. Stech, Zeit. Phys. 144 , 214 (1956).

 H.J. Lipkin and S. Meshkov, Phys. Rev. Let. 14 , 670 (1965).
 
 K.M. Bitar and F. Gu rsey, Phys. Rev. 164 , 1805 (1967).

 M.M. Nagels, T.A. Rijken and J.J. de Swart, Phys. Rev. D12 ,
744 (1975); Phys. Rev. D15 , 2547 (1977); Phys. Rev. D20 , 1633 
(1980).
 C. Moeller and L. Rosenfeld, K. Danske Vidensk. Selsk, Mat.-fys. Medd 17 , 8 (1940).

W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 59 , 436 (1941).

 G. Fogli and G. Preparata, Nuovo Cimento A48 , 235 (1978).

 J.M. Jauch and N. Hu, Phys. Rev. 65 , 289 (1944).
                                
                            
 A.J.C. Hey, J.L. Rosner and J. Weyers, Nucl. Phys. B61 ,
205 (1973).

 F.E. Close, H. Osborn and A.M. Thompson, Nucl. Phys. B77 ,
281 (1974).

 F.J. Gilman, M. Kugler and S. Meshkov, Phys. Rev. D9 ,
715 (1974).

  F. Gu rsey and L.A. Radicati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 , 
172 (1964); B. Sakita, Phys. Rev. B136 , 1756 (1964);                             
F. Gu rsey, A. Pais and L.A. Radicati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 , 
299(1964); F. Gu rsey, Phys. Lett. 14 , 330 (1965).                            

 W. Celmaster, H. Georgi and M. Machacek, Phys. Rev. D17 , 
879 (1978); Phys. Rev. D17 , 886 (1978); W. Celmaster, Phys. Rev. 
D15 , 1391 (1977).

 A. de Rujula, H. Georgi and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. D12 ,
147 (1975).

 H.J. Schnitzer, Phys. Lett. 76B , 461 (1978) and 
references therein.
 
 R. Friedberg and T.D. Lee, Phys. Rev. D16 , 1096 (1977);
Phys. Rev. D18 , 2623 (1978).

 For a generalization to  see F. Buccella,
A. Sciarrino and P. Sorba, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 10 , 455 (1974).

 S. Meshkov, in Proc. XVII Int. Conf. on High Energy, ed.
J.R. Smith, p. II-101, (London, 1974).

 A.J.G. Hey, in Proc. XVII Int. Conf. on High Energy, ed.
J.R. Smith, p. II-120, (London, 1974).


 P. Chang and F. Gu rsey, Nouvo Cimento, 63A , 617 (1969);
D.G. Caldi and H. Pagels, Phys. Rev. D14 , 809 (1976); For broken chiral
symmetry see H. Pagels, Phys. Reports 16C , 221 (1975).

