Holography and the Deligne Conjecture 
Ioannis P.  ZOISizois@ihes.fr Research supported by the EU, 
contract No: HPMF-CT-1999-00088. Current address: 
School of Mathematics, Cardiff University, PO Box 926, Cardiff CF24 4YH, UK; 
e-mail address: zoisip@cf.ac.uk 



IHES, Le Bois-Marie, 35, route de Chartres


F-91440 Bures-sur-Yvette, FRANCE


and


Mathematical Institute, Oxford University


24-29 St. Giles', Oxford, OX1 3LB, UK 
 


 
"In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni" .

 

In this article we try to explain a statement due
to Maxim Kontsevich back in 1999, that the Holography Principle 
in physics is related to the (higher dimensional)
Deligne Conjecture  in mathematics. That seems to suggest that the
little -discs operad  (or equivalently the notion of a
-algebra ) gives a new way to understand the mathematical aspects of
quantum gravity  using holography . The strategy is as
follows: we would like
to learn something about quantum gravity in  dimensions: we use
holography to reduce our original problem to a CFT in -dimensions. The
deep origin of this dimensional reduction lies on the fact that it is the
area  and not  the volume  which appears in the
formula giving the entropy of
black holes as described long ago by Hawking. Then we use -algebras (i.e. 
the little -discs operad) to study our -dim CFT.
The possible relation between -dim CFT and -algebras comes from the 
lesson we have learnt from strings (namely the 2-dim CFT case): the space of 
physical states
in closed string field theory (ie the BRST cohomology) has a natural
Gerstenhaber  algebra structure and this by Cohen's theorem is related to
the little 2-discs operad. The proposal then is that the relation might hold 
in higher
than 2 dimensions. This approach is algebraic although it would have been be 
much more satisfactory if we could generalise Segal's geometric approach
to CFT in higher than 2 dimensions. Hopefully the article is mathematically
self-contained.


PACS classification: 11.10.-z; 11.15.-q; 11.30.-Ly


Keywords: Holography, Operads, String Theory, Quantum Gravity, Conformal
Field Theory.


Introduction 

This work was motivated by an attempt to understand an interesting
statement
by Maxim Kontsevich back in 1999: that the Holography
Principle  originally due to G. 't Hooft in
Physics might be related to the Higher Dimensional Deligne
Conjecture  in Mathematics due to Kontsevich. In 2000 Kontsevich and
Soibelman proved the original Deligne conjecture.


Let us roughly explain both these statements here and elaborate more on them
later: Holography is a statement about quantum gravity ; in
simple terms it says that quantum gravity must be a topological
quantum field theory .


On the other hand the original Deligne conjecture (due to Deligne as the name 
suggests) is about the
Hochschild complex of associative algebras; as it is well-known the
Hochschild complex is very useful when one wants to study the theory of
deformations of algebras.


We organise this article as follows: in section 2 we try to explain the
necessity for holography in physics starting from black hole puzzles; in
section 3 we give the necessary
mathematical definitions about operads and Gerstenhaber algebras
and we also state the two basic theorems: the first is due to F. Cohen and
relates Gerstenhaber algebras with the little 2-discs operad and the second
is D. Tamarkin's theorem on the formality of the little -discs operad.
In the last section we explain the relation between string theory and the
little 2-discs operad.
Then as we shall see, one will be able to interpret Kontsevich's statement as
a higher dimensional analogue of the above relation.


We start our discussion with possibly the most mysterious objects
in the universe: Black Holes. 







Understanding Black Holes from Strings: the need for a nonlocality
mechanism 







We have gained some understanding on two
important problems in
black hole physics (abreviated to "BH" in the sequel) by using
some recent results from string theory dualities (for more details one
can see which is a nice review article):


1.   In general relativity we have the
so-called "no hair"  theorem
which refers to black holes. This is the statement that the configuration
of a black hole solution given by the Schwarzchild metric
is uniquely determined  by its mass (= total energy) (we assume
no more conserved quantities like electric charge or angular momentum for
simplicity). In other words we have only 1  configuration (for a given
mass) associated to the Schwarzchild solution.

Following the usual definition for the classical entropy  of a system
 where  is the number of microstates compatible
with some given values of the macroscopic parameters (eg temperature,
pressure, volume etc) and  is Boltzmann's constant, we
immediately deduce that a BH must have zero  entropy classically since
.


But then we encounter the qualitative argument  originally due
to Beckenstein that if this was indeed the case, then any object, e.g. some
gas, falling into a BH would contradict the second law of
thermodynamics . To avoid that one should associate a nonzero  entropy
(positive of course) to any BH. The precise value of the
entropy  of a BH was then determined by the Hawking area formula which,
ignoring constants, reads

where  is the area  of the event horizon. The origin of BH entropy
was understood to be quantum mechanical .


We know however that statistical physics gives a more fundamental explanation
of the laws of thermodynamics and moreover a correct "would-be" quantum
theory of gravity should explain the origin of the quantum states associated
to a BH. So the challenge was to find a statistical explanation for the
quantum states associated to a BH which give rise to its entropy described by
the Hawking formula.


Superstring theory  can indeed, in some cases, provide an explanation 
for the origin of
quantum states associated to multicharged extremal black holes . And
anyway string theory is arguably the best known
candidate for a quantum theory of gravity. The argument
 which explains the microscopic origin of BH entropy starting from string
theory was originally due to Strominger, Vafa, Horowitz and Maldacena and it 
is based
on S -duality. The later is a statement about an isomorphism between
strong  and weak  coupling regions of superstring theory;
equivalently it interchanges  monopoles  with charges  in
the theory (or equivalently it interchanges topology and dynamics) and gives
us the ability to identify BPS superstring states  which will either
be
perturbative states  if they carry NS charges  or
D-branes  if they carry R charges  in
"weak coupling"  region with extremal black holes  carrying the
analogous type of charge in "strong coupling"  region. We restrict
our attention to BPS states (these are states whose mass does not receive any
quantum corrections) because for simplicity we assume no backcreation for the
black hole (namely its mass which is equal to its energy remains constant).
Briefly then the main
idea behind this string theoretic explanation of the quantum states
associated to a black hole is that since strings live in 10-dim and BH in
4-dim, the remaining
6 compactified dimensions essentially provide a "phase space" which we
quantize and thus we obtain the states of the BH. (This picture is not 
utterly correct but we think captures the spirit of the argument
and gives a clear picture conceptually).



2.   The second problem we would like to consider in BH physics is the
so-called "information paradox" . Classically ,
nothing can escape the event horizon of a BH  (since that
would require a velocity which is grater than the velocity of light; one can
use that as a definition of the "event horizon" ). Yet
quantum mechanically, since a BH has a positive entropy as we just
argued above, assuming a thermodynamical behaviour , it should also
have a corresponding temperature  from the well-known relation in
thermodynamics

This is the Hawking temperature 

where  is surface gravity  (the acceleration felt by a
static object at the horizon as measured from the asymptotic region),
and hence BH's should also radiate. 


This is the Hawking radiation . Then the problem with
radiation carrying out the information of formation , assuming
no quantum xeroxing,  is to maintain unitarity  of the process
as ordinary quantum mechanics requires. More precisely, the way one computes
Hawking radiation is by assuming a codim-1 foliation  of spacetime
where the normal direction is time
and this radiation process appears to be nonunitary .


Thus trying to avoid a classical contradiction with the 2nd law of
thermodynamics we assumed that BH's have positive entropy (whose origin is
quantum mechanical); yet this almost immediately created another contradiction
with quantum mechanics: loss of unitarity in BH radiation. Unitarity is
absolutely crucial in any quantum theory since it reflects the
conservation of probabilities. So it seems that we didn't actually achieve
very much: we simply "pushed"  the contradiction from the classical
to the quantum realm.


It appears that the most economical  (i.e. requiring the fewest
changes to things we already know in physics) way out  is to assume
that there is some physical principle  which does not
allow this to happen. We enforce  unitarity  throughout by
imposing a non-locality  mechanism. One such mechanism is the
holography principle  due to G. 't Hooft. The original statement is the
following:


"a quantum theory of gravity on a
-manifold with boundary should be equivalent to a conformal field
theory (CFT for short) on the boundary (which is a -manifold) and this
conformal field
theory on the boundary must have one degree of freedom per Planck area" .


Let us elaborate more on this: since for BH we seem to lose any information
passing the event horizon, it is reasonable to assume that in order to avoid
this problem (along with its quantum mechanical incarnation of nonunitary
radiation), everything that happens
inside the black hole should be described from data on its event horizon. It
 is clear we think that the motivation for this dimensional reduction 
of quantum gravity in holography came from the formula for the black hole
entropy: the entropy of a black hole is proportional to the area  and 
not  the volume of the event horizon.


Another very useful way of thinking about the holography principle is that
it simply says that for a given 3-volume 
in space the state of maximal entropy  in nature is given by the
largest BH that fits inside  ,
(silently we are making use of the Hawking formula which says that the
entropy of a BH is
proportional to the area of its event horizon).


This principle has a deep consequence on perturbative quantum field
theory:  BH's
provide a natural  cut-off limit  since the
above statement says that for fermions for example one cannot have a huge
amount of energy concentrated
in a tiny region of space because that would collapse into a BH.


There is also a string theoretic version
of the holography principle using string theory language,
the so-called "Maldacena
conjecture"  which states that string theory on the smooth manifold
 is dual to  SYM  gauge theory on the
boundary  of . In this talk we shall primarily
build our understanding
of Kontsevich's statement based on this string theoretic version of
holography. However let us for the moment go back to the original 't Hooft
version of holography and ask:


(Key Question:)  What is a  CFT?


In order to answer the above question and eventually understand Kontsevich's
statement, we should
start by trying to understand the  case first. We know from G. Segal
what a  CFT is, so it seems that somehow we have to generalise his work.


A good motivation to study  CFT comes from string theory itself, one can
say in fact that  CFT is intimately related to string theory: strings
are 1-dim objects which in time sweep out 2-manifolds called
worldsheets ;
this is the higher dimensional analogue of the paths (1-dim geometric objects)
swept out in time by point particles. However now we are talking about
M-Theory in physics which generalises string theory and M-Theory contains
the M2 and M5 branes; these are 2 and
5-dim objects respectively whose worldsheets are 3 and 6-dim manifolds. So
apart from holography, there is additional motivation coming from M-Theory to
understand higher dimensional CFT's.


Now we would like to describe briefly what string theory is classically :
basically it is a -model , namely it describes
harmonic maps  
where  is a Riemann surface of genus  representing the
worldsheets of strings and  is a 26-dim
Riemannian manifold with a -field. The dimensionality of  is fixed from
consistency arguments (compatibility with special relativity and cancellation
of the conformal anomaly). The -field is a real valued 2-form
which is used as a potential to gauge  the worldsheets of the strings
in order to get our Dirac phase factors; in fact one can think of it as the
Poincare Dual (a 2-form) of the worldsheet which is a 2-manifold (it is the
analogue of the gauge
potentials in Yang-Mills theory, connection 1-forms, although now it has to
be a 2-form instead of a 1-form since we are talking about strings whose
worlsheets are 2-manifolds whereas for point particles we needed 1-forms
because their "worlsheets" were 1-dim objects). This picture needs to include
fermions as well in order to be complete but we shall not elaborate more on
this. The introduction of fermions along with supersymmetry reduces the
dimensionality of  from 26 down to 10.


The quantum  theory of strings is essentially a  CFT 
(plus a little bit
more structure as we shall see later). In order to
describe  CFT one may use the original geometric  approach due to
G. Segal. This approach however does not lead to the statement of
Kontsevich in a straightforward way. Moreover it is not easy to see how it
can be generalised to
higher dimensions which is what we are after. Instead we shall adopt
 an algebraic approach  using the language of operads ;
in fact we shall see the little 2-discs operad   arising
naturally in our discussion. This is the crucial step in
order to understand Kontsevich's statement which is the higher
dimensional version of this beautiful fact. The appearence of the operad
 in string theory is not at all obvious and at least for us quite
surprising. The link between string theory and the little 2-discs operad
 comes from a deep theorem due to Fred Cohen as we shall try to
exhibit shortly. For simplicity we shall restrict our discussion to
closed strings . But we shall do that in the last section because we
need some mathematical definitions first. The final remark here is that we
would still like to generalise Segal's work and get a geometric definition of
 CFT. Currently this seems out of reach since there are two reasons
which make Segal's approach particularly nice for the  case (but at the
same time act as
barriers when trying to generalise into higher dimensions): the
conformal group in this case is infinite dimensional and hence contains a lot
more information whereas in higher dimensions the conformal group is only
finite dimensional. The second reason is that
the classification of 2-manifolds is simple whereas for  it is not
known if 3-manifolds can be classified and in dimensions  we can
only classify simply connected manifolds (in perturbative quantum field theory
that means we can only talk about tree level).





A Mathematical Interlude 







In this section now we shall give formal definitions.


Definition 1: 

A Gerstenhaber algebra  (or a -algebra) is a
graded vector space  with a dot product 
 defining the structure of a graded commutative associative
algebra  along with a bracket operation   of degree -1 defining
the structure of a graded Lie algebra  such that the bracket is a
derivation  with respect to the dot product, i.e. it satisfies the
Leibniz rule


Examples: 

i.  Let  be an associative algebra and let
 be its Hochschild complex
where  and the differential  is defined
as ():


On the Hochschild complex we can define the usual cup product
 as follows
(,  and ):

Moreover we can also define the Gerstenhaber bracket   as:

where

The G-bracket gives after a shift of the -grading by -1 the structure 
of a (differentiable graded lie algebra) DGLA on the Hochschild complex. The 
cup product is not graded commutative (it is only associative) but the induced 
operation on cohomology is graded commutative. Moreover the G-bracket induces 
an operation on cohomology which satisfies the Leibniz rule with respect to 
the cup product, hence the Hochschild cohomology of any associative 
algebra is in fact a -algebra .


We shall briefly mention three more examples of -algebras:


ii.  Polyvector fields  on smooth manifolds with wedge
product  and Schouten-Nijenhuis bracket .


iii.  Exterior algebra of a Lie algebra  with wedge
product and extension of the Lie bracket. 


iv.  (Rational) homology of double loop space  with
Pontrjagin product and Samelson bracket .


Definition 2: 

An operad   (of vector spaces) consists of the following data:

a.  a collection of vector spaces ,

b.  an action of the symmetric group  on  for every ,

c.  an identity element ,

d.  compositions 

for every  and . These compositions have to be
 associative , equivariant  with respect to the symmetric group 
actions and the identity  element  has to satisfy the following 
naturality property with respect to the composition:

and

for all  (one can have a look at for more details).


Example:  The "endomorphism operad"  of a vector space  is
given
by  where the action of the symmetric group and
the identity element are the obvious ones and the compositions are defined by
the substitutions



where ,  and .


Definition 3: 

An algebra  over an operad   (of vector spaces), or a
P-algebra , (or equivalently a representation  of the operad ), 
consists of a vector space 
and a collection of multilinear maps 
 for all  satisfying the following axioms:

a.  for any  the map  is -equivariant,

b.  for any  we have ,

c.  all compositions in  map to compositions of multilinear
operations in .


In other words the structure of an algebra over  on a vector space  is
given by a homomorphism  from  to the endomorphism operad of
 .

One can also define modules  over algebras over operads.


One can construct operads denoted , , , 
,
,
, 
such that algebras over these operads are associative  algebras,
Lie  algebras, Poisson  algebras, Gerstenhaber  algebras 
and their homotopic  versions
respectively but there is no  operad for Hopf algebras  (for more 
details see).


In the definition of operads we can replace our
vector space   by a compact topological space   and hence
define operads over topological spaces  replacing
tensor product  with Cartesian product .


The analogue of the endomorphism operad will in this case be
. Then one can define algebras
over topological operads accordingly.


More generally one can define operads and algebras over operads over objects
of any symmetric monoidal category  , namely a category
endowed with the functor 
, the identity element  and the
appropriate coherence isomorphisms for associativity and commutativity of
-product.


Operads themselves can be seen as algebras over the coloured operad. 
(see p.12 Remark 1.)


In particular we would like to consider operads in the symmetric monoidal
category  whose objects are Z -graded complexes of abelian
groups and arrows morphisms of complexes. These are called differential
graded operads  or dg-operads  for short. So each component  of an
operad of complexes will be a complex, namely a vector space decomposed into
a direct sum  and endowed with a
differential  of degree  such that
. Then every dg-operad  has a corresponding homology operad 
denoted .


Key idea: 

There is a natural way to construct an operad of complexes  from
a topological operad  by using essentially the
singular chain complex  of topological spaces.

Let  be an integer. Denote by  the -dimensional Lie
group of affine transformations  acting on  via
  where  is a real number and
 is a vector.
This group acts simply transitively on the space of closed discs in
 and the disc with centre  and radius  is obtained
from the standard disc

by a transformation from  with parameters .


Definition 4: 

The little d-discs operad   is a topological operad with the
following structure:

a.  ,

b.  ,

c.  for  the space  is the space of
configurations
of  disjoint d-discs   inside the standard -disc
.


The composition

is obtained by applying elements from  associated with discs
 in the configuration in  to configurations
in all ,  and putting the resulting configurations
together. The action of the symmetric group  on  is given
by renumerations of indices of discs  .


The little -discs operad   was introduced by
Peter May and Boardmann-Vogt in the 70's in order
to describe homotopy types  of -fold loop spaces , namely spaces
of continuous maps

where "" denotes base point,  is a topological space,  is the 
-dim sphere. The little -discs operad is the most important operad in
homotopy theory.


The key result relating the little -discs operad  with -fold
loop spaces is that (with field coefficients) chains of -fold loop spaces
become naturally -algebras i.e. algebras over the operad
. (In fact the above statement is true even without taking
"chains" in both sides).


Fact:  The space  is homotopy equivalent  to the
configuration space of  pairwise distinct points  in :







Definition 5: 

Let  which is also the
Fulton-MacPherson operad  .


For ,  is homotopy equivalent to the -sphere .
For all ,  is a manifold with corners  which can be
identified explicitly.


Definition 6: 

For , a -algebra is an algebra over the operad
 in the category of complexes.


One then has:


Theorem 1.  (F. Cohen)

There is a natural homotopy equivalence


Recall the fact that the Hochschild cohomology of any associative algebra has
a natural -algebra structure. The original Deligne conjecture  was
that the
Hochschild complex of an associative algebra (or more generally the Hochschild
complex of an -algebra as mentioned in) itself
carries a natural 2-algebra structure, i.e. it has an action of the operad
.
Its higher dimensional version due to Kontsevich says:


"for any  there is a natural action of a
universal (in an appropriate sense defined up to homotopy) " .


Useful facts:


Since in general homotopic versions of various algebras appear when the 
product is originally defined on the cohomology and one wants to "lift" the 
structure to the cochain level,  one has the following general relations 
between algebras and their
"homotopic versions":





Aside:  The above discussion was about the little discs operad and 
based loop spaces.
One also has a variation of the above, the so called framed  little 
-discs operad denoted 
which is related to free  loop spaces. The framed little 2-discs operad
 is homotopic  to the cactus  operad
and the (rational) homology of the framed little 2-discs operad is homotopic 
to the BV-operad. The main result is then that the (rational) homology of the 
free loop 
space  where  is a compact oriented manifold (after an
apropriate shift) has a BV-algebra structure, namely it is an algebra over 
the Batalin-Vilkovisky  operad. At this point we would like to remind 
the reader of the fact that BV-algebras appear in Lagrangian formulation of 
field theories whereas Gerstenhaber algebras (to be defined below) appear in 
BRST cohomology which is 
Hamiltoniam formalism of a field theory. For more details on the cactus 
operad, free loops and BV algebras we refer to.



Theorem 2:  (D. Tamarkin 1998)

In characteristic zero, the operad  is
formal , i.e. it
is homotopy equivalent to its corresponding homology operad.







The appearence of the operad  in string theory 




After giving all these mathematical definitions we now return back to physics.
G. Segal defined a  CFT as roughly a topological vector space 
and to each ( is a Riemann surface of genus ) cobordism 
(which physically represents a Feynman
diagram for strings which are 1-dim objects with 2-dim worldsheets)
 we associate an operator
 satisfying certain axioms to be compatible with the
principles of quantum
mechanics and conformal invariance. The case  corresponds to
tree-level  in physics.

Now we shall modify Segal's definition using the more convenient language
of operads , we follow. We shall explain in detail
the structures appearing in the  case and then we shall try to see how
much can be immediately generalised to higher dimensions.


Before doing that we would like to make a comment: there are two 
ways to construct operads related to Riemann surfaces: the first one is by
using moduli spaces of punctured Riemann surfaces and compactify them, such
operads are roughly denoted ; the second is by decorating the puctures
with local coordinates. One can sew two Riemann surfaces together
unambiguously (up to modular equivalence) by using suitable local
coordinates.


Let  be the moduli space of nondegenerate Riemann spheres 
with  labelled punctures and non-overlapping holomorphic discs at each
puncture (holomorphic embeddings of the standard disc  to 
centered at the puncture). The spaces ,  form an operad
under sewing Riemann spheres at punctures (cutting out the discs 
and  for some  at sewn punctures and identifying the
annuli  and  via ). The symmetric group
interchanges punctures along with the holomorphic discs.

Consider the complexification  of the Virasoro algebra of complex valued
vector fields on the circle, generated by elements , , with the commutators .
Then one has:


Definition 7: 

A  conformal field theory  at tree level consists of the following
data:
1.  A topological vector space  called state space .

2.  An action  of the Virasoro algebra 
on .

3.  A vector   for each 
 depending smoothly on .
These data must satisfy the following relations:

4.  , where
 and  is the natural action of
 on  by infinitesimal reparametrisations at punctures. In
particular  whenever  can be
extended to a holomorphic vector field on  outside of the discs.

5.  The correspondence  defines the structure
of an algebra over the operad   on the space of states .


So briefly, the slogan is that a  CFT is an algebra over the operad
.


Definition 8: 

A string background  (at the tree level) is a  CFT based on the
vector space  with the following additional data:

1.  A Z -grading  on the state
space.

2.  An action of the Clifford algebra   which
is denoted  and 
for generators of the Clifford algebra, the degree of  is -1 and the degree of  is +1.

3.  A differential , , of degree +1 called
BRST operator  satisfying .


The differential graded complex  is called the BRST complex  and
the degree is called the ghost number .


One of the nicest implications of a string background is the construction of
a morphism of complexes 
, from the complex of linear mappings between tensor powers
of the BRST complex  to the de Rham complex of the space .


Taking the cohomology  of the BRST complex
gives the space of physical states . In physics this amounts to mod out
gauge invariance (this is a cohomological approach to symplectic
reduction  in the case of a symplectic manifold  carrying a Lie group action
which is more convenient in infinite dimensions, i.e. field theory).


Then a closed string field theory  is a string background together with
a morphism of operads . This however does not
readily generalise to higher dimensions since both operads  and 
are related to moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces. The aspect of closed string
field theory which will be useful for higher dimensional generalisations is
the following:


Key fact:  The space of physical states in closed string field theory
(namely BRST cohomology) has the structure of a Gerstenhaber algebra .


Let us explain this a little bit more: from the work of G. Segal we knew that
in general  topological quantum
field theories (and in particular closed string field theory)
are -graded commutative associative Frobenious algebras, hence they
are graded
associative algebras . Yet it was observed by Witten and Zwiebach that closed
string field theory also carries the structure of a Differential
Graded Lie Algebra  relative to another grading which is
"the associative grading - 1" .
In fact these 2 structures can be combined together to give a G-algebra 
structure.


Now we make use of Cohen's theorem saying that -algebras
correspond exactly to the homology of the chains of the little 2-discs
operad and of Tamarkin's result to deduce that the space of physical
states of closed string field theory (which is a special case of  CFT) 
has a natural (defined up to homotopy) 2-algebra structure .


So this is the important relation between strings and the operad 
that plays the fundamental role to understand Kontsevich's
statement which is then simply the higher dimensional version  of the
above fact which originally holds for strings ( case).


Remarks: 

1.  The original Deligne conjecture, namely the case , was
proved by Kontsevich and Soibelman in 2000
using ideas and techniques from Dan Quillen's homotopical algebra 
which roughly is a non-linear 
generalisation of homological algebra .


2.  Why should physics care about the Deligne conjecture?
We think for 2 reasons:

i.  The fact that the Hochschild complex of an associative algebra is a
2-algebra (original conjecture) is related to the action
of the Grothendieck-Teichmuller (G-T) group . The fact that the
Hochschild
complex plays the fundamental role in the theory of deformations  of
associative algebras explains why its study is important in quantum field
theory if one adopts the deformation quantization approach .

In other
words the goal is to understand the action  of the G-T group on the
space of all
deformation quantizations  on the associative algebra of functions (in fact
one needs a little more structure, i.e. a Poisson algebra structure) on a
given (spacetime or phase space respectively) manifold and this is believed
to be related
to gauge symmetry. Yet all these are far from being clear at the moment.
Let us briefly recall that the Grothendieck-Teichmuller group can be defined
as the automorphism group of the tower of the pro-nilpotent completions of
the pure braid groups; the pure braid group of  strings is the fundamental
group of the configuration space of  points in the plane
.


ii.  If one wants to understand -dim quantum gravity , one
approach is
to follow holography. This means that equivalently one should understand
   CFT. From the string theory example we have learnt that  CFT is
related to 2-algebras. It is then reasonable to expect that  CFT must be
related
to -algebras. So the hope is that this higher dimensional Deligne
conjecture
will tell us something about the "BRST complex"  whose cohomology
would describe the  CFT.

Perhaps here we should mention another important
result: the BRST complex of closed string field theory has also the structure
of a -algebra (see). That makes someone to
speculate on a relation between the operads  and
. For example it is unknown if double loop spaces (which are
the primary examples of 2-algebras) also carry a homotopy Gerstenhaber
algebra structure.


3.  As Kontsevich explains in his article, from Deligne's conjecture
and from Tamarkin's theorem (namely the formality of the operad
), follows almost immediately his
earlier result on deformation quantization of symplectic (Poisson) manifolds
for the case where the associative algebra of interest is just the polynomial
algebra in  variables

Let us recall that Kontsevich's result was that for the associative algebra
 above one has that its Hochschild complex  is homotopic 
as a Lie algebra to its Hochschild cohomology . An equivalent
statement is that for the Euclidean space , the Hochschild
complex of the associative algebra of functions on  equipped with
the Gerstenhaber bracket is homotopic as DGLA  to
the -graded superalgebra of polyvector fields  on  equipped
with the Schouten-Nijenhuis bracket.

4.  The structure of an -algebra has appeared recently in
open strings . Moreover let us mention that one of the main examples of
homotopy associative algebras (or -algebras) is singular chains
of based loops.


5.  A pessimist would argue that the holography principle does not really
"resolve" the BH paradoxe; it simply pushes it even further to the realm
 of quantum gravity which is terra incognita  for today's physics.
We however would like to adopt a more positive point of view: by accepting
the validity of holography we can actually
use  it in order to learn something about quantum gravity and
at the same time we try to understand its wider implications for physics.
Finally we would like to mention that there have been already some positive
tests for the validity of holography mainly in the framework of some
calculations related to its string theoretic version (Maldacena conjecture).


So the main point in this article was to argue that the Hilbert space
of  dimensional quantum gravity should have the following algebraic
structure: from holography principle it should be a TQFT; all TQFT's known are
cohomological  theories, namely it should be described as the 
cohomology of a complex. Following the lesson we have learnt from strings 
this Hilbert space should have a -algebra structure; then the higher 
dimensional Deligne conjecture will tell us that the complex whose cohomology 
gives the Hilbert space must carry a -algebra structure. One
can only hope that an explicit construction will eventually emerge after
accumulating information about the properties of the "would-be"
quantum gravity Hilbert space. In D=2 case one uses Topological Vertex
Operator Algebras (TVOA) as a tool to construct topological Conformal Field
Theories but again their higher dimensional generalisation is not
obvious. We believe that the way ahead, which looks more like a programme 
for future research, is to try to understand in grater 
detail what happens in lower dimensions  before atacking the case of 
physical 
interest, namely quantum gravity in dimension 4, CFT in dimension 3 and the
higher dimensional Deligne conjecture.


 
The author would like to thank Maxim Kontsevich and Graeme Segal for useful 
discussions.






 20 

 S.R. Das and S.D. Mathur: "The Quantum Physics of Black Holes:
Results from String Theory", Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science
Vol 50 (2000) and gr-qc/0105063.


G. 't Hooft: "Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity",
Essay dedicated to Abdus Salam in "Salamfestschift : a collection of
talks", editors: A. Ali, J. Ellis and S. Randjbar-Daemi, World Scientific
1993 and gr-qc/9310026.


 J-L. Loday, J.D. Stasheff and A.A. Voronov: "Operads:
Proceedings of Renaissence Conferences", Contemp. Maths. 202 AMS 1997.


 M. Kontsevich: "Operads and Motives in Deformation
Quantization", Lett. Math. Phys. 48.1 (1999) and QA/9904055.


 M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman: "Deformations of
algebras over operads and Deligne's conjecture", Conference Moshe Flato 
1999, Vol I, Math. Phys. Studies 21, Kluwer (2000), 225-308 and QA/0001151.


 A.A. Voronov: "Notes on Universal Algebra", preprint 
QA/0111009.









































