



 

 
SEARCH FOR A "GRAVITOID" THEORY 

 

 

J. A. Nieto(
nieto@uas.uasnet.mx) and M. C. Mari n

 

Departamento de Investigacio n en Fi sica de la Universidad de
Sonora, 

83190, Hermosillo Sonora, Me xico 

and 

Facultad de Ciencias Fi sico-Matema ticas de la Universidad
Auto noma 

de Sinaloa, 80010, Culiaca n Sinaloa, Me xico (
permanent address) 

 

 

Abstract 

By combining the concepts of graviton and matroid, we outline a new
gravitational theory which we call gravitoid theory. The idea of this theory
emerged as an attempt to link the mathematical structure of matroid theory
with M-theory. Our observations are essentially based on the formulation of
matroid bundle due to MacPherson and Anderson. Also, by considering the
oriented matroid theory, we add new observations about the link between the
Fano matroid and  supergravity which was discussed in some of our
recent papers. In particular we find a connection between the affine matroid 
 and the symmetry of  supergravity.

. 

Pacs numbers: 04.60.-m, 04.65.+e, 11.15.-q, 11.30.Ly

February, 2003

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

It is known that the theory called M-theory was suggested by duality
symmetries interrelating the five known superstring theories in 9+1
dimensions (i.e., nine space and one time), Type I, Type IIA, Type IIB,
Heterotic SO(32) and Heterotic E E If the strong/weak
coupling duality transformations allow to relate these superstrings theories
then it is no longer appropriate to see them as distinct theories, but
rather as different manifestations of an underlying unique theory: M-theory.
Roughly speaking, we can say that duality implies M-theory.

It turns out that in an apparent complete different area and in another time
an analogue conclusion led Whitney to the discovery of the concept of
matroid in 1935 In effect, it is known that not all of the graphs have an
associated dual graph. If one insists on extending the duality property to
any graph, not only for plane graphs, one is inevitably led to the
mathematical structure of matroids. From this point of view, we can also say
that duality implies a matroid scenario.

Now, the arising question is whether these two conclusions are not a
coincidence. But, why to ask, first of all, for a coincidence if M-theory
and matroid structure appear, at first sight, as two totally different
formalisms. This scenario seems to be similar to the case of the two
apparently unrelated subjects: Newton's gravitational theory and the
mathematics of Riemann geometry. The equivalence principle, among other
things, suggested to look for a mathematical structure beyond the Euclidean
geometry used in Newton's gravitational theory. It is well known that in
1915 it was discovered that the use of the Riemann geometry makes possible
the accomplishment of such a quest. Similarly, a duality principle in
M-theory may suggest the search of a singular mathematical structure beyond
the mathematical formalism used in string theory. In three previous works
 we provided enough evidence to prove that a duality principle in
M-theory may have a mathematical support in the well-developed formalism of
matroid-theory. In fact, in these references it was shown that Fano
matroid and the matroid-Tutte polynomial are connected to 
Supergravity, Chern-Simons theory and string theory, which are essential
parts of M-Theory.

Further, the connection between matroid theory and  supergravity may
naturally lead to the need of a mathematical structure that combines
matroids and fiber bundles. The reason for this is that in order to have a
realistic four dimensional theory it is necessary to compactify seven
dimensions out of the eleven space-like dimensions of  supergravity.
The traditional method to achieve such a compactification is via the
Kaluza-Klein mechanism. But, as it is well known, this mechanism is closely
related to the mathematical structure of fiber bundles.

Fortunately, the concept of matroid bundle has already been developed by the
mathematicians. In fact, in 1993 MacPherson defined for the first
time matroid bundles in connection with combinatorial differential
manifolds. Since then the matroid bundles structure has been refined and
developed by Anderson and others Roughly speaking, matroid
bundles are the combinatorial analogue of vector bundles. The central idea
in matroid bundles is to allow oriented matroids to play the role of
tangent spaces or, more generally, vector spaces.

Now, vector bundles provide an important tool in the formulation of the four
dimensional gravitational theory contained in  supergravity.
Therefore, one should expect that matroid bundles may lead to a new
gravitational structure. We call this expected new gravitational object the
"gravitoid" because it combines the concepts of graviton and matroid. Our
conjecture is that the gravitoid theory should play a crucial role not only
in  supergravity but also in M-theory itself. Since every matroid has
an associated unique dual it is reasonable to expect that the gravitoid
should have an associated unique dual gravitoid and this fact should lead to
a dual invariant partition function for the gravitoid.

The plan of this work is as follows: In section II, we briefly review
oriented matroid theory. In section III, we closely follow the Ref. 6 adding
new information about the connection between matroid theory and 
supergravity. In particular, we discuss a link between the affine matroid 
 and symmetry of  supergravity via self-duality. In
section IV, we introduce the concept of matroid bundle and develop the
gravitoid theory. Finally, in section V, we remark the importance of
gravitoid theory and matroid bundles for further research and make some
final comments.

 

II. A BRIEF REVIEW OF ORIENTED MATROIDS 

Matroid theory arose in 1935 from the abstract properties of vector
spaces and graph theory. Whitney seems to be the first mathematician
to have noticed such properties. Looking at Whitney's previous work
on non-separable graph theory, one wonders if the lack of duality on
nonplanar graphs, such as the complete graph  and the bipartite graph 
 provided his main motivation to introduce such abstract
properties. Indeed, as it is known, in graph theory only planar graphs have
an associated dual graph. As the Kuratowski's theorem assures, the complete
graph  and the bipartite graph  which are nonplanar, do not
have a corresponding dual graph. On the other hand, matroid theory has the
attractive feature that every matroid has an associated unique dual matroid.
In particular, the matroid associated to , let us say , has
a dual , but  turns out to be not
representable by means of a graph.

In connection with vector spaces, the matroid duality is realized by the
orthogonality of matrices. But the notion of orthogonality in vector spaces
is extended by matroid theory in the sense that not all matroids are
realizable by matrices. In fact, there are matroids, such as the non-Pappus
matroid, that are not realizable by a subset of a vector space or by
matrices.

A natural generalization of graph theory is provided by oriented graph
theory. In this generalized case, the edges of a graph are labeled with a
plus or minus sign. Similarly, a natural generalization of matroid theory is
the oriented matroid theory. The origin of oriented matroid theory can be
traced back to the Gutierrez-Novoa's workon signed bases, in 1965.
However, it seems that the formal axiomatic notion of orientability for
matroids was not proposed before 1978 (see Ref. 18 for details). One of the
attractive features of oriented matroids is that they capture the sign
properties of vector spaces without losing the duality properties of the
underlying non-oriented matroids. At present, oriented matroid theory is a
well-developed mathematical structure in combinatorics with a very
interesting connection in differential topology, as we shall discuss in
section IV.

An oriented matroid  is a pair , where  is
a non-empty finite set, and  is a non-empty collection of
subsets of  (called signed circuits) satisfying the following properties:

 no circuit properly contains another circuit,

  if  and 
 are two distinct signed circuits, 
 and  then there
exists a third circuit  with 
 and 

.

An alternative, but equivalent, way to define an oriented matroid is as
follows: An oriented matroid  is a pair  where 
is a non-empty finite set and  (called chirotope) is a mapping 
, with  the rank on , satisfying the
following properties.

  is not identically zero,

 is alternating,

 for all  and 
such that

 
there exists an  such that

 

For a vector configuration the chirotope  can be identified as

 
and in this case (2) becomes connected with the Grassmann-Plucker relation.

It can be proved that the definition of the underlying matroid  of 
 follows from the chirotope definition for oriented matroids. In
fact, from the chirotope definition it follows that if  is the
set of -subsets of  such that

 
for some ordering of  of , then 
 is the set of bases of the matroid . Formally, the
definition of  in terms of the bases is as follows:

A matroid  is a pair , where  is a non-empty finite
set and  is a non-empty collection of subsets of  (called
bases) satisfying the following properties:

   no base properly contains another
base;

  if  and  are bases and if  is
any element of  then there is an element  of  with the
property that  is also a base.

The dual of , denoted by  is defined as a pair 
 where  is a non-empty collection of subsets
of  formed with the complements of the bases of . An immediate
consequence of this definition is that every matroid has a dual and this
dual is unique. It also follows that the double-dual  is
equal to .

The definition of the corresponding dual oriented matroid 
 is straightforward. One introduces the dual chirotope 
such that

 
and

 
where  means some
permutation of  and





is the parity of the number of inversions of  It is not
difficult to see that, as in the case of ordinary matroids, every oriented
matroid  has an associated unique dual 
 Furthermore, it is found that 
.

Another interesting and important result is that

 
where  is the direct sum of two
connected oriented matroids  and .

 

III. ORIENTED MATROIDS, OCTONIONS,  
-SYMMETRY AND   SUPERGRAVITY 

In this section, we shall extend the discussion presented in Ref.6, 7 and 8
on the connection between matroid theory and  supergravity. In
particular, we show that the complementary relation in seven dimensions
between the Fano matroid  and octonions can be extended to eight
dimensions by means of the affine matroid . We also prove that the
self-duality condition on the octonionic structure in eight dimensions
(necessary to account for the -symmetry in  supergravity) is in
concordance with the self-duality of . At the same time, the idea
of this section is to prepare the motivation and notation to consider
matroid bundles and the gravitoid theory in the next section.

It is known that in order to get a realistic four dimensional theory from 
 supergravity it is necessary to compactify seven space-like dimensions
out of the eleven dimensions. At this respect, the Englert's compactification
 of  supergravity provides us with one of the most attractive
solutions. In this case, the  manifold  is compactified in the
form , where  is a four dimensional space-time
manifold and  is the seven dimensional sphere. Such a solution turns
out to be connected to the parallelizable properties of , which in
turn are related to octonions. Moreover, in the Englert


 

s mechanism of compactification the mapping 
 is made via the Kaluza-Klein formalism which mathematically can be
understood in terms of fiber bundles.

The Fano matroid  is one of the most important on matroid theory
essentially because, among other things, it is the only minimal binary
irregular matroid. The ground set for  is

 
The bases of  are all those subsets of  with three elements except
the seven subsets    
   and 
. The dual  of  can be obtained from the complements
of the bases of .

In order to link  with octonions let us introduce the set

 
We shall denote by , 
, , , 
,  and 
 the corresponding subsets , with 
. Let us write an octonion in the form

 
where  denotes the identity. The imaginary units  determine
the product of octonions through the formula

 
where  is the Kronecker delta and  
 are the fully antisymmetric structure constants. By
taking the  equal to  or  for each of the seven
combinations  we can obtain every value of .

The basic associator of any three imaginary units  and 
is

 
where  is a fully antisymmetric four index tensor. This
means that the octonion (Cayley) algebra is not associative and in fact it
is an alternative algebra. It turns out that  and 
 are dual to each other. Specifically, they are related by

 
where  is the fully antisymmetric Levi-Civita tensor,
with .

Anticipating a connection between  and octonions we observe that
giving the numerical values  for the indices of  and
using (13) we get the other seven subsets of  with four elements used to
define  For instance, if we consider  then we have 
 and (13) gives  which leads to the circuit
subset  of 

Now, consider the matrix

 
If we denote by  the columns of this matrix, it is found that the
bases of the matrix  are those subsets with three columns except the
subsets , , 
, , 
,  and 
 This shows that  is not only realizable
by the matrix  but also that it is a binary matroid. Actually, we have
performed the map  and consequently the ground set 
 becomes 
and the subsets  are mapped to 

In principle, we can associate the chirotope

 
to . But one of the intriguing properties of  is that it is
not orientable matroid. Without formally proving this fact (see Ref. 9 for a
formal proof), one can verify by hand that  does
not satisfy property . Anyhow, a relationship between 
 and the structure constants for octonions 
 can be accomplished by means of the formula

 
where  can be identified with the chirotope
of the uniform matroid  which is an excluded minor for 
-representability, where  denotes a finite field of order  The
expression (16) shows that  and 
 determine . This means that 
and the octonions are complementary concepts of the oriented uniform matroid 
 structure.

In order to understand further the formula (16) let us compute 
 for the different values of the indices . Since
the different  correspond to linear dependent vector columns of 
we find that the chirotope  vanishes for the
different . Hence, using (15) we find that the only nonvanishing
terms of  are

 
On the other hand, for the different non-zero values of the octonions
structure constants , we can choose any consistent
sign values for the different . We shall make the following choice

 
We observe that  takes sign values different from zero precisely when
the corresponding  takes sign values equal to zero and vice versa.
Therefore, this is another way of showing that  and  are
complementary concepts.

Now if we put together the sign set combinations (17) and (18) according to
(16) we get the sign values for  which can
be identified with the chirotope of the oriented uniform matroid 
 From (17) we can check by a direct computation that  is
not orientable , while from (17) and (18) we can verify the orientability of 
.

How is the above matroid-octonions scenario related to -holonomy of 
 supergravity? As it is known recent investigations of M-theory have
suggested to take -holonomy seriously for the  manifold of 
supergravity. In particular, by a generalization of the self-duality
condition in four dimensions to eight dimensions Nishino and Rajpoot
have shown a mechanism that implements the symmetry in
supersymmetric models in . The interesting thing about this
mechanism is that it opens the possibility of obtaining the supersymmetric
vector multiplet with the full  Lorentz covariance reduced to 
by dimensional reduction. The generalized self-duality condition used by
Nishino and Rajpoot can be derived from the definitions

 
and 
 
and by using (13). In fact, from (13), (19) and (20) it is found that 
, with the Greek indices running from  to ,
satisfies the self-duality formula

 
This extension of the octonionic relation (13) from  to  must have
his corresponding extension in matroid theory in connection with . In
particular, this observation suggested the extension of the formula (16) to
the form

 
Our task is now to find now the mathematical meaning of 
 and  First
of all, since the chirotopes are defined in terms of the bases of a matroid,
it follows that  should
correspond to a four-rank matroid. Further, 
 must have the property to be reduced to the chirotope 
 associated to  This means that such a four-rank
matroid should provide an extension of  In other words 
should be a minor of such a four-rank matroid. Moreover, the self-duality of 
 should imply a self-duality not only
for  but also for 
. This means that the four-rank matroid must
be a self-dual matroid. Happily, there is a four rank matroid satisfying all
these requirements. In fact, the affine matroid  is a self-dual
four-rank matroid and among its minors it has the matroid 
Specifically,  is not graphic, nor cographic, and every
single-element deletion is isomorphic to  and every
single-element contraction is isomorphic to . Furthermore, one finds
that the chirotope  associated
to  is self dual and has all the desired properties.

In connection with  we already
mentioned that this object should be self-dual. It must also correspond to
the chirotope of a four rank matroid. Since 
 when  and 
 when 
 we find that  should be
associated to a four-rank matroid with an underlying set 
and with its bases given by all of the four element subsets of . The
candidate is, of course, the uniform matroid  which is orientable
In general, the uniform matroid  has the self dual property 
 and therefore we discover that  is also
self-dual as required.

 

IV. GRAVITOID THEORY 

A physical theory that combines the concepts of matroid and graviton we
shall call it gravitoid theory. From this definition it turns out that the
connection of the Fano matroid  and the affine matroid  with 
 supergravity discussed in the previous section can be considered as
part of the gravitoid theory.

Perhaps the simplest motivation to be interested in gravitoid theory may
follow from the heuristic observation that since the graviton can be
represented classically as a symmetric second-rank matrix tensor and a
matroid is a more general concept than a matrix one should expect that a
graviton-matroid connection may lead to an extension of the concept of the
graviton. (It seems to be reasonable to call such a generalized
gravitational structure the gravitoid.) The real motivation, however, may
arise from the idea of establishing a duality principle in M-theory. As we
mentioned in the introduction, duality is one of the most attractive
features in matroid theory. In a certain sense, matroid theory is the theory
of duality. Therefore, matroid theory offers an excellent mathematical
framework to incorporate a duality principle in M-theory. It turns out that
although the gravitoid theory may be interesting by itself, it can also
teach us, among other things, how to achieve such a quest.

Before we discuss the formal expected approach for the gravitoid theory, it
is first convenient to briefly mention the recently proposed mathematical
formalism of matroid bundle. This mathematical structure is the
combinatorial analogue of real vector bundles in which a "base space" is a
simplicial complex and the "fibers" are oriented matroids. The idea of
matroid bundles arose from the concept of combinatorial differential
manifolds introduced by MacPherson in 1993 and evolved very rapidly
on several fronts. In particular, a close connection between matroid bundle
theory and characteristic classes has emerged.

Two main ideas make the matroid bundle structure possible: oriented matroids
and simplicial complexes. In order to define formally matroid bundles we
closely follow Anderson's work (see Ref. 15). Let 
 be a real vector bundle, where  is a dimensional base
space. We assume  to be a triangulable compact space, i.e.,  has an
associated simplicial complex. For each point  of  the vectors 
 span the space . We can associate
an oriented matroid with underlaying set  to the vectors 
.

A rank- matroid bundle is a pair  where  is a
partially ordered set and  is a rank- oriented matroid
associated to each element  so that  weakly maps to 
 whenever . Intuitively, and
in analogy to the case of a real vector bundle,  corresponds to the
base space  and the oriented matroid  to the fiber of the
bundle  (For a complete exposition see Ref. 15).

In particular, in the case of tangent matroid bundles one associates an
oriented matroid to each tangent space and one realizes a differentiable
manifold by a combinatorial differential manifold. In what follows, we shall
focus our attention on this special kind of matroid bundle.

In order to introduce the gravitoid concept it is first convenient to
recall, in brief, how the metric is introduced in a tangent bundle. Consider
a tangent bundle over the differentiable manifold :

 
Here, the tangent space  plays the role of the fiber of .
(We assume that  is a triangulable manifold.) Of course,  is a
vector space and consequently  provides an example of a real vector
bundle. The dual of  is the cotangent bundle  defined in
the form

 
where  is the dual vector space of . Thus,
whereas  is a vector space of contravariant vectors, 
 is a vector space of covariant vectors (1-forms). Moreover, it can be
proved that the dimension of  is equal to the dimension of 
.

Take   as the base
vectors of  and  as the corresponding bases (one forms)
of . Consider a vector 
 and its dual one-form . The tangent space
isomorphism

 
has the component representation

 
Expressions (25) or (26) can be used to define an inner product 
, where 
is the set of real numbers. In component representation this leads to

 
which by virtue of (26) can also be written as

 
Usually the matrix  is called a metric if it is symmetric and
positive definite, so  has the meaning of square norm
of . However, in the case of a pseudo Riemannian space the positive
definite condition can be dropped and we can still call the matrix 
 a metric (or pseudometric). Moreover, in nonsymmetric gravitational
theories the matrix  does not even satisfy the symmetric
condition. Therefore, in order to be as general as possible we shall call a
metric just the isomorphism (25), without specifying any additional
condition.

Let us now return to our goal of finding a mathematical structure for the
gravitoid system. In the case of a tangent matroid bundle,  is
replaced by an oriented matroid  and the base space is
replaced by a simplicial complex . Just like one can associate to 
 the dual tangent space  one can associate to 
 the dual oriented matroid 
Thus, one should expect that the isomorphism 
 leads to the corresponding isomorphism

 
In general if an oriented matroid is realizable, its dual is also
realizable. Therefore, if  is realizable then 
 is also realizable. Let us denote by  the 
matrix over a field  representing the vector matroid 
 The ground set  of  are the columns
of . Similarly let us denote by  the corresponding matrix
associated to the dual vector matroid  In
this context the map (29) has the component representation

 
where  and .

Now, the question arises whether there is a relation between the two maps 
and . The map  can be understood as the
combinatorial analogue of the metric . For this reason we shall call 
 the matroid metric. Since the simplicial complex 
is homeomorphic to the smooth manifold  i.e., 
 is a homeomorphism, we have the induced map 
. Hence, (25) and (29) imply that there must
exist a map ,
where  This result establishes the
connection between  and .

Our next step is to associate a gravitational theory to the matroid metric 
. For this purpose we first need to introduce the
combinatorial analogue of a connection and curvature. At this respect we
shall relay on Ref. 8. The idea is to define 1-cocycle  and
2-cocycle  on each local system on 
. It is worth mentioning that, in order to find a combinatorial
formula for the Pontrjagin classes, Gelfand and MacPerson consider 
and  as the combinatorial analogue of connection and curvature of 
, respectively.

The quest now is to find a relation between  and . In
principle, we can achieve this by applying a Palatini method to certain
proposed action  The question is, therefore, what
is the form of ? A partial answer to this question
may come from the link between matroid theory and Chern-Simons theory found
in Ref. 7. For this reason let us briefly review the main ideas of Ref. 7.

It is known that if we choose   and 
for all the link components then the Witten's partition function

 
where  is the Chern-Simons action

 
and  is the Wilson line

 
reproduces the Jones polynomial

 
Here, , with  the generators of the Lie
algebra of a gauge group  and the symbol  means the path-ordering
along the knots  The parameter  is 
 
and  denotes the Jones polynomial satisfying the skein relation;

 
where  and  are the standard notation for overcrossing,
undercrossing and zero crossing.

On the other hand, Thistlethwaite showed that if  is an
alternating link and  the corresponding planar graph, then
the Jones polynomial  is equal to the Tutte polynomial 
 up to a sign and a factor power of  Specifically, we
have

 
where  is the writhe and  and  are the rank and the nullity of 
 respectively Here,  is the Jones polynomial of the
alternating link  The Tutte polynomial associated to each graph 
 is a polynomial  with the property that if 
 is composed solely of isthmus and loops then 
 where  is the number of isthmuses and  is
the number of loops. The polynomial  satisfies the skein
relation

 
where  and  are obtained
by deleting and contracting respectively an edge that is neither a loop nor
an isthmus of .

A theorem due to Tutte allows to compute  from
the maximal trees of . In fact, Tutte proved that if 
 denotes the set of maximal trees in a graph , 
denotes the number of internally active edges in  and 
refers to the number of the externally active edges in  (with
respect to a given maximal tree ) then the Tutte
polynomial is given by the formula

 
where the sum is over all elements of . It is worth mentioning
that the Tutte polynomial  computed according to
(39) uses the concept of a graphic matroid  defined as the
pair , where  is the set of edges of .

Therefore, we have the connections 
. These bridges
allow to transfer information from  to  and conversely
 In particular, if we change the notation 
 and 
 one discovers that the duality property of the Tutte
polynomial

 
can be expressed as

 
and consequently from (34) and (37) we find that the partition function 
 gets the dual property

 
(see Ref. 7 for details). This expression is of special relevance because it
is exactly the kind of symmetry that one may expect in M-theory. Writing 
, where  is a constant parameter (perhaps complex) one
finds that the symmetry (42) in  is related to the
S-duality symmetry  which is one of the
key symmetries linking different superstring theories.

In the gravitoid theory one should expect similar, but not quite the same
construction as the matroid-Chern-Simons approach. First of all, the
Chern-Simons action in (31) is not written in abstract combinatorial terms.
(Perhaps, here again the Gelfand-MacPerson procedure could be
useful.) Secondly, the matroid theory enters in the scenario via graph
theory. But graph theory is just an example of the simplicial complex
formalism, so one needs the analogue for the Tutte polynomial for higher
dimensional simplexes and, as far as we know, no such a mathematical
structure is available in the mathematical literature. Nevertheless, let us
just simply write the expected abstract symmetry that the gravitoid
partition function should have, namely

 
where  is the 2-cocycle associated to 
. Since every matroid  satisfies

 
we should have . The fact that any
matroid has its corresponding dual matroid is translated as a dual symmetry
of the partition function .
This is a remarkable consequence of using matroid theory as a mathematical
framework. In order to have a complete picture in the expression (43) it is
necessary to find the combinatorial analogue of the concept of classical
action. Although this seems to be not a trivial problem, we can speculate
that the answer should be something similar to the combinatorial formula for
the Pontrjagin classes due to Gelfand and MacPherson. Oriented
matroids and the simplicial complex formalism allowed these authors to find
the combinatorial analogue of the Chern-Weil formula

 
Here,  represents an integration over a fiber. In Chern-Weil
theory the curvature is defined by  where 
 is a one form induced by the connection on the bundle . In (45) 
 is the fiber dimension of . The combinatorial analogue of (45)
proposed by Gelfand and MacPherson is

 
where  is a fixing cycle for the simplicial complex  (For details
and further information we refer the reader to the original Ref. 25 of
Gelfand and MacPherson.)

Since in matroid theory we have that any two connected matroids 
 and  satisfy the expression 

 we discover the remarkable result that

 
and

 
if and only if

 

Besides its importance in gravitoid theory, the equation (43) may motivate a
similar construction for M-theory. As it was mentioned before the five known
superstring theories in 9+1 dimensions can be understood via duality as a
different vacuum of the M-theory. Therefore, one should expect that the
partition function associated to M-theory should be invariant under certain
duality symmetry such as (42) or (43).

 

VI. COMMENTS 

Matroid bundle is a remarkable mathematical structure that promises many
interesting applications not only in mathematics but also in physics. In the
present work we have shown the possibility of using matroid bundle as a
framework for a new gravitational theory called gravitoid theory. The
essential idea in this theory is to combine the concepts of graviton and
matroid. One of the hopes is that gravitoid theory shows us how to develop
M-theory from M(atroid)-theory. In essence we have proposed a partition
function with a duality symmetry for the gravitoid system which may suggest
a similar structure for M-theory.

Our procedure was focused on realizable tangent matroid bundles. However,
since not all of the oriented matroids are realizable there must be more
general tangent matroid bundles and therefore a more general gravitoid
theory. Mathematically, a similar question has been considered in Ref. 14
where it was raised the question whether all combinatorial differential
manifolds are topological manifolds.

One of the attractive features of matroid bundle is that it offers the
possibility of using new combinatorial techniques to study characteristic
classes. In particular, it has been proved that matroid bundles may be the
basis for new studies on characteristic classes of differential manifolds.
Examples of this fact is the Gelfand-MacPherson's combinatorial formula
 for the Pontrjagin classes and the Anderson-Davis's
combinatorialization of the Stiefel-Whitney classes and Euler
classes. These characteristic classes play an essential role in theoretical
physics. For instance, Stiefel-Whitney classes are useful to determine the
spin structure of a smooth manifold and Euler classes and Pontrjagin classes
are useful topological invariants in the formulation of the
MacDowell-Mansouri's formalism (see Refs. 27 and references there in) in
supergravity. These observations suggest and motivate the search of a link
between the gravitoid theory and these combinatorial characteristic classes.

Gravitoid theory can be understood as the combinatorialization of the
bosonic sector of supergravity in any dimension and in particular in .
In view of the MacPherson


 

s conjecture that all characteristic classes of a vector bundle should have
their corresponding characteristic classes in matroid bundle one should
expect combinatorialization of Chern-Simons theory and topological gravity
. From this perspective it is tempting to speculate about the
possibility that gravitoid theory may contain, in fact, the
combinatorialization of topological gravity.

There are many other open questions. Is gravitoid theory an alternative for
quantum gravity? What is the supersymmetrization of the gravitoid theory?
What is the precise relation between the gravitoid theory and 
supergravity? It seems that the combinatorialization of the Pontrjagin
classes implies an exotic combinatorial  sphere. Is the gravitoid theory
related to this exotic structure via  supergravity? Our hope is that
the present work stimulates a research to answer these and other related
questions.

Acknowledgment:  We would like to thank C. Austin for
calling our attention about the Anderson's references. We also like to thank
to J. Saucedo and G. Compoy for helpful comments.

 99 
  P. K. Townsend, "Four lectures on M-theory," 
Proceedings of the ICTP on the Summer School on High Energy Physics  and
Cosmology , June 1996, hep-th/9612121.

  M. J. Duff, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 11,  5623 (1996),
hep-th/9608117.

  P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 460,  506
(1996).

  M. Green, V. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstrings Theory 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987) Vol I and II; M. Kaku, 
Introduction to Superstrings  (Spring-Verlag, Berlin, 1990).

  H. Whitney, Am. J. Math. 57,  509 (1935).

  J. A. Nieto, Rev. Mex. Fis. 44,  358 (1998).

  J. A. Nieto and M. C. Marin, J. Math. Phys. 41,  7997
(2000).

  J. A. Nieto, "Searching for a connection between matroid
theory and string theory," hep-th/0212100.

  J. G. Oxley, Martroid Theory , (Oxford University
Press, New York, 1992)

  D. J. A. Welsh, Martroid Theory , (Academic, London,
1976).

  R. J. Wilson, Introduction to Graph Theory , 3rd ed.
(Wiley, New York, 1895).

  J. P. S. Kung, A Source Book in Matroid Theory ,
(Birkhauser, Boston, 1986).

  K. Ribnikov, Ana lisis Combinatorio , (Editorial
Mir, Moscu , 1988)

  R. D. Macpherson, "Combinatorial differential manifolds: a
symposium in honor of John Milnor's sixtieth birthay," pp. 203-221 in
Topological methods on modern mathematics (Stony Brook, NY, 1991), edited by
L. H. Goldberg and A. Phillips, Houston, 1993.

  L. Anderson, New Perspectives. in Geom. Comb. 38 , 1
(1999).

  D. Biss, "Some applications of oriented matroids to
topology," PhD. thesis, MIT, 2002.

  Babson, "A combinatorial flag space," PhD. thesis, MIT,
(1993).

  A. Bjorner, M. Las Verganas, N. White and G. M. Ziegler, 
Oriented Martroids , (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993).

  H. Whitney, Trans. Amer. J. Math. 34 , 339 (1932)

  L. Gutierrez-Novoa, Pacific J. Math. 15 , 1337 (1965).

  F. Englert, Phys. Lett. B 119,  339 (1982); F. Gursey
and C. Tze, Phys. Lett. B 127 , 191 (1983).

  I. L. Kantor and A.S. Solodovnikov, Hypercomplex
Numbers; An Elementary Introduction to Algebras,  (Spring Verlag, New York,
1989); J. C. Baez, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 39 , 145 (2002).

  H. Nishino and S. Rajpoot, "Octonions, G(2) symmetry,
generalized selfduality and supersymmetries in dimensions D less than or
equal 8," hep-th/0210132.

  I. M. Gelfand and R. D. Macpherson, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
26 , 304 (1992).

  L. Anderson and J. F. Davis, "Mod 2 Cohomolgy of
Combinatorial Grassmannians," math.GT/9911158.

  M. Thistlethwaite, Topology 26 , 297 (1987).

  H. Garcia-Compean, J. A. Nieto, O. Obregon and C. Ramirez,
Phys. Rev. D 59 , 124003 (1999); J. A. Nieto and J. Socorro Phys.
Rev. D 59 , 041501 (1999); J. A. Nieto, J. Socorro and O. Obregon,
Phys. Rev. Lett.76 , 3482 (1996).

  E. Witten, Phys. Lett. B 206 , 601 (1988).


----------------------
Visite a la Universidad Autonoma de Sinaloa http://www.uasnet.mx

