

15cm
22cm
-10mm


ANTHROPIC ESTIMATES

 OF THE CHARGE AND MASS OF THE PROTON 
Alberta-Thy-03-04, hep-th/0203051  

Don N. Page
Internet address:
don@phys.ualberta.ca 


Institute for Theoretical Physics

Department of Physics, University of Alberta

Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2J1
 
(2003 Feb. 13) 
 

18 pt

	By combining a renormalization group argument
relating the charge  and mass  of the proton
by  (in Planck units)
with the Carter-Carr-Rees anthropic argument that gives
an independent approximate relation 
between these two constants, both can be crudely estimated.
These equations have the factor of  and the exponent of 20
which depend upon known discrete parameters
(e.g., the number of generations of quarks and leptons,
and the number of spatial dimensions),
but they contain no  continuous observed parameters.
Their solution gives the charge of the proton correct to within about 8,
though the mass estimate is off by a factor of about 1000
(16 error on a logarithmic scale).
When one adds a fudge factor of 10 previously given by Carr and Rees,
the agreement for the charge is within about 2,
and the mass is off by a factor of about 3
(2.4 error on a logarithmic scale).
If this 10 were replaced by 15, the charge agrees
within 1.1 and the mass itself agrees within 0.7.



18 pt
Introduction 

	One prominent idea of recent decades is that
some of the 'constants of physics' may only be constant
(or nearly so) in our observable region of the universe
(our 'subuniverse')
but may take on a range of values in the entire universe
(or 'multiverse,' though I shall eschew this terminology here).
Two examples to be considered here are the electromagnetic
fine structure constant, 
(the square of the charge of the proton, , in
the Planck units 
I shall use here), 
and the gravitational fine structure constant for the proton,

(the square of the mass of the proton, , in Planck units).
If these 'constants' vary widely over the entire universe,
most of the universe may be unsuitable for observers,
and hence one might expect that observed values would
statistically have a narrower range.
One goal of a complete theory of physics and of observership
would be to calculate the statistical distribution of
the observed values of such 'constants.'

	Of course, we are nowhere near achieving such a goal.
However, here I wish to use come crude hypotheses and arguments
about the conditions that might be conducive for typical observers
in order to come up with some rough values that typical observers
might be expected to see for the electromagnetic and gravitational
fine structure constants.  (Such arguments often go under the name
of anthropic arguments, but they are really about observership
rather than about anthropos .  Because these arguments can be made
only very crudely at present, they are often deprecated,
but I shall take the view that they are just the beginning hints
of what should in principle be possible with a complete theory
of the universe, including the physical conditions for observership.)

	Rather remarkably, one finds that
without using any observational data except for certain discrete
integers (e.g., the dimension of space, the number of generations
of quarks and leptons, etc.), one can get crude estimates
for typical observed values of both of these parameters
that are in the right ballpark to explain our particular observations.
In this paper I shall show how one can get a crude estimate
for the magnitude of the charge of the proton
( in Planck units)
that differs from what we observe by only a few percent.
One can also get a somewhat more crude estimate
for the mass of the proton ( in Planck units)
that differs by about 3 orders of magnitude
from the value that we observe.
However, since the observed value is about 19 orders
of magnitude smaller than unity,
on a logarithmic scale the crude estimate is not that far off.

	Furthermore, one just needs a single previously-published fudge
factor of 10 to reduce the error to about 2 for the charge of the proton
(or to within 1.1 error for the charge
and to within 0.7 error for the mass if this 10 were replaced by 15).
Of course, it is a cheat
to take these revised values as predictions,
but to the degree that it is not implausible that a factor
of the order of 10 or 15 could arise from a more detailed calculation,
it is not implausible that such a calculation could give
a statistical distribution of observed values of the
charge and mass of the proton
such that our observations of these values would be typical.
In other words, the 'errors' of the crude estimates
previously mentioned,
which do not use as input any observed continuous parameters
like the fudge factors of the present paragraph,
seem small enough not to be fatal to the form of the argument. 

The Carter-Carr-Rees anthropic argument 

	We will need two independent formulas relating
the charge and mass of the proton in order to deduce
approximations for their values.  First I shall give
the Carter-Carr-Rees formula,
and then in the next section I shall add my own renormalization
group argument to get a new formula that one can combine
with the Carter-Carr-Rees one to get actual estimates
for the charge and mass of the proton.

	Brandon Carter noted that typical observers
may live on planets, as we do, and that planetary formation
may depend upon the formation of convective red stars.
For the existence of these he deduced that
  
where  is the mass of the electron.
Then Bernard Carr and Martin Reesnoted that if  were a lot smaller than the
right hand side of Eq. (),
one might not get supernovae that are necessary
for producing the elements needed for observers like us.
Putting these two arguments together,
one may conclude that for observers like us
that live on planets and have a complex chemistry,
one may need
  
 
 	One might alternatively write this relation as
  
with a 'Carter constant'  that is predicted to be
observed to be of the order of unity by typical observers.
We observe it to be  in our sub-universe.
 
	In their Eq. (58), Carr and Reesalso cited Carter in noting
four key coincidences of nuclear physics that may be
necessary for observers like us.  Together they imply
what Carr and Rees write, in Eq. (45) of their paper,
as
  
The 10 is really just an order-of-magnitude estimate
for a numerical coefficient that is not predicted precisely,
a 'fudge factor' as it were, so to get relations
without including unpredicted factors, one might write this
relation merely as
  
Alternatively, one might write this relation as
  
with a 'Carr-Rees constant'  that is predicted
to be somewhat larger than unity.
To give an order of magnitude estimate, Carr and Rees say .
We actually observe it to be  in our subuniverse
.

	If we now combine these two relations
without the numerical factors of  and , we get
what I shall call the basic Carter-Carr-Rees relation
  
which is also listed explicitly as Eq. (57) of.

	If one does include the fudge factor of 10
that Carr and Rees include in their Eq. (45),
copied as Eq. () above,
then one gets what I shall call the fudged
Carter-Carr-Rees relation
  
Alternatively, one can write
  
where .
In our subuniverse, we observe ,
or .
Since  is fairly close to ,
as a mnemonic device one can remember
a fairly good approximation to Eq. ()
in our subuniverse as the "2-3-4" formula
  

	Thus we have one rough relation
between  and ,
or between the charge  and mass  of the proton.
To get an estimate for both values, we need another relation.
This I shall provide by a crude renormalization-group (RG)
analysis of supersymmetric (SUSY)
Grand Unified Theory (GUT) couplings
in the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM).

	But before I do that, I should note that the Carr-Rees
paper, though preceding most of the development of the MSSM,
did also propose a second relation between 
and  based upon some arguments about
a self-consistent quantum electrodynamics, namely Eq. (54)
of, which I shall call the Carr-Rees log relation:
  

	Although Carr and Rees did not carry this further
in their paper, it is trivial to combine Eqs. ()
and () [their Eqs. (57) and (54) respectively]
to estimate that , which is about 66
of the value we observe in our subuniverse,
,
and to estimate that ,
about 7 times the value we observe in our subuniverse,


(the 12th smallest Mersenne prime and largest prime found
without computers, in 1876 by Edouard Lucas).
It is remarkable that even these very crude estimates
give values for the charge and mass of the proton that
are within the right ballpark for our observations.

The renormalization group argument 

	Now I shall show how to deduce a better relation
between  and 
by using a renormalization group analysis of
supersymmetric grand unified theories, e.g.,
that of William Marciano and Goran Senjanovic.

	I shall assume that there are  generations
of quarks and leptons and  relatively light Higgs doublets
in low-energy ,
which are discrete choices that themselves might by justified
in the future by some anthropic argument that typical observers
would see those values.

	However, I shall not use any observational
results of parameters that are believed to have a potentially
continuous range (like the charge and mass of the proton).
(More precisely, parameters like the charge and mass of the proton
are not now known to be limited to discrete values,
so for the sake of argument I shall assume that they can in principle
have continuous ranges,
even though a future theory could conceivably show that they
really are limited to certain discrete values.)

	Then, to one-loop order and ignoring additive numbers like
, the results of Marciano and Senjanovicimply that the  inverse
coupling constants, and the inverse electromagnetic fine-structure
constant, run with the energy scale ,
in the range  between the weak energy scale 
and the unification mass scale , in the following way,
when  and :
  
 
	Now the proton mass is set roughly by the scale  at which
the  coupling constant  becomes large, say
  
For this equation to be approximately valid despite the fact
that the proton mass  is not in the range
 where Eqs. ()-() are valid,
I shall assume that on a logarithmic scale,
 is fairly close to , in comparison with
a much greater logarithmic range where
Eqs. ()-() are valid,
as is indeed the case in the subuniverse that we observe.

	If we approximate the electromagnetic coupling constant
at zero momentum transfer,
which is the quantity we have been calling ,
with the electromagnetic coupling constant at energy scale
, we get from Eqs. () and () that
  
 
 	The next approximation we shall make is that on a logarithmic
scale, the unification mass  is nearly the Planck mass ,
so we can replace  with
 in Eq. ().
This then gives us our new relation between
the electromagnetic and gravitational fine structure constants
(or between the charge and mass of the proton in Planck units,
as given in the Abstract):
  
 
 	One can note that if we stick with  generations
of quarks and leptons but allow the number
of relatively light Higgs doublets, , to be different from
its minimal value of 2, then we get instead
  

	Alternatively, one can replace the approximate
Eqs. ()-() with the exact equation
  
(taking  to be defined by this equation)
and the approximate relation
  
Since  must be an even integer, the right hand side
of Eq. () must be an integer, 10 if ,
whereas we can take the left hand side, ,
to be defined by Eq. ().
In our subuniverse, we observe .
This is close enough to 10 that we might conclude
that it is likely that our assumption of  is correct
for our subuniverse.

	Incidentally, to get some feel for the accuracy
of the approximations above, one may note that at the same
level of approximation and truncation of the MSSM
renormalization group equations,
one gets that the weak-mixing angle  gives
  
about 13 less than the observed value 0.231 in our subuniverse
.

Combining the two relations between  and  

	Now we can combine some form of the Carter-Carr-Rees
anthropic relation between  and 
with the new MSSM renormalization group approximate
Eq. () to derive approximate estimates for values of both
 and  that a typical observer might be expected
to see.

	If we use the basic Carter-Carr-Rees relation above,
Eq. (), ,
then we get for the electromagnetic fine structure constant 
or the charge  of the proton in Planck units,
  
with the solution
  
The prediction for a typical observed value of the charge
of the proton is then
  
within about 8 of the experimental value
observed in our subuniverse near our present time and location,

 coulomb.
   
	Similarly, we can combine Eqs. () and ()
to get an equation for the gravitational fine structure constant
 or the mass  of the proton
in Planck units,
  
This has the solution
  
or
  

	In this case the agreement is not so good,
as the estimated mass of the proton
comes out to be only about 0.1 of the value
we observe in our subuniverse.
The large magnitude of the error can be attributed
to the the large exponent of 20 in
the basic Carter-Carr-Rees relation of Eq. (),
.
This makes it so that a relatively small error
in the estimate for  can get converted
into a relatively large error in .
However, since  is so small in Planck units,
it might be more natural to make the comparison
on a logarithmic scale, in which case one gets
  
which has an error of less than 16.

	Although of course it is a cheat
for getting a true estimate,
one can improve the estimate by using
the fudged Carter-Carr-Rees relation, Eq. (),
,
along with the MSSM renormalization group approximate
Eq. () to get the fudged improved equations
  
  
The approximate numerical solutions of these fudged equations are
  
  
  
  

	Thus the fudged equations give an estimated charge
of the proton within about 2.25 of the observed value
nearby in our subuniverse, and an estimated mass of the proton
within a factor of 3 of the observed value.
Of course, the factor of 10 in Eq. (),
which gets raised to the 4th power in Eq. (),
was just an order-of-magnitude estimate that was no doubt biased
by the observed value of this factor in our subuniverse,
so it is not expected to be reliable.
However, it does show that if one combines my
new MSSM renormalization group approximate Eq. ()
(having no continuous free parameters)
with the previously-published anthropic equations with
this previously-published fudge factor,
one gets a remarkable agreement with the observed
charge of the proton, nearly 98 of the observed value,
and reasonably good agreement with the observed mass,
nearly 98 of its logarithm.

	More importantly, since it shows that one needs
a fudge factor, like the factor of 10 in Eq. (),
that is of the same general
order of magnitude as unity to get good agreement with
the observations in our subuniverse, it does make it
plausible to conjecture that when we gain sufficient
knowledge to be able to calculate more precisely
the statistical distribution of observed values
of the charge and mass of the proton over all subuniverses,
the values we observe in our subuniverse will turn out
to be typical, even if the values can vary
widely over the full range of subuniverses.

	If one cheats even more and uses the
MSSM renormalization group approximate Eq. ()
with the 2-3-4 formula (),
one gets an even better fit to our observations,
with the charge of the proton being predicted
to be 0.986 of the observed value,
and the mass of the proton being predicted to be
0.760 of the observed value.
(This replacement is equivalent to replacing
the Carr-Rees fudge factor of 10,
in Eq. () where it is raised to the 4th power,
with .)
Since the new fudge factor of  in the 2-3-4 formula ()
was chosen as a simple expression close to the numerical
value for that equation to be true in our subuniverse,
it cannot be counted as a prediction at all.
Then the main error in the 'predicted' charge and mass of the
proton comes from the
MSSM renormalization group approximate Eq. ().

	Alternatively, one can choose  in Eq. ()
so that when it is combined with Eq. ()
to get separate equations for  and ,
  
  
one fits the observed value of either  or 
and then predicts the other one.

	For example, if one uses our observed value of ,
,
and solves Eq. () for
  
and then inserts this into Eq. ()
to solve for ,
one gets a value for the mass of the proton that
is too large by a factor of about 2.615,
rather oppositely to the previous predicted values
that were all too small.

	On the other hand, if one uses our observed value of ,
,
and solves Eq. () for
  
and then inserts this into Eq. ()
to solve for ,
one gets a value for the charge of the proton
that is 0.989 of the observed value.

	A possibility very similar to this last one is to
replace the 10 in Eqs. ()-() with 15, which is
equivalent to using  in
Eqs. ()-().  Then
one gets 
and ,
so then the errors are less than 1.1 and 0.7 respectively.

	To fit our observed values
of both the charge and mass of the proton to better than 99 accuracy,
we need not only a single fudge factor like  in Eq. (),
but also a second fudge factor in Eq. (),
such as the  in Eq. ().
As noted previously, if we set ,
as well as , then we can reproduce
our observed values of both the charge and mass of the proton.
However, with 3 generations of quarks and leptons,
and the minimal number (2) of relatively light Higgs doublets,
the coefficient  in Eq. () is predicted to be precisely 10.
Thus if we did put a fudge factor into that equation,
it should be somewhere else.

	The main error of Eq. () seems to come from
the approximations that on a logarithmic scale,
the unification mass is close to the Planck mass
and the weak energy scale is close to the proton mass.
The first of these errors tends to increase the right hand side
above the left hand side, and the second tends to decrease it.
If we wildly conjecture that the ratios of the unification mass
to the Planck mass and of the weak energy scale to the proton mass
might be expected anthropically to go as some powers of the running
coupling constants at those scales,
then we might naively expect that a first correction to
Eq. () would be to replace it with
  
for some exponent  that might conceivably be predictable.
If we then set  for another exponent 
(where here and in the following equation  means the base
of the natural logarithms rather than the charge of the proton),
then Eq. () becomes
  
Here the factor of  in Eq. ()
and the exponent of 20 in Eq. ()
are determined by discrete parameters of the crude theory
used to derive these equations,
but  and  are not so determined, at least not yet.
The simplest version of the argument above would
just suggest that  and  should both be roughly 0.

	Using both fudge factors  and 
in Eqs. () and Eq. (),
we can fit the observations in our subuniverse
with  and .

	Now the point of a complete anthropic argument
would not be to predict precise values for  and 
(which would give precise values for the charge and mass of the proton),
but rather to predict a joint statistical distribution for their
observed values over the entire universe.
The simple argument given above just suggests that typical observers,
if they are like us in living on planets, having complex chemistry, etc.,
might expect to see values of  and  that are not
too different from zero
(i.e., having magnitudes not very large in comparison with unity).
This does fit the observations in our subuniverse,
where both  and  are even somewhat smaller than unity.
In this way our observations are consistent with
the simple argument given above.

	Of course, this consistency just means that the simple argument
passed its first test in not being falsified
where it conceivably could have been,
but the consistency does not confirm the basic truth
of the simple argument.
For example, we do not yet know whether the charge and mass of the proton
really do have a distribution of different values over all subuniverses.
However, it is at least encouraging that one can find a simple argument
of this form that does so well in giving rough values for our
observations of the charge and mass of the proton.

	I have benefited from discussions on this topic with Bruce
Campbell, Gerald Cleaver, Valeri Frolov, Gordon Kane, Sharon Morsink,
Roger Penrose, Lenny Susskind, and no doubt others.  This research was
supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada.




4pt

 99 

  B. Carter,
in M. S. Longair (ed.),
Confrontation of Cosmological Theory with Observational Data 
(Riedel, Dordrecht, 1974), pp. 291-298.

  B. J. Carr and M. J. Rees,
Nature 278 , 605-612 (1979).

  Particle Data Group,
Phys. Rev. D66 , 010001-1 - 010001-973 (2002).

  B. Carter,
"Large Numbers in Astrophysics and Cosmology"
(paper presented at Clifford Centennial Meeting, Princeton, 1970).

  J. J. O'Connor and E. F. Robertson,

http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/history/Mathematicians/Lucas.html .

  W. J. Marciano and G. Senjanovic,
Phys. Rev. D25 , 3092-3095 (1982).





