0 


    n=2 deformed - draft    





draftcontrol0 



by 60
255 
255 by-60255 by:255<10 0255  
//    




















































 


  #1  

 

  
   
   Abstract 1000
   
     
 







     	to  
	-to   
     to   
           






          	 



















#1                    
                    *() to -0.2cm#1   
                    equation  
                     
                    #1           
                                            
                                                                                 


  
    #1 #1  
  
    [#1]#2 #2  
  
    #1  
                  
                           
           
           





















11in 
     -.3in   
   -.6in 



























i.e.  
e.g.  

3pt 1em  
                     width3pt
                     width0pt height 0pt depth0.5em
                     to 0cm
                     #1       


A  
A  
  
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
G  
H  
I  
J  
K  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
Q  
R  
S  
T  
U  
V  
W  

C  
N  
P  
Q  
R  
Z  

 
 
e  
i  
  
Tr  
Re  
Im  
id  

d ^#1 #2 
 #1 

12  
 '  

    #1 _#2    
height.#2pt  
 width.#2pt height#1pt #1pt
 width.#2pt height.#2pt    

  12 15  9 12  6.3 9  4.5 9    




 
Q  
 
 
  








Compactifications of the  flow 


MCTP-03-06 

hep-th/0302107 
February 2003 


Alex Buchel

Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics 

Randall Laboratory of Physics, The University of Michigan 

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1120 

 





In hep-th/0004063 Pilch and Warner (PW) constructed 
supersymmetric RG flow corresponding to the  mass
deformation of the   Yang-Mills theory.
In this paper we present exact  deformations of PW flow 
when the gauge theory 3-space is compactified on . 
We consider also the case with the gauge theory 
world-volume being  instead of .
The solution is constructed in five-dimensional gauged supergravity 
and is further uplifted to 10d. 
 




Introduction 
Probably the most intriguing aspect of the gauge theory/string theory 
duality 
(see for a review) is the fact that it provides 
a dynamical principle for the nonperturbative definition of string theory
in the asymptotically Anti de Sitter spacetime, where there is no notion of an 
-matrix. The best understood example  of this  duality 
is for the   supersymmetric Yang Mill theory.
Given the original correspondence, new examples 
can be constructed  by deforming the gauge theory by 
relevant operators. By now there is an extensive literature on 
such, renormalization group (RG) flow deformations 
. In it was suggested 
that the duality can be extended to cases when one deforms the 
gauge theory space-time. Furthermore, in it was
suggested that gauge theories on nondynamical de Sitter
backgrounds might be relevant for understanding string theory 
in backgrounds with cosmological horizons.  
Unfortunately it is difficult to use space-time 
deformations of for developing a detailed 
gauge/string theory duality map. The main problem stems 
from the fact that the examples considered there typically 
involve gauge theory with not well understood ultraviolet
properties. It seems desirable to construct 
nontrivial examples of such deformations for 
"simpler" gauge theories in the UV. 
  


Probably the simplest  candidate is to consider space-time deformations 
of the massive  RG flow.  In this paper 
we discuss how to construct such deformations for the 
 RG flow of Pilch and Warner.


We should emphasize that though we concentrate on the 
flow, the construction presented here 
can be applied to other RG flows. In particular, 
in Appendix we construct the   
deformation of the recent non-supersymmetric 
 () flowin five dimensional gauged supergravity. 
While supergravity flow  is actually
singular, our deformation is completely smooth. 
We also comment on the physical reason for the singularity    
of  this  flow.  
   

The paper is organized as follows. 
In the next section we review the Pilch-Warner RG flow  
in five dimensions, and discuss it's  and  
deformations. In section 3 we discussed the details of 
the 10d uplift of the deformations. We conclude 
in section 4. 


 RG flow and its deformations in five dimensions 

The gauge theory story 
In the language of four-dimensional  supersymmetry, the mass
deformed   Yang-Mills theory () 
in  consists of a vector
multiplet , an adjoint chiral superfield  related by 
supersymmetry to the gauge field, and two additional adjoint chiral
multiplets  and  which form the  hypermultiplet.  In
addition to the usual gauge-invariant kinetic terms for these fields,
the theory has additional interactions and hypermultiplet mass term
summarized in the superpotential(The classical Ka hler
potential is normalized 
.) 
 
When    the gauge theory is superconformal with 
characterizing an exactly marginal deformation. The theory has 
classical   complex dimensional moduli space. This moduli  
space is protected by supersymmetry against (non)-perturbative quantum 
corrections. With , the  supersymmetry is 
softly broken to . This mass deformation lifts 
 hypermultiplet moduli directions, leaving the 
 complex dimensional Coulomb branch of the  
 Yang-Mill theory, 
parameterized by
expectation values of the adjoint scalar
 
in the Cartan subalgebra of the gauge group.  For generic values of
the moduli  the gauge symmetry is broken to that of the Cartan
subalgebra , up to the permutation of individual 
factors. Additionally, the superpotential 
sp  induces the RG flow of the gauge coupling.   
While from the gauge theory perspective it is straightforward 
to study this   gauge theory at any point on the 
Coulomb branch, the PW supergravity flowcorresponds to a particular Coulomb branch vacuum. 
More specifically, matching the probe computation 
in gauge theory and the dual PW supergravity flow it was argued 
in that the appropriate Coulomb branch vacuum  
corresponds to a  linear distribution of the vevs adsc 
as
 
with (continuous in the large  limit) 
linear number density       
 
Unfortunately, the extension of the  gauge/gravity
correspondence of for vacua 
other than rho  is not known.
 
In the dynamics of the gauge theory 
on the D3 brane probe in the PW background was studied in details.
It was shown in that the probe has one complex dimensional 
moduli space, with bulk induced  metric precisely equal to the 
metric on the appropriate one complex dimensional submanifold of the 
  Donagi-Witten theory Coulomb branch. 
This one dimensional submanifold 
is parameterized by the expectation value  of the  complex scalar
on the Coulomb branch of the theory where 
, and the  subscript denotes that the  factor is 
in the Pilch-Warner vacuum rho . As  coincides with 
any of the  of the PW vacuum, the moduli space metric diverges,
signaling the appearance of the additional massless states. 
Identical divergence is observed for the  probe D3-brane  
at the enhancon  singularity of the PW background.
Away from the singularity locus, , the gauge theory 
computation of the probe moduli space metric is 1-loop exact. 
This is due to the  suppression of instanton corrections  in the large  
limit of  gauge theories. 

Consider now the   or  deformations 
of the  gauge theory. Both deformations introduce a new 
scale, let's call it , to the model 
- the  scale in the former case 
and the Hubble parameter in the latter. Depending on the ratio
 we expect an interesting interplay between the 
strongly coupled  IR dynamics and  the IR curvature 
induced cutoff. For one reason, we expect that for the sufficiently 
high  the number density distribution  should be 
just a -function at zero. In what follows we 
present and indication for this phase transition while 
postponing the detailed analysis for the future. 



PW RG flow 
The gauge theory RG flow induced by the superpotential sp 
corresponds to five dimensional gauged SUGRA flow induced 
by scalars  and . 
The effective 5d action is 
  
where the potential  is(We set the 5d gauged SUGRA coupling 
to one. This corresponds to setting  radius .)  
 
with the superpotential
 
The PW geometry has the flow metric 
 
The scalar equations of motion and the Einstein equations 
can be reduced to the first order equations
  

Asymptotics of the PW flow 
Given the explicit solution of the flow equations pwo 
in is it easy to extract the UV/IR asymptotics.
In the ultraviolet, , we find
  
while in the infrared, 
 


Deformations of the PW flow 
Unlike the PW flow, the deformed flows break the supersymmetry and 
are given by second order equations.
From action5  we have Einstein equations
  
plus the scalar equations
 


We consider two deformations of the flow metric flowmetric :
 

In the first case from ee ,scalar  we find
 
while in case (b) we find
 
It is easy to check that above equations are consistent. 
Thus for the deformed flows we could use the same 
scalars as in the PW case. 
   

Asymptotics of the  deformation 
The flow equations are given by aeq . 
The nonsingular in the IR flows are represented by  a  two parameter 

Taylor series expansion(Without loss of generality 
we set . This corresponds to rescaling the time coordinate
in ab .)  
 
with the first terms being 
 
We expect that for an appropriate choice of  
we recover the UV asymptotics pwasi . 
It is tempting to identify the 2 dimensionless 
parameters of the regular in the IR 
flow with the ratio of  of the gauge theory (the  parameter), 
and  the  parameter as a characteristic of  the brane 
distribution (similar to the 
enhancon scale  in rho ) 
in the IR. Notice, that unlike PW flow, where 
 in the IR, here it is consistent to 
choose(We would like to interpret  flow 
as a supergravity dual to the  
flow induced by the  scalar expectation values. 
Typically, scalar expectation value does not give rise to an 
RG flow. Since these scalars are conformal (and thus couple to the 
 curvature), given them an expectation value would induce a flow. 
)  . In fact  is a solution 
to aeq ( Also,  and  
is a trivial solution corresponding to the global .) .


The nonsingular flows that asymptote
to pwasi  would have a well defined (finite) mass,
being a function of , characterizing  
phases of the model(The details of the phase structure will 
be discussed elsewhere.) .  
 







Asymptotics of the  deformation 
The flow equations are given by beq . 
The nonsingular in the IR flows are represented by  a  two parameter 

Taylor series expansion 
 
with the first terms being 
 
As in the case of the  deformation it is also consistent 
here to choose . 



The ten-dimensional solutions 



Type IIB SUGRA equations of motion 

We use mostly positive convention for the signature 
 and .
The type IIB equations consist of:

The Einstein equations:
 
where the energy
momentum tensors of the dilaton/axion field, , the three index
antisymmetric tensor field, , and the self-dual five-index
tensor field, , are given by
 
 
 



In the unitary gauge  is a complex scalar
field and
 
with
 
while the antisymmetric tensor field  is given by
 


The Maxwell equations:
 

The dilaton equation:
 
The self-dual equation:
 

In addition,  and  satisfy Bianchi identities which
follow from the definition of those field strengths in terms of their
potentials:
) 




For the 10d uplift of the RG flows in the 5d gauged SUGRA 
the metric ansatz  and the dilaton is 
basically determined by group theoretical properties 
of the   scalars, and thus must be the same for  
both the deformed and original PW flows.
Specifically, we assume that the 10d Einstein frame metric is 
   
where  is either the original PW flow metric 
flowmetric  or its deformations ab , 
. The warp factor is given by
 
and the two functions  are defined by
 
As usual,  are the  left-invariant forms normalized so that 
.
For the dilaton/axion we have 
  

The consistent truncation ansatz does not specify the 
(3-) 5-form fluxes. As in we assume the most general 
ansatz allowed by the global symmetries of the background
 
where  are arbitrary complex functions. 
For the 5-form flux we assume 
 
where  is an arbitrary function.

We will do all the computation in the natural 
orthonormal frame given by 
 
where  are again  left-invariant one forms, such that 
the round  metric of unit radius is .


As in the PW case, examination of the Einstein equations 
reveals that 2-form potential functions  have the following 
properties: ,   are pure imaginary, and 
is real. 



Lift of  deformation 
Explicitly computing Ricci tensor with above ansatz,
we find  nonvanishing components 

. Given the 5d flow equations  
aeq , we find relations 
  
The 3-form energy-momentum tensor has nontrivial components 


. The nonvanishing 
components of the dilaton/axion energy-momentum tensor are 
. 
Finally, the 5-form energy-momentum  tensor has nonvanishing components 
 
where
 
Besides Einstein equations, we have nontrivial 5-form Bianchi identity,
dilaton/axion equation tengsq , and 4 equations from the 
Maxwell equation tenmaxwell  for components .
 
As in we find the following consistency checks 
on the metric and dilaton/axion ansatz(
There is a typo in the second equation in consch  in(eq.(4.3)).) :
 
Next combination is 
 
As in, we find that r107  (and the linearized 
solution of all equations in the UV) is satisfied provided(
Note that there is a sign typo for  in the corresponding 
equations in, (eq.(4.8)).) 
 
Finally, from the   Einstein equations 
we find 
 

We explicitly verified that supplementing the 
metric and  the dilaton/axion ansatz 
of the previous section with aaa , wres ,
and the 5d flow equations  aeq , all the equations of
10d type IIB supergravity are satisfied.
 
Lift of  deformation 
In this case the analysis are similar to those in the 
previous section. Thus we present only the results.
First, we find the same complex functions , specifying 
the 2-form potential a2 
 
Second, the  in the 5-form potential 5form  is
   


Conclusion 
In this paper we observed that certain 5d gauged supergravity 
flows on the background  can be deformed 
to flows on backgrounds  or 
 with the same  5d scalars. 
If the 10 dimensional lift of the  original backgrounds 
is known, this implies that deformed flows can be uplifted to ten 
dimensions as well. We explicitly demonstrated this for the 
 PW flow, constructing for the first time 
massive RG flow with asymptotically global  geometry. 
We hope that study of  these 
backgrounds would help develop gauge/gravity dictionary for 
gauge theories in curved space-time, including  deformations 
which might be relevant for understanding strings in backgrounds 
with cosmological horizons. 
  





Acknowledgments 
It is a pleasure to thank Ofer Aharony for very interesting and stimulating 
discussions. I would like to thank the Weizmann Institute of Science, 
University of Pennsylvania for hospitality during part of this work.  
I would also like to thank the  Aspen Center 
for Physics  (2001 workshop) for hospitality, where this work started. 
I would like to thank Nick Evans for the e-mail correspondence concerning 
potential singularity of RG flow in.
   



Appendix 
In, Babington, Crooks and Evans
(BCE) proposed 
a supergravity dual to  gauge theory. This gauge theory 
is obtained by giving the same mass to all four Weyl  fermions 
in the  SYM theory. 
Note that this  mass term completely 
breaks the supersymmetry,  hence the name for the deformation. 
In the infrared the  gauge theory is expected to confine 
with  a mass gap in the spectrum. The mass gap in the gauge theory 
spectrum in particular  would imply that the dual, nonsupersymmetric,
supergravity background of is nonetheless stable.
The  dual supergravity solution is 
constructed first in 5d gauged supergravity and then was uplifted to
the full ten dimensional solution. 
The authors turned on only the 5d scalar, called , dual to the 
 invariant fermion mass term. They argued, based on the 
D3 brane probe computation, that the six  scalars 
have positive radiatively induced (mass), that thus, 
naively expected(
Note that this is precisely what is happening for the 
flow of: the fermion mass term induces the negative  (mass) term for scalars causing the D3 branes, originally 
at the origin, to 'spread' up in an enhancon configuration  
rho .) , expectation value for these scalars 
is not induced. In other words turning on  alone  
is consistent, and the confined  vacuum is at the 
origin of the  moduli space. 
   
If this would be the case, the supergravity solution 
 should have been nonsingular. 
We believe the solution of has a naked singularity 
in the interior. This in particular is 
reflected in the fact  that the dilaton of is singular in 
the infrared, ,  for(For  notations 
see.)  .  The technical problem appears to 
be  attributed to the geodesic incompleteness of geometryfor their choice of a radial coordinate, and thus incorrect identification 
of what is the infrared part of the geometry. From the physics
perspective, we suspect  that the probe computation in 
is not a reliable tool to address the issue of radiatively induced 
scalar masses, due to the large nonperturbative corrections 
(fractional instantons) in theories with less then eight 
supercharges(This is briefly discussed in.) . 
In a sense solution is akin to 
a singular Klebanov-Tseytlin (KT) geometry, where unphysical 
requirement of unbroken chiral symmetry led to a singularity 
of the dual supergravity solution. In, we believe this 
requirement is a zero expectation value for scalars. 
The analog of the Klebanov-Strassler (KS)resolution of the KT singularity in the BCE case is likely to 
be the inclusion of the additional 5d gauged supergravity 
scalar(Playing the role similar to  
for the  PW flow supp .)  
corresponding to  invariant 'distribution' 
of D3-branes. We expect the resulting nonsingular geometry 
will be similar to the polarized-branes solution of Polchinski 
and Strassler.

While KT solution is unphysical in its original form, it is easy 
to turn it to a physical one by deforming the theory in such a way 
that the spontaneously broken chiral symmetry in the IR  gets 
restored. This can done by either considering sufficiently hot 
thermal state of the gauge theory, or with  
an  or  deformation of the 
gauge theory space-time. In the remaining of this section 
we argue that the prescription resolves 
BCE singularity. The latter is a reflection of the  
expectation that the infrared cutoff due to the  scale 
or the Hubble parameter in the  deformation would stabilize 
the  scalar masses for the  flow,
resulting, as proposed in, in the vacuum at the 
origin of the  moduli space. 
We demonstrate this in the   
deformed 5d gauged supergravity solution of 
BCE(There is a nonsingular lift of these  deformed 5d 
solutions.) .
 
The 5d solution of BCE comes from the effective action         
  
where the potential  is
 
and  the flow metric 
 
For the  deformation(The 
 deformation can be analyzed in a similar fashion.)  ab , 
 the equations of motion are 
 
Though we can't find an exact analytical solution of ca , 
we can still argue that the corresponding backgrounds are nonsingular,
provided we choose infrared boundary condition .
In the infrared () these nonsingular solutions form 
a one-parameter  family of  
Taylor series expansions(By rescaling the time coordinate 
in ab  we 
can always set .)   
 
with the first terms being 
 
Here , corresponds to global   solution.
Numerical analysis of ca  with boundary condition 
ds0ase  suggests that for arbitrary value of ,
in the ultraviolet () we obtain UV asymptotics of 

 






 
  









 99 


J. M. Maldacena,
"The large  limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,"
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.  2 , 231 (1998)
[Int. J. Theor. Phys.  38 , 1113 (1999)]
[arXiv:hep-th/9711200].



O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri and Y. Oz,
"Large N field theories, string theory and gravity,"
Phys. Rept.  323 , 183 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9905111].




A. Buchel and A. A. Tseytlin,
"Curved space resolution of singularity of fractional D3-branes on  conifold,"
Phys. Rev. D 65 , 085019 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0111017].



A. Buchel,
"Gauge / gravity correspondence in accelerating universe,"
Phys. Rev. D 65 , 125015 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203041].



A. Buchel, P. Langfelder and J. Walcher,
"On time-dependent backgrounds in supergravity and string theory,"
Phys. Rev. D 67 , 024011 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207214].





K. Pilch and N. P. Warner,
"N = 2 supersymmetric RG flows and the IIB dilaton,"
Nucl. Phys. B 594 , 209 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0004063].




J. Babington, D. E. Crooks and N. Evans,
"A stable supergravity dual of non-supersymmetric glue,"
arXiv:hep-th/0210068.





R. Donagi and E. Witten,
"Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory And Integrable Systems,"
Nucl. Phys. B 460 , 299 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9510101].



A. Buchel, A. W. Peet and J. Polchinski,
"Gauge dual and noncommutative extension of an N = 2 supergravity  solution,"
Phys. Rev. D 63 , 044009 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0008076].



N. Evans, C. V. Johnson and M. Petrini,
"The enhancon and N = 2 gauge theory/gravity RG flows,"
JHEP 0010 , 022 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0008081].




A. Buchel,
"Comments on fractional instantons in N = 2 gauge theories,"
Phys. Lett. B 514 , 417 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0101056].




 J. H. Schwarz, 
"Covariant Field Equations of Chiral   Supergravity," 
Nucl.Phys.  B226  (1983) 269.



 A. Buchel, unpublished; N. Evans, private 
correspondence.  



I. R. Klebanov and A. A. Tseytlin,
"Gravity duals of supersymmetric SU(N) x SU(N+M) gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 578 , 123 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0002159].





I. R. Klebanov and M. J. Strassler,
"Supergravity and a confining gauge theory: Duality cascades and  
chiSB-resolution of naked singularities,"
JHEP 0008 , 052 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0007191].




J. Polchinski and M. J. Strassler,
"The string dual of a confining four-dimensional gauge theory,"
arXiv:hep-th/0003136.



A. Buchel,
"Finite temperature resolution of the Klebanov-Tseytlin singularity,"
Nucl. Phys. B 600 , 219 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0011146].


S. S. Gubser, C. P. Herzog, I. R. Klebanov and A. A. Tseytlin,
"Restoration of chiral symmetry: A supergravity perspective,"
JHEP 0105  (2001) 028
[arXiv:hep-th/0102172].









