6.4in 
9in





 
hep-th/0302224

SNBNCBS-2003
 
 Dynamics in a noncommutative space  

R.P.Malik 
( E-mail address: malik@boson.bose.res.in  ) 

S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences,  

Block-JD, Sector-III, Salt Lake, Calcutta-700 098, India  




Abstract :
We discuss the dynamics of a particular two-dimensional (2D) physical system 
in the four dimensional (4D) (non-)commutative phase space by exploiting the 
consistent Hamiltonian and Lagrangian formalisms based on the symplectic 
structures defined on the 4D (non-)commutative cotangent manifolds. The 
noncommutativity exists equivalently  in the coordinate or the momentum 
planes embedded in the 4D cotangent manifolds. The signature of
this noncommutativity is 
reflected in the derivation of the first-order Lagrangians where we exploit 
the most general form of the Legendre transformation defined on the 
(non-)commutative (co-)tangent manifolds. The second-order Lagrangian, defined 
on the 4D tangent manifold , turns out to be  the same  irrespective 
of the noncommutativity present in the 4D cotangent manifolds for the 
discussion of the Hamiltonian formulation.
A connection with the noncommutativity of the dynamics, associated with the 
quantum groups on the -deformed 4D cotangent manifolds, is also pointed out.


 










1 Introduction 



In recent years, there has been a great deal of interest in the study
of noncommutative geometry because of its 
very neat and natural appearance in the context of
brane configurations related to the dynamics of string theory and 
matrix model of the M-theory [1-3]. It has been demonstrated that, in a certain
specific limit, the whole string dynamics can be described by the minimally
coupled gauge theory on a noncommutative space [2]. Even the experimental 
test for the existence of such kind of noncommutativity has been 
proposed where the synchrotron radiation has been incorporated in the 
experimental set up in a very specific way [4]. In such kinds of 
experimental proposals,
it has been argued that only the quantum mechanical approximations are good
enough to shed some light on the existence of the noncommutativity [5,6]. This 
is why a whole lot of studies have gone into the understanding of the
quantum mechanics of some physical systems on the noncommutative spaces 
(see, e.g., [7-10] and references therein for details). In particular,
the motion of the charged particles in the 2D plane, under the influence of 
a constant perpendicular magnetic field, has been studied
extensively because of the fact that the noncommutativity appears 
in this problem (i.e. Landau problem) quite naturally [7,8,10].


In the present scenario of the frontier research in the realm of high energy
physics (in particular, 
connected with the string theory), the noncommutative (NC) effects are
presumed to show up only  at very high energy scale 
(perhaps, very near to the Planck scale). One can observe, however, the
physical consequences of these NC effects in the low energy effective actions
for physically interesting systems.
Equivalently, on the other hand, one can construct the low energy effective 
actions for the above physical systems by exploiting the basic ideas 
behind the NC geometry that are supposed to be the benchmark of physics
at very high energy scale. In the latter category, mention can be made of a
couple of interesting examples such as
the NC Chern-Simons theory [11] and the NC extension of the standard model [12].
One of the most interesting physical system that encompasses NC structure
in its folds at low energy scale is the 2D Landau problem.
The purpose of our present paper is to study, systematically, the Hamiltonian
and Lagrangian formulation of the 2D Landau problem based on the symplectic
structures defined on the 4D cotangent manifolds. We lay emphasis on 
the classical equations of motion  for the charged particle moving
on a 2D plane under the influence of a harmonic oscillator potential and
a constant magnetic field perpendicular to this 2D plane. We demonstrate that
there exist three consistent
first-order Lagrangians (FOLs) and three Hamiltonians that lead
to the same classical equations of motion when we exploit 
the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion and the Hamilton's equations of motion
using (i) the canonical Poisson brackets (PBs), and 
(ii) the nontrivial (noncommutative) Poisson brackets. The nontrivial
noncommutativity is found to be equivalently 
present either in the coordinate plane or in 
the momentum plane, embedded in the 4D cotangent manifold.
The FOLs are defined 
and derived by the most general form of the Legendre transformations 
which exploit the above symplectic structures (see, e.g., [13] for details). 
It is interesting to point out the fact that the second-order Lagrangian
, defined in the 4D tangent manifold, turns out to
be the same for all the three consistent
FOLs and the Hamiltonians. In fact, the signature
of the NC structure, present in the PBs, disappears in the derivation
of the second-order Lagrangian (SOL) for the system under consideration. This
happens, perhaps, because of the fact that the Hamiltonians (and the
corresponding PBs) are connected with one-another due to a special class 
of transformations (see, e.g., (3.5) and (3.6) below)
on the phase variables under
which the sum of the areas of the phase space remains unchanged .
Furthermore, we have shown  that these special 
class of transformations are not exactly  the canonical transformations
because the form of the basic  canonical PBs does not remain form
invariant. In particular, the brackets equivalently 
defined in the 2D coordinate or momentum plane
do change  their form (under the above transformations) which is
the root cause of the presence of NC structures in the theory. In the framework
of quantum groups, we demonstrate and establish that the above (phase space)
area preserving transformations correspond to the  
invariant transformations on the phase variables defined on the 4D 
-deformed cotangent manifolds. The consistency of the above
transformations with the structure of the -deformed
PBs, however, puts a restriction  on the deformation parameter.
This requirement, in turn, allows only the 
presence of the exact canonical transformations
for the phase variables in the framework of quantum groups.



The contents of our present paper are organized as follows. In section 2,
we discuss the canonical brackets and show that the classical dynamical
equations of motion for the charged particles on the 2D plane
(moving under the influence of a constant perpendicular magnetic field)
can be derived from a canonical Hamiltonian. Section 3 is devoted to the
discussion of the nontrivial NC brackets which are exploited in the
derivation of the same classical dynamical equations from another set of
a couple of Hamiltonians. In this section, we also discuss about the
special kind of transformations on the phase space variables that connect
the (non-)trivial PBs as well as the Hamiltonian functions. We deal
with the noncommutativity associated with the quantum groups 
in section 4 and show its
connection with the NC structures associated with the PBs, discussed in the 
previous sections. Finally, in section 5, we concisely summarize our results 
and make some concluding remarks.
 

2 Canonical brackets: Hamiltonian and Lagrangian dynamics 



We start off with the following Hamiltonian, describing the motion
of the charged particles in a 2D plane
under the influence of a two-dimensional
harmonic oscillator potential, as
( We adopt here the summation convention  where all the repeated
Latin indices  in the coordinate and/or momentum space
and  in the momentum phase 
(i.e. cotangent) space are
summed over. The antisymmetric Levi-Civita tensor  is
chosen such that .) 
















where  (with ) are the canonically conjugate
position and momenta variables for the charged particles with individual 
charge  and  is the frequency of the harmonic
oscillations. The constant  is connected with 
the charge , the speed of light  and the magnetic field 
 perpendicular to the 2D plane of oscillation. Here the
mass of the particle has been set equal to one for the sake of simplicity
of all the later calculations. The dynamical equation of motion for this 
physical system





can be derived from the above Hamiltonians by exploiting the following
canonical Poisson brackets (PBs) among the conjugate variables







With the help of the above canonical brackets (2.3), the canonical 
symplectic structures on the 4D cotangent manifold, for 
the Hamiltonians (2.1), can be defined as



















where the entry  in the parenthesis of the symplectic structures
 and  stand for the subscript of the
Hamiltonian in (2.1) and the
notation 
 has been introduced in the definition of the 
matrix form  of the symplectic structure as given below








The most general form of the PB between two dynamical variables 
 in the momentum phase (i.e. cotangent) space can be defined as







In general, the symplectic structures in (2.4) and/or (2.5) can be 
functions of the phase variables . In such a situation, the most
general form of the Legendre transformation (which leads to the
derivation of the first-order Lagrangian ) is given by [13]






where the general form of the covariant symplectic
structure  is [13]






For our case of canonical symplectic structures (listed in (2.4)
and satisfying (2.5)), the above formula
yields 
. The first-order Lagrangian (modulo some total 
derivatives w.r.t. time), for our discussion, is










The equations of motion, emerging from the above FOL (2.9), are 








Combined together, the equations of motion (2.10)
imply our starting
equation of motion (2.2) that was derived from the Hamiltonian
(2.1) by exploiting the canonical PBs of (2.3).


Now, inserting  the equations of motions derived
from FOL (2.9) into itself, we obtain the following
second-order Lagrangian 







A couple of comments are in order which would turn out to be quite handy for
our further discussions in the later sections. 
First and foremost, the Euler-Lagrange equation
of motion, emerging from (2.11), is nothing but our starting equation of 
motion (2.2). 
Second, the canonical momentum
 defined from the above SOL in (2.11)






turns out to be the same as the one derived from the Hamilton's
equations of motion by exploiting the Hamiltonian function (2.1). 


3 Nontrivial brackets: Hamiltonian and Lagrangian dynamics 



Keeping the dynamical evolution 
()
of the system intact, it is straightforward
to check that the following new Hamiltonians 












expressed in terms of the phase variables  and
() lead to our starting equation of motion (2.2) if we exploit the 
following nontrivial  PBs in the phase space















Here the new phase variables  and  parametrize
the transformed versions of the cotangent manifolds that are obtained by
exploiting a certain specific 
types of transformation on the original phase variables
 (which earlier described the original cotangent manifold).
Furthermore, it is evident that the brackets in (3.3) and (3.4) are
defined for the Hamiltonians in (3.1) and (3.2), respectively.



As far as the the nontrivial  PBs in (3.3) and (3.4) are concerned,
the noteworthy points, at this stage, are as follows. First, it is
interesting to pin-point that the PB between the co-ordinates
and momenta variables remain the same  in the canonical brackets (2.4) 
as well as the nontrivial brackets (3.3) and (3.4) 
even though, as is clear, a certain specific
type of transformations has been performed on the
original phase space variables  to make them the new
pairs of variables  and , respectively. 
Second, for the Hamiltonian (3.1),
it is the momenta variables  (describing a momentum plane in the
transformed cotangent manifold) that are required to be noncommutative 
(vis- a -vis  the brackets in (2.3)) for the dynamical equations of 
motion (2.2) to remain intact. Third, it is the coordinates  (defining 
a coordinate plane in the transformed cotangent manifold) that are required to
possess noncommutative nature (vis- a -vis  the brackets in (2.3)) 
for the starting equation of motion (2.2) to remain unchanged. Fourth, it 
can be checked that the following specific transformations on the phase
variables
















relate  to  and  to  where (i) 
the phase variables 's come in different guises for the different types
of Hamiltonian, and (ii) the Hamiltonian 









is obtained from  by the following canonical transformations









which show that  and  are 
canonically equivalent. Fifth, the transformations in (3.5) and (3.6)
imply the noncommutativity present in (3.3) and (3.4). Sixth, the
canonical equivalence of  and  demonstrates
that the noncommutativity of (3.3) and (3.4) are equivalent too.
Seventh, it is obvious that,
under the above transformations, the sum of the area elements in the
momentum phase (cotangent) space remain invariant (i.e. 
) for the transformations in (3.5) and (3.6).


With the nontrivial brackets defined in (3.3), it can be seen that the
analogues of the symplectic structures in (2.4) (and satisfying (2.5))
for the transformed cotangent manifold are 



















where the notation 
and the definitions of (2.5) have been taken into account. In terms of the
covariant symplectic structure , defined on the transformed
cotangent manifold, we obtain the following FOL (modulo some total 
derivatives w.r.t. time) for the case under consideration; namely,











The following equations of motion emerge from the above FOL






which, ultimately, lead to the derivation of the dynamical equation of motion
(2.2), we started with. It will be noticed that the above equations of motion 
(3.11) are quite different in appearance from their counterparts in (2.10)
which has been derived from the FOL .
Now, exploiting (3.11), it is straightforward to check that the SOL
(which emerges from the FOL in (3.10)) is exactly  the same as (2.11).


Now let us concentrate on the nontrivial brackets defined in (3.4). Here
the analogues of the symplectic structures in (2.4) (that satisfy (2.5)) are



















where the notation 
has been chosen in the analogues of the definitions (2.5) for the
case under consideration. With the help of the covariant symplectic
structure in (3.12), one can obtain the FOL  (modulo some
total derivatives w.r.t. time) as 












The above Lagrangian leads to the derivation of the Euler-Lagrange
equations of motion that are first-order in time derivative on 
 and . These  and 
 are intertwined together in one equation as






Combined together, the above equations of motion
lead to the derivation of the same dynamical equations of motion
(i.e. )
as we started with in (2.2). It will be noticed that even though the equations
of motion are expressed, ultimately, in  (which are
 different from 
in (2.2)), the evolution of the dynamics of the 
physical system w.r.t. time is the same as in (2.2).
It is very interesting to check that the SOL (that emerges from the FOL (3.13))
has exactly  the same appearance as the one in (2.11), albeit 
expressed in terms of  and . 

A few comments are in order as far as the transformations (3.5) and (3.6)
of the phase variables (defining the transformed cotangent space) are concerned.
It should be noticed that, unlike transformations (3.8),
these transformations are not exactly 
canonical in nature even though they preserve the invariance of the sum of
the area elements in the cotangent manifold. To be precise, it should
be noted that, for a transformation ,
to be canonical [14], the following basic PBs defined in the transformed
cotangent manifold







should retain their form. Here the superscripts on the brackets
denote the definition of
the PBs w.r.t. the original phase variables . It is 
straightforward to check that the above brackets are not preserved under
the transformations (3.5) and (3.6) if we exploit the
basic PBs defined in (2.3). Thus, the latter transformations are a very
special class  of transformations in the phase space
which are not canonical in nature per se  but they preserve the
sum of the areas in the phase space. 




4 Deformed -brackets: connection with quantum groups 



In this section, we briefly recapitulate some of the key 
and pertinent points of our earlier
works [15,16] on the consistent construction of the dynamics in the
noncommutative phase space where the noncommutativity (i.e. -deformation)
was introduced in the -deformed  
dimensional cotangent manifold corresponding to
a given -dimensional configuration manifold. In our present context
(where we are discussing a 2D physical system), the following relationships
among the phase variables  (with ) 
on the 4D cotangent manifold






play a very crucial and decisive role in our whole discussion of 
the dynamics. In fact, the above
-deformation is chosen in the phase space so that the quantum group 
invariance and the ordinary rotational invariance can
be maintained together
( This deformation can be easily generalized to the -dimensional
Minkowski cotangent manifolds for the dynamical discussion of a physical
relativistic system where the quantum group invariance and Lorentz invariance
are respected together for any arbitrary ordering of the spacetime 
indices [15,16].) 
for any arbitrary ordering of the indices
 and   (see, e.g., [15] for details). 
We shall concentrate here on the following general 
transformations on the phase variables  defined on
the 4D -deformed cotangent manifold 






In the above, the original phase variables  
and the transformed sets of the phase variables  
are assumed to commute with the elements  of a  
matrix corresponding to the quantum group . Here the deformation
parameters  are the non-zero complex numbers 
(i.e. ) corresponding to the most general
quantum group deformation of the ordinary general linear group 
 of  nonsingular matrices. In fact, the elements of the
quantum group 
obey (see, e.g., [17] for details)







It can be checked that the relationships in (4.1) remain 
form invariant  under the general transformations (4.2) only
for the choice  . In other words, the -deformation (4.1) in the
4D cotangent manifold remains form invariant under the quantum group 
 
which is different from the single parameter -deformed quantum
group . In fact, the latter is the limiting case of 
 when . 
Under the restriction , the relations (4.3) yield the following
braiding relationships among the rows and columns







At this stage, it is important 
to note that it is the individual pairs  of the
original phase variables  (with ) that change to
the transformed phase variables  (with ) under
the quantum group . Thus, for our present discussion, 
there are
two sets of quantum groups  which are responsible for
the transformations of the original two pairs of phase variables 
and  in (4.2). This statement can be mathematically expressed, in
the matrix form, as given below





























where  are the elements of the quantum group 
that satisfy (4.4).


Now the stage is set for establishing the connection between the 
noncommutativity discussed in the previous sections and the noncommutativity
due to the quantum groups in the present section. As argued in the paragraph 
after (3.4), one of the key as well as crucial features of the transformations
in (3.5) and (3.6) is the invariance of the sum of the phase space areas. In 
the language of the  invariant differential geometry 
defined on the 4D cotangent manifold (see, e.g., [15] for details), this 
statement can be mathematically captured in the following wedge products and
their transformations








where, in addition to (4.4), we have used the following relationships [15]







This shows that, for the area preserving phase space transformations in (4.6),
we have





which is nothing but setting the -determinant 
(see, e.g., [17] for details) of the 
 matrix equal to one. In more sophisticated language,
the requirement of the area preserving phase transformations in (4.5) entails
upon the quantum group  to become 
as the -determinant . From the point of view of the
structure of the PBs defined in the canonical
form (cf. (2.3)) and the nontrivial forms (3.3) and (3.4), it can be seen
that the canonically conjugate variables obey







In other words, the PBs between the original canonically conjugate
variables  and the transformed phase variables 
and  remain unchanged. For the same to remain sacrosanct even 
in the case of
quantum group transformations in (4.5) (or (4.2)), it can be seen that
the following condition







has to be satisfied. In the derivation of the
above, we have exploited the following -deformed
basic Poisson brackets for the phase variables  [15]








which crucially depend on the choice of the symplectic structures on the
-deformed 4D cotangent manifold. In our earlier work [15], we have 
chosen the following



















It is now unequivocally clear that the requirement of the equality 
and consistency between
(4.9) and (4.10) imposes the following restriction 
on the elements of the 





This shows that, for a theory in which the canonical brackets (4.9)
and the area preserving transformations (i.e., 
) are respected together, we obtain a restriction
 on the deformation parameter. This condition emerges from 
the equality of (4.8) and (4.13).
With the -brackets defined in (4.11), it is straightforward
to check (using the -commutation relations (4.4)) that the following
brackets, defined in the 2D coordinate as well as the momentum plane
of the 4D q-deformed cotangent manifold, are true; namely,










These -brackets turn out to be zero for .
Thus, it is clear that the NC structure 
in the 2D coordinate as well as momentum plane (cf. (3.3) and (3.4))
does not  exist for
our quantum group considerations if we require the consistency between the
-deformed PBs and the area preserving 
 invariant phase space transformations. Hence, it is
obvious that for , the quantum group considerations allow the phase
space transformations that are exactly canonical in nature.


5 Conclusions 



In the present investigation, we have established (i) a connection between
the canonical PBs and the nontrivial NC brackets, and (ii)
the relation between the canonical Hamiltonian and the nontrivial Hamiltonians.
These connections emerge because of the existence of a
special class of symmetry transformations
(cf. (3.5) and (3.6)) on the phase variables that
preserves the sum of the areas on the (un)transformed cotangent manifolds.
This symmetry transformation is, however, shown not 
to be exactly canonical in nature unlike the canonical transformations of
(3.8) which leave the canonical brackets form invariant.
As far as the dynamics on the 4D tangent manifold is concerned, it remains
unaffected by the NC structures present in the PBs equivalently  defined
on the 2D coordinate or momentum planes that are
embedded in the 4D cotangent manifolds. This fact is captured in the
appearance of the second-order Lagrangian  which remains
unchanged irrespective of the noncommutativity
present in the PBs defined on the 4D cotangent manifold.
The above cited "sum of the area preserving transformation" is also
reflected in the realm of quantum group 
transformations on the phase variables where the transformations,
generated by , are restricted to become the
transformations corresponding to the quantum group .
The requirement of the consistency of the above transformations with
the structure of the -deformed PBs, however, puts a restriction 
 on the deformation parameter. It is interesting to
point out that, in a completely different context, exactly the same
restriction (i.e. )) has been shown to exist for 
the requirement of equivalence between the gauge- and reparametrization 
invariances for a -deformed relativistic (super)particle moving
in an undeformed -dimensional target space [16]. 



= 12pt
 99 
E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 460 , 33 (1996).
N. Seiberg and E. Witten, JHEP 09 , 032 (1999);

      For a review, see, e.g., L. Castellani, Class. Qaunt. Grav.
      17 , 3377 (2000).
A. Connes, M. R. Douglas and A. Schwarz, JHEP 02  , 033 (1998).
P. Castorina, A. Iorio and D. Zappala ,
      Noncommutative Synchrotron , [hep-th/0212238].
H. Falomir, J. Gamboa, M. Loewe, F. Mendes and J. C. Rojas,
       Phys. Rev.  D 66 , 045018 (2002).
M. Chaichian, A. Demichev, P. Presnajder, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and
      A. Tureanu,  Phys. Lett. B 527 , 149 (2002).
J. Lukierski, P. Stichel and W. Zakrzewski, 
       Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 260 , 224 (1997); P. A. Horvathy and
      M. S. Plyushchay,  JHEP 06 , 033 (2002); S. Bellucci, A. Nerssessian
      and C. Sochichiu, Phys. Lett. B 522 , 345 (2001);
      C. Zachos, arXive: hep-th/0008010.
V. P. Nair, Phys. Lett. B 505  (2001) 249;
      V. P. Nair and A. P. Polychronakos, Phys. Lett. B 505  (2001) 267;
      C. Duval and  P. A. Horvathy,  Phys. Lett. B 479 , 284 (2000).
M. Eliashvili and G. Tsitsishvili, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
      B 14 , 1429 (2000); B. Muthukumar and P. Mitra, Phys. Rev. D
      66 , 027701 (2002); A. Deriglazov, arXive: hep-th/0208072;
      C. Acatrinei, arXive: hep-th/0106141.
R. Banerjee, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17 , 631 (2002);
      P. A. Horvathy,  Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 299 , 128 (2002); 
      S. Bellucci and A. Nersessian,  Phys. Lett. B 542 , 295 (2002).
L. Susskind, The quantum Hall fluid and noncommutative Chern-Simons
      theory , [hep-th/0101029]; A. P. Polychronakos, JHEP 04 , 011 
      (2001).
X. Calmet, B. Jurco, P. Schupp, J. Wess and M. Wohlgenannt,

      Euro. Phys. J. C 23 , 363 (2002).
I. A. Batalin and E. S. Fradkin,  Nucl. Phys. B 326 , 701 (1989).

      See, also, S. V. Shabanov J. Phys. A: Math Gen 26 , 2583 (1993).
L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics , 
      (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1988).
R. P. Malik, A. K. Mishra and G. Rajasekaran,  Int. J. Mod. Phys. 
      A 13 , 4759 (1998) [hep-th/9707004].
R. P. Malik,  Phys. Lett. B 316 , 257 (1993) [hep-th/0303071];
      Phys. Lett. B 345 , 131 (1995) [hep-th/9410173];
      Mod. Phys. Lett. A 11 , 2871 (1998) [hep-th/9503025].
A. P. Isaev and R. P. Malik,  Phys. Lett. B 280 , 219 (1992).
 




