




plain 
theorem Theorem [section]
lemma [theorem]Lemma 
corollary [theorem]Corollary 
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
conjecture [theorem]Conjecture 



0in
6.5in
0in
0in
8.5in
2ex




ILL-(TH)-03-01

hep-th/0302099



 

D-branes,  fields, and Ext groups  



Andrei Caldararu, Sheldon Katz and Eric Sharpe 

 Department of Mathematics 

University of Pennsylvania 

David Rittenhouse Lab.

209 South 33rd Street 

Philadelphia, PA  19104-6395 

 Department of Mathematics 

1409 W. Green St., MC-382 

University of Illinois 

Urbana, IL  61801 

 Department of Physics

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Urbana, IL 61801

andreic@math.upenn.edu , 
katz@math.uiuc.edu ,
ersharpe@uiuc.edu  






In this paper we extend previous work on calculating
massless boundary Ramond sector spectra of open strings
to include cases with nonzero flat  fields.
In such cases, D-branes are no longer well-modeled precisely
by sheaves, but rather they are replaced by 'twisted' sheaves,
reflecting the fact that gauge transformations of the  field
act as affine translations of the Chan-Paton factors.
As in previous work, we find that the massless boundary Ramond
sector states are counted by Ext groups - this time,
Ext groups of twisted sheaves.  As before, the computation of
BRST cohomology relies on physically realizing some spectral
sequences.  Subtleties that cropped up in previous work also appear
here.



 
February 2003

Introduction 


One of the predictions of current proposals for the physical
significance of derived categories (seefor an incomplete list of early references) is that
massless boundary Ramond sector states of open strings
connecting D-branes wrapped on complex submanifolds
of Calabi-Yau's, with holomorphic gauge bundles, should
be counted by mathematical objects known as Ext groups.
Specifically, if we have D-branes wrapped on the
complex submanifolds  and
 of a Calabi-Yau ,
with holomorphic vector bundles , ,
respectively, then massless boundary Ramond sector states
should be in one-to-one correspondence with elements of
either
 
or
 
(depending upon the open string orientation).

In we explicitly checked this proposal
for large-radius Calabi-Yau's,
by using standard well-known BCFT methods to compute 
the massless Ramond sector spectrum of open strings connecting
such D-branes, and then relating that spectrum to Ext groups.
Naively the massless Ramond sector states are not counted
by Ext groups, but rather sheaf cohomology groups that
are merely related to Ext groups via spectral sequences.
However, a closer examination of the physics revealed
that, at least in cases we understand well,
those spectral sequences are realized
directly in BRST cohomology, and so the massless Ramond sector
spectrum is counted directly by Ext groups.

In we extended the work in to consider
D-branes in orbifolds.  We again found that massless boundary
Ramond sector states are counted by Ext groups, this time
on quotient stacks.  Previously, open string spectra in orbifolds
had only been computed for topologically trivial brane configurations,
so we were able to implicitly solve the old technical challenge
of calculating spectra for more general configurations.
We also commented on the physical meaningfulness of quotient stacks.
For example, fractional branes cannot be described as sheaves
on quotient spaces - they can only be described as sheaves on quotient
stacks.   

Both of the papers implicitly assumed that there
was no  field background.
In this paper we shall extend the methods ofto the case of nonzero, nontrivial, flat  fields.

In the presence of a nontrivial  field,
one does not have an honest bundle on D-brane worldvolumes,
essentially
because in open strings gauge transformations of the  field
mix with transformations of the Chan-Paton factors, as
*  
Instead, the bundle is
twisted, in the sense that the transition functions 
no longer close to the identity on triple overlaps, but rather
obey
 
for some -valued 2-cocycle  partly defining the  field.
(For a readable description of nontrivial  fields, see).
This twisting has played an important role in, for example,
the derivationof Douglas's description of discrete torsion for D-branes,
and has also been discussed in.

One can make rigorous mathematical sense of such twisted
bundles, as well as analogous twisted notions
of sheaf cohomology and Ext groups, as we shall review.

 
In this paper, after discussing how nontrivial flat  fields
can be described by certain elements of the group
, we shall compute the massless boundary
Ramond sector spectrum of open strings connecting D-branes,
in the presence of a  field defined by 
, and we shall show that such states are
in one-to-one correspondence with elements of twisted
Ext groups, either
 
or
 
(depending upon the open string orientation).



We begin in section  with an overview of bundles
and sheaves twisted by the  field, and relevant bits of physics.
In section  we discuss massless boundary Ramond sector
spectra for open strings between parallel coincident branes.
The analysis proceeds very much as in, and we find
that said spectra are ultimately counted by Ext groups between
twisted sheaves.
In section  we discuss an example.  Unfortunately,
due to a lack of known Calabi-Yau manifolds with the relevant properties,
we are not able to discuss a wide variety of examples, but we do
at least illustrate how the relevant calculations are performed.
In section  we discuss massless boundary Ramond sector
spectra for parallel branes on submanifolds of different dimension.
In section  we discuss massless boundary Ramond sector spectra
for general branes.  Finally, in appendix  we prove some
spectral sequences used in this paper.








Overview of twisted sheaves    


As mentioned in the introduction, in the presence
of a nontrivial  field, one no longer has an
honest bundle on the worldvolume of a D-brane.
Ordinarily on triple overlaps the transition functions 
of a bundle obey the condition
 
However,  field gauge transformations combine nontrivially
with Chan-Paton translations, as
* 
so if the  field has nonzero transition functions,
then the connection on our 'bundle' picks up affine translations
between coordinate charts.
The effect is that the transition functions 
of the 'bundle' obey the condition  
for a 2-cocycle  representing a cohomology class
in .  These cohomology classes define gerbes,
and the  satisfying () define twisted bundles.
 From the exact sequence




we get a map  which 
takes  to a class in , the characteristic
class of the gerbe.  Note that
.
See for more details.

Note that modulo scalars, ()
becomes
 
where  is the  image of .
If the twisted bundle has rank , then () says that we
get a cohomology class .
 From the exact sequence




we get a coboundary map 
, 
taking  to an element of .  It is 
straightforward to check that the image of this class in 
 induced by the inclusion 
is precisely the class of the gerbe defined by
the original .  Since  is torsion, we see that
rank  twisted bundles can only exist if the class of the underlying gerbe
is  torsion. In particular, if the gerbe is not a torsion class, then there
are no finite-rank twisted bundles at all.

Such twisted bundles are understood in mathematics
(see for example).
One can define not only twisted bundles, but also twisted
coherent sheaves on a space.
In fact, sheaves can also be defined in terms of local data
and transition functions obeying a cocycle condition
(see for example), so we can define twisted
sheaves in exactly the same form as twisted bundles.
On the other hand, although twisted bundles are immediately
realized in D-brane physics, the physics of twisted sheaves
is more obscure.  Part of what we are doing in this paper
amounts to giving concrete evidence that D-branes in flat
 field backgrounds can be accurately modeled by twisted sheaves
(see also for previous work in this vein).

In this holomorphic context, the twisting is defined by
an element  associated
to the  field.  Moreover, one can also define Ext groups
between twisted sheaves.  If ,  are two
coherent sheaves on , both twisted by the same
element , then one can
define .
We will say more about such Ext groups and how to arrive at
elements of  from a  field momentarily.
First we will review twisted sheaves in more detail.

For convenience of the reader, we give the complete definition of a 
twisted sheaf.  If 
 is represented by a C ech 2-cocycle 
 on an
open cover , with the  holomorphic,
an -twisted sheaf  consists of a
pair 

where  is a sheaf on  for all  and

is an isomorphism for all , subject to the conditions:
 
;
;

.

The class of twisted sheaves together with the obvious notion of
homomorphism is an abelian category,
the category of -twisted sheaves, leading to the stated
notion of Ext groups by general homological algebra. 

This notation is consistent, since one can prove that this category
is independent of the choice of the covering
 () or of the particular cocycle
 ()

Now a -field is a connection on a gerbe.  To say it is a
connection means that we can express it locally as a 2-form ,
subject to gauge transformations  for some
1-forms .  The field strength  is then globally
defined.  Since  is exact, we
can locally write

, where  are local -valued functions,
once again representing the class of the underlying gerbe. In this
context,  is the characteristic class of the
gerbe (it actually lies in ).  If in addition the
 field is flat, i.e. if , then the above considerations lead
to the holonomy class of  in .  See
 for more details.  In particular the contribution of the
-field to the action can be specified topologically for a closed
string worldsheet.

A connection on a twisted  bundle in the presence of a -field is 
analogous to the usual notion of a connection.  We have a local collection
of 1 forms  satisfying




Here,  is the gauge transformation of the -field as discussed
above, and  is the  identity matrix.  
Note that  is not gauge invariant, but  is gauge invariant.

For completeness, we describe the
relationship between elements of 
and gerbes, at least in the case of a Calabi-Yau threefold.  Extensions
are straightforward.
There is an exact sequence
 
and on a Calabi-Yau threefold, .  Thus 
 is the kernel of 
 
This map can be described by first mapping
, then following with the
Hodge-theoretic projection of a de Rham third cohomology class onto
its  component.  Since an element of  is
real, the  component vanishes whenever its  component
vanishes.  Thus we see that given an element of 
,(We are not being quite precise in
notation here,
as  does not embed in  in the presence of
torsion.)  we can uniquely reconstruct a
corresponding element of .  Note that
 plays an important role
in the generalized Hodge conjecture in dimension 3.  For more details on
this circle of ideas, see.

Define the intermediate Jacobian




a complex torus of dimension .  Given a family of
holomorphic curves on the Calabi-Yau , parametrized by , there is an Abel-Jacobi
mapping



Now  is not an abelian variety, but it contains an
abelian variety  whose dimension is equal to the rank of
.  In fact,  is the maximal
abelian variety contained in  and orthogonal to .
The generalized Hodge conjecture asserts that the Abel-Jacobi mapping is
surjective for some family of curves.

For example, on the Fermat quintic threefold, 
 has rank 200
and consequently  is an abelian variety 
of dimension 200.  In this case, it is straightforward to check that the
Abel-Jacobi image for the family of lines on  is precisely .
Furthermore,  decomposes as a direct sum of genus 2 Jacobians.  This
genus 2 Jacobian has appeared in the physics literature inand the relevant mathematics has been discussed 
more recently in.

In this paper, we are only interested in flat  fields,
which means that the curvature (the de Rham image of the
characteristic class) vanishes, so the corresponding
element of   is purely torsion.  When this happens, its
image in  necessarily vanishes for the above reasons.

In summary, the torsion subgroup of  is isomorphic to the
torsion subgroup of .  So the elements 
of  relevant to our study of D-branes correspond to 
purely topological information.

As we have seen above, one can define holomorphic locally free 
twisted sheaves of finite rank only when the twisting
is by an element of  corresponding
to a torsion element of .  The elements arising this way
form the Brauer group .
(A widely-believed conjecture of Grothendieck says that the elements 
of the Brauer group
are the same as the torsion elements of .)
For twistings by non-torsion elements, no locally free twisted
sheaves of finite rank exist. 
So our physical constraint of flat  fields translates
directly into mathematics.

In passing, we will note that 
there is a closely analogous phenomenon in the study of WZW models.
There, one has strings propagating on a group manifold with a nontrivial
 field background, in which the curvature  of the  field
is nonzero (this is the point of the Wess-Zumino term, after all).
D-branes cannot wrap the entire group manifold.  Instead,
D-branes can only wrap submanifolds  such that the restriction
of the characteristic class to  is torsion, mirroring the
statement that finite-rank locally-free twisted sheaves only exist when
the characteristic class of the twisting is torsion.


Another way to think about twisted holomorphic bundles is that they
are associated to projective space bundles that cannot be obtained
by projectivizing an ordinary holomorphic vector bundle.
In detail, given a projective space bundle, imagine lifting 
the fibers locally from  to .
The original projective space bundle was a bundle ,
so its transition functions close on triple overlaps.
However, if we lift those same transition functions from
 to , then they need only close
up to the action of  on triple overlaps.
In other words, given a projective space bundle, it need not
lift to an honest vector bundle, but in general will only
lift to a twisted vector bundle, twisted by an element of
 defined by the failure of the
transition functions to close on triple overlaps.

Given two twisted sheaves , , one can
define a twisted sheaf of local homomorphisms 
.
If  is twisted by 
and  is twisted by ,
then  is
a twisted sheaf, twisted by 
.

In particular, if two bundles ,  are twisted
by the same  element of ,
then  is an
ordinary, untwisted sheaf.

We can use that fact to set up homological algebra in the
usual form.  If ,  are two twisted sheaves,
but twisted by the same  element of ,
then we can define local 
 and global 
.

This last fact is directly relevant for this paper,
as in any given theory there is only a single  field that
twists the D-brane bundles.  Thus, open string spectra are
always computed between twisted sheaves that have been
twisted by the same element of ,
which means that for all our string spectrum calculations,
there exists a relevant notion of Ext groups
in mathematics, and the associated Ext sheaves are ordinary sheaves.


Serre duality functions for twisted sheaves much as for 
ordinary untwisted sheaves.
For  an element of the Brauer
group (i.e.  corresponding to a flat  field),
for any two -twisted coherent sheaves ,
 on a Calabi-Yau manifold , we have
 



We have spoken a great deal so far about twisted sheaves
in general terms.  Although our remarks apply in principle,
in practice we unfortunately do not know of any examples
of smooth Calabi-Yau manifolds with non-zero torsion part of
.

We do know of some spaces that are close but not quite Calabi-Yau,
and for the purposes of illustrating our methods with some
concrete examples, we will mention a few such examples.


Our example of a space with nonzero torsion in  is taken
directly from the appendix of
.  
Let  be a generic hypersurface
of bidegree (2,2), and let  be the discriminant
locus of the fibration , where
 is the projection onto the first factor.  One can show that
 is an octic surface with 80 ordinary nodes.  Let 
 be the double cover of  branched over ,
and let  be the blowup of the
80 nodes of , so that  is smooth.
Since we have blown-up the nodes, rather than small-resolved them,
this space is not quite Calabi-Yau, but in some sense, close.
As shown in, this space has 2-torsion in .








Parallel coincident branes on     

Let  be a smooth complex submanifold of
a Calabi-Yau , and let  define
a flat  field.  Let ,  be two -twisted
holomorphic bundles on , corresponding to the twisted bundles
on the worldvolumes of two sets of branes, both wrapped on .

Since we are assuming the  field is flat, locally we can
gauge the  field to zero, so the physics analysis proceeds exactly as 
in, except that the Chan-Paton factors now couple to
twisted bundles rather than honest bundles.
We shall omit the detailed explanation (consult for details).
The boundary Ramond sector states are of the form
 
where
* 
as BRST invariants in the standard notation for the  model,
subject to the boundary conditions 
for Dirichlet directions, and naively   for
Neumann directions.  (The boundary conditions are modified
by the Chan-Paton factors, as in, a point we shall
return to momentarily.)
The indices ,  are Chan-Paton indices, describing
the -twisted holomorphic bundles ,  on .

Naively, physical states of the form above should be in one-to-one
correspondence with elements of the sheaf cohomology groups
.

Note that although  and  are both twisted bundles,
instead of honest bundles, we can still speak of ordinary bundle-valued
sheaf cohomology, since the product 
is untwisted.

As in,
there is a spectral sequence
 
relating the sheaf cohomology above to the desired (-twisted)
Ext groups.  (See appendix  for proofs.)


How is this spectral sequence realized physically?
As in, there are two important subtleties
that must be taken into account:
 
 need not split holomorphically, i.e.  
 in general, so it is not quite right
to interpret the vertex operators as -valued forms.
The boundary conditions are twisted, by the curvature of the
Chan-Paton factors and the  field (see, 
),
so that for Neumann directions,
, but rather 

.
Just as in, in the special case that ,
we shall see explicitly that taking care of these two subtleties has the
effect of physically realizing the spectral sequence in BRST cohomology.
Furthermore, we conjecture that the same result is true in general:
being careful about these subtleties should have the effect of realizing
all spectral sequences we discuss in this paper directly in BRST cohomology,
so that the physical massless boundary Ramond sector states are in 
one-to-one correspondence with
elements of Ext groups.


Let us specialize to the case , to see how
the spectral sequence is realized explicitly.
As the argument is essentially identical to that in,
we shall be brief.
We deal with both of the subtleties above in the same form as in.
The first subtlety is dealt with by lifting -valued forms to
-valued forms, which can be directly associated to vertex operators,
unlike -valued forms.  The resulting -valued forms need
not be holomorphic, however.  Their images under 
are -valued forms, to which we can apply the boundary condition


.  Thus, the BRST operator acting on
the -valued forms can be interpreted as a composition of
 and an evaluation map.
For example, starting from an element of 
, we have the composition
 
where the first map () is the coboundary map,
and the second map () is the evaluation map realizing the
boundary conditions.
This argument is identical to that used in,
except for the fact that here  is an -twisted
holomorphic bundle, not an honest holomorphic bundle.
Also just as in, the composition above is exactly
the differential  of the spectral sequence.  

Finally, as in 
, we still have an Atiyah class 

 corresponding to the canonical extension
 
of twisted sheaves defined by the twisted sheaf of 1-jets of .
The second map is simply cup product
with .  Note that 
 is an ordinary sheaf.  The computation proceeds exactly
as in.  The only change is that the boundary conditions
get modified as we have discussed above, corresponding to
() being an extension of twisted sheaves rather than of 
ordinary sheaves.


Thus, we have seen explicitly that in the special case
, the spectral sequence is realized directly
in BRST cohomology.  We conjecture that the same statement is true
for more general , .











Example   
In this section we shall briefly consider an example
involving branes wrapped on a submanifold of a space with
nontrivial torsion in .

Now, as mentioned earlier, we do not have any examples of
Calabi-Yau's with such a property.
However, we do have some examples of spaces that are not quite
Calabi-Yau, and for the purposes of illustrating how to perform
computations using the technology presented here, such an
example will do.  Of course, since the space  is not Calabi-Yau,
our computations will be purely formal in nature - they cannot
reflect any physics, since the B model cannot be defined on .

Recall earlier we mentioned an example taken from the appendix
of.  
Let  be a generic hypersurface
of bidegree (2,2), and let  be the discriminant
locus of the fibration , where
 is the projection onto the first factor.  One can show that
 is an octic surface with 80 ordinary nodes.  Let 
 be the double cover of  branched over ,
and let  be the blowup of the
80 nodes of , so that  is smooth.

The discussion in identifies a 2-torsion element 

by exhibiting a  bundle over  minus its nodes, and showing
that this is not the projectivization of a vector bundle .  After 
blowing up the nodes, this argument can be transferred to .

In other words, the  bundle of is the projectivization
of an -twisted bundle  on .  

Let us imagine (formally) working with the B model on ,
and wrapping D-branes on all of  with twisted bundle .
Since we are wrapping all of , the spectral sequence is 
unnecessary.  In any case, the spectral
sequence degenerates and 
.
Note that  is an ordinary bundle (the 
associated Azumaya algebra of Brauer group theory).
In passing, note that it is only because the  field is nontrivial
that we could consider such twisted bundles on the brane worldvolume - 
were the  field to be zero, for example, no such branes would exist.


Now let  be the
exceptional divisor of the blowup of one of the 80 nodes.  
Each .  In particular,
there is no torsion in  or
 and so the  field can be trivialized after
restricting to .  Thus the gauge fields on -branes wrapping
 live in ordinary bundles.

If  and  are distinct, they are disjoint and so 



where  and 
 are the natural inclusions.

Furthermore, the spectral sequence for 



is identical to the corresponding spectral sequence in the absence of a 
-field, so the presence of the -field does not affect the spectrum.
















Parallel branes on submanifolds of different dimension 

Let  define the  field,
let  and 
be smooth complex submanifolds of  with ,
and let ,  be -twisted holomorphic
bundles on , , respectively, corresponding to branes wrapped
on  and .

The physical analysis in this case proceeds just as in.
The massless boundary Ramond sector states are of the form
 
where ,  are Chan-Paton factors describing
the -twisted bundles  and ,
the  indices are tangent to ,
and (momentarily ignoring the twisting of)
the  indices are normal to .
Naively, the BRST cohomology classes of such states appear to be counted
by the sheaf cohomology groups

.

Exactly as in, there is a spectral sequence
 
(See appendix  for proofs.)

Exactly as in, we have neglected certain subtleties,
described in more detail in the previous section, and we conjecture
that when those subtleties are taken into account, we are left with
BRST cohomology classes counted by the -twisted Ext groups above,
as we explicitly saw happens for parallel coincident branes in the
previous section.
















General intersecting branes  

The analysis for general intersections proceeds much as in the
above and in.  Let ,  be smooth submanifolds,
and let ,  be twisted holomorphic vector
bundles on , , respectively, each twisted by the pullback
of an element of .  In order to write down
the massless boundary Ramond sector states for the general case,
we need to take into account facts about branes at angles
.  We refer the reader to for details
of the analysis in the untwisted case, and the analysis in the
twisted case is a nearly exact duplicate.
Suffice it to say that the massless boundary Ramond sector spectrum,
ignoring subtleties in boundary conditions, appears to be counted by the
sheaf cohomology groups
 
where
 
and , .

Just as in, we are led to believe the boundary Fock vacua
are sections of the line bundles 
and , in order to get
any relationship to Ext groups.  As before, this statement is supported
by analysis of anomalies, and suggests implications for supersymmetry
breaking, and is also required to restore Serre duality invariance of
the spectrum.  These subtleties are all discussed in great detail
in, and we refer the reader there for more information.


Exactly as in, there are two spectral sequences
* 
(See appendix  for proofs.)


All the subtleties that arose in have immediate analogues
here.  For purposes of brevity, we merely refer the reader tofor more details.  Just as in, we conjecture that both of
the spectral sequences above are realized physically in BRST cohomology,
due ultimately to Chan-Paton-induced boundary condition twistings of
the form described in, as we explicitly saw happens
earlier in the special case of parallel coincident branes.













Conclusions 


In this paper we have explicitly computed the massless boundary
Ramond sector spectrum in open strings between D-branes wrapped
on holomorphic submanifolds, with nontrivial flat  fields
turned on, carrying on the program of.
Just as in our earlier work, we find that the
spectra are again counted by Ext groups, this time
Ext groups between twisted sheaves, where the twist is
determined by the  field.


It has been previously proposed that
some properties of D-branes could be modeled by derived categories.
The proposals in, however, really
only speak to a special class of D-branes, namely, those
with no background fields turned on - no  field,
and no Higgs field vevs.  In this paper we begin to see how some
of those constraints can be lifted.
In the presence of a nontrivial flat  field, for example,
we have given concrete evidence that ordinary derived categories
should be replaced by derived categories of twisted sheaves.
(See also for some previous work in this vein.)
It should also be possible to lift some of the other restrictions
mentioned.  For example, it has been suggested that
giving nilpotent vevs to Higgs fields might be modeled
sheaf-theoretically in terms of sheaves on nonreduced subschemes
of Calabi-Yau's.  Work to compare open string spectra in
such backgrounds with Ext groups between sheaves on nonreduced 
subschemes is in progress.




Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank D. Morrison for useful conversations.  The work
of A.C. is partially supported by an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship.  The work of S.K. is partially supported by NSF grant DMS
02-96154 and NSA grant MDA904-02-1-0024.  The work of E.S. is
partially supported by NSF grant DMS 02-96154.




Proofs of spectral sequences   

In this appendix we derive the spectral sequences used in the rest of
the paper.  We work with a background smooth variety (or complex
manifold) , endowed with a -field .  We
consider branes  and  supported at the smooth
subvarieties  and  of .  We let  be their scheme
theoretic intersection, and we label the inclusions as follows:
 
The bundles  and  are twisted by  and 
on  and , respectively.  We assume that  is smooth; in
concrete terms this means that the set theoretic intersection of 
and  is smooth, and furthermore the equality

holds at every point . 


The main spectral sequence that we want to derive is:

 
Let  be the rank of , the normal bundle of  in , and
let  be the vector bundle on  given by

There exists a convergent spectral sequence


 
We use the convention that  for a bundle  on
, even if  .   denotes the dual of the bundle
.


Since  and  are twisted by  and ,
respectively,  and  are defined, and they are both
-twisted, .  Thus 
 is untwisted and hence  makes
sense.  See  for details.  Similarly, 
 is untwisted, so the  term is defined.


Before we can proceed to the proof of Theorem  we
need several auxiliary results.

 
Around every point  there exists an open neighborhood 
 and a smooth subvariety  of  containing  such that
 
[a)] , 
[b)]  is the scheme theoretic intersection of  and ,
and
[c)]  and  intersect in the expected dimension, i.e.



 

Proceed by induction on .  If , then 
 and we can take .  If , then , and since we
assumed that

we conclude that  is not contained in .

Observe that  is the intersection of the (Zariski) tangent
spaces  of all the local hypersurfaces  through  that
contain . Since  is not
contained in , there exists a hypersurface  that contains
 and such that .  Thus  and 
 are smooth at , of dimensions  and 
, respectively, and .  We have

thus we are in the same situation as before, but with
.  By the induction hypothesis we can find 
in  satisfying the conditions of the proposition.  Considering 
inside of  instead of  still satisfies (a) and (b), and we have
* 



 
If  then 

where  is the normal bundle of  in .  (We abuse
notation and write  for , etc.)

 
Since the question is local and  is locally a complete
intersection, we can use the Koszul resolution with respect to the
normal bundle to obtain a locally free resolution of 

 
around every point of , where  is locally free on 
and .  
To compute  we
tensor this resolution by , which has the effect of restricting
all the bundles to  and making all the maps in the complex zero,
hence the result.
 

 [  ]
If  is of the expected dimension, i.e.,

then

for .

 

where .


 
By Proposition , around every point of  we can find
 smooth such that  is contained in ,  and  intersect
in the expected dimension, and .  

Since  and  intersect in the expected dimension, using
Proposition  we see that the change-of-rings spectral
sequence 

consists of the single column


where the last equality is Proposition .  In other
words,


At each , the composition of maps


is injective, because a tangent vector to  will be tangent to 
only if it is tangent to , and then it is tangent to .  Comparing
dimensions, we see that the natural map 
 is therefore an isomorphism.
Finally,
one can trace through the identifications and see that the local
isomorphism

does not depend on the choice of , hence it lifts to a global
isomorphism. 

As this calculation can be tedious, we supplement this argument with
an alternative approach.  The claimed result is elementary to check
directly for .  For  this is also straightforward: using the
exact sequence



we compute that  is isomorphic
to the kernel of the map



namely 



But this can be seen directly to be isomorphic to ; the
isomorphism is induced by the natural map

 taking a class represented by a function
 to the linear functional on  induced
by .

For  we note the existence of a natural map
 
This alternating product is constructed by using the exterior algebra
structure on any local Koszul resolution and the multiplication on 
.  As the algebra structure on the Koszul complex is 
canonical (a change of regular sequence induces a canonical isomorphism
of algebras), the map () is canonical, independent of the
choice of local defining equations yielding the Koszul complex.  Then
our earlier local calculations show that () is an isomorphism.


 From here on we switch to the language of derived categories.
Recall (,) that objects in the derived category
of twisted coherent sheaves on a space (or abelian groups, etc.) are
complexes of such sheaves, with morphisms defined using the machinery
of derived categories.  For a morphism between smooth spaces (as well
as in much more general cases), one has derived functors corresponding
to push forward, pull back, , , , etc.  Applying
any of these functors to a complex yields again a complex.  Given such
a complex  (of twisted sheaves, abelian groups, etc.) we can
consider its -th cohomology object, denoted by .  It is
a twisted sheaf or an abelian group, accordingly.  We use the
convention that .

Note that pushing forward by an affine morphism is exact, so we do not
need to derive this functor.  Also, tensoring by a locally free sheaf
is exact, and this tensoring operation does not need to be derived
either.  On the other hand, pulling back to a subvariety is only right
exact, so we need to left-derive it to get a well-defined functor on
derived categories.

 
We have


Combined with Proposition , this yields



 
By the projection formula (, ) we have

On the other hand, since  is exact, we have

and thus

 
(Here we have used the fact that for a sheaf or twisted sheaf, pulling
back in the underived way  its push-forward by a closed embedding
yields back the original sheaf.)  Using the projection formula again
for  we have


and since  is locally free on  we get


But for sheaves  and underived operations , 
.  Therefore
* 
which is the first result.  Applying again the projection formula we have


By Proposition , 

hence the second result.


 
If  is a locally complete intersection embedding
of varieties or complex analytic spaces of relative dimension 
(such is the case if, for example, W is a smooth subvariety of the
smooth variety ), and  is an element of , then we
have a natural isomorphism

for  and , where

(Here, , and  denotes the shift
by .)

Applying  to both sides we conclude that  is a right
adjoint to , as functors between  and 
.

 
To prove the first statement it is enough to show that there exist
natural local isomorphisms 

for  an open set of , sufficiently small to trivialize ,
and .  (Here we work with either the analytic or the
etale topology, as the Zariski topology is not fine enough for the
Brauer group to be interesting.)  In this form, the above isomorphism
is nothing else than duality for a finite morphism (; see  for
similar statements for morphisms of analytic spaces).

The second statement follows immediately from the fact that 


for -twisted sheaves .



Now we can finally prove the main result:



Proof of the main theorem. 
The functor  is left adjoint to
 (, ), so we have

 
Writing down the Grothendieck spectral sequence for the composition of
the two functors  (contravariant) and 
 (covariant) yields the convergent spectral sequence


(Note the implicit change of sign in , due to the fact that
 is contravariant.)  Using
Proposition  we get that 


which by Grothendieck duality (Proposition ) gives


But  and  are locally free, so 
* 
Renumbering and putting it all together we arrive at our result: there
exists a convergent spectral sequence











 199 



 P. Aspinwall and R. Donagi,
"The heterotic string, the tangent bundle, and derived categories,"
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2  (1998) 1041-1074, 
hep-th/9806094 .

 E. Sharpe, "D-branes, derived categories, and
Grothendieck groups," Nucl. Phys. B561  (1999) 433-450,
hep-th/9902116 .

 M. Douglas, "D-branes, categories, and 
 supersymmetry," J. Math. Phys. 42  (2001) 2818-2843,
hep-th/0011017 .

 P. Aspinwall and A. Lawrence, "Derived categories
and zero-brane stability," JHEP 0108 (2001) 004, hep-th/0104147 .



 S. Katz and E. Sharpe, "D-branes, open string vertex
operators, and Ext groups,"
hep-th/0208104 .


 S. Katz, T. Pantev, and E. Sharpe, "D-branes, orbifolds,
and Ext groups," hep-th/0212218 .


 N. Hitchin, "Lectures on special Lagrangian submanifolds,"
math.DG/9907034 .


 E. Sharpe, "Discrete torsion," hep-th/0008154 .

 E. Sharpe, "Recent developments in discrete torsion,"
Phys. Lett. B498  (2001) 104-110, hep-th/0008191 .

 M. Douglas, "D-branes and discrete torsion," 
hep-th/9807235 .

 A. Kapustin, "D-branes in a topologically nontrivial
-field," hep-th/9909089 .

 P. Bouwknegt and V. Mathai, "D-branes,  fields, and
twisted K-theory," JHEP 0003 (2000) 007,
hep-th/0002023 .


 A. Caldararu, 
"Derived categories of twisted sheaves
on Calabi-Yau manifolds," Cornell University Ph.D. thesis, 2000.
Available at http://www.math.upenn.edu/ andreic 


 D. Freed and E. Witten, "Anomalies in string theory
with D-branes," hep-th/9907189 .




 D. Eisenbud and J. Harris, The Geometry of Schemes ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 2000.

 A. Kapustin and D. Orlov, "Vertex algebras,
mirror symmetry, and D-branes:  the case of complex tori,"
hep-th/0010293 .



 C.H. Clemens and P.A. Griffiths, "The intermediate
Jacobian of the cubic threefold," Ann. Math. 95  (1972), 281-356.

 P. Candelas, X. de la Ossa, and F. Rodriguez-Villegas,
"Calabi-Yau manifolds over finite fields, I," hep-th/0012233 .

 A. Mustata, Ph.D. thesis, University of Utah, 2003.

 C. Klimcik and P. Severa, "Open strings and D-branes in
WZNW models," Nucl. Phys. B488  (1997) 653-676,
hep-th/9609112 .

 A. Alekseev and V. Schomerus, "D-branes in the WZW model,"
Phys. Rev. D60  (1999) 061901,
hep-th/9812193 .

 P. Aspinwall, D. Morrison, and M. Gross, "Stable singularities
in string theory," Comm. Math. Phys. 178  (1996) 115-134,
hep-th/9503208 .



  E. Witten, "Mirror manifolds and topological
field theory," in Mirror Symmetry I , ed. S.-T. Yau,
American Mathematical Society, 1998.


 A. Abouelsaood, C. Callan, C. Nappi, and S. Yost,
"Open strings in background gauge fields,"
Nucl. Phys. B280  (1987) 599-624.

 C. Callan, C. Lovelace, C. Nappi, and S. Yost,
"String loop corrections to beta functions,"
Nucl. Phys. B288  (1987) 525-550.


 M. Berkooz, M. Douglas, and R. Leigh, "Branes intersecting
at angles," Nucl. Phys. B480  (1996) 265-278, hep-th/9606139 .


 T. Gomez and E. Sharpe, "D-branes and scheme theory,"
hep-th/0008150 .


J.-P. Serre, Algebre Locale - Multiplicites , LNM 11,
  Springer-Verlag, 1965.


D. Eisenbud,  Commutative algebra with a view toward algebraic
geometry , LNM 150, Springer-Verlag, 1995.


R. Hartshorne, Residues and Duality , LNM 20, Springer-Verlag, 1966.




 C. Banica and   O. Stanasila, 
  Algebraic methods in the global theory of complex spaces , John Wiley,
  New York, 1976.












