   
Particle production related to the tunneling in false vacuum
decay 


 
 Michael Maziashvili  

 Department of Theoretical
Physics, Tbilisi State University, 380028 Tbilisi, Georgia 


 
Motivated by the work of Mersini, the particle production related
to the tunneling in false vacuum decay is carefully investigated
in the thin-wall approximation. It is shown that in this case the
particle production is exponentially suppressed even when the
momentum is comparable to the curvature scale of the bubble. The
number of created particles is ultraviolet finite.
General discussion 
False vacuum decay by the tunneling in the WKB approximation is
described by the -symmetric bounce solution,
. In the limit of small
energy-density difference, , between the true and false
vacuum the bounce looks like a large four-dimensional spherical
bubble of true vacuum separated by a thin wall from a sea of false
vacuum. The evolution of the system after tunneling is described
by the  invariant solution that is obtained by the
analytic continuation of the bounce to the Minkowskian time
, see. Since the field 
describing the bubble nucleation end expansion is coupled to
itself and to the fluctuation field, the false vacuum decay
through the barrier penetration is accompanied by the particle
production. Using the formalism developed infor the calculation of particle number the particle production by
the thin-walled bubble was considered in. However, we
fail to corroborate the main conclusion of that for the
momentum comparable to the curvature scale of the bubble there is
a strong enhancement of the particle production. In this paper we
would like to point out that, in general, the particle production
in the thin-wall approximation is strongly suppressed. The
calculations have been undertaken to exhibit the exponential
suppression of the particle production, even when the momentum is
comparable to the curvature scale of the bubble, rather than for
actual use in calculation of particle number at all momenta.
Throughout this paper the metric signature in Minkowski space-time
is  and units  are used. The calculations
are present in sec.2.
Particle spectrum 
Throughout this paper we restrict ourselves to the consideration
of thin-wall case. This approximation for the bubble formation is
considered in. We consider a scalar field 
defined by the Lagrange density  The
potential has the form
  where
 and  are positive parameters. The potential
() has a local minimum at  and a global
minimum at  Bounce solution with a
good accuracy is  where
 and . Thickness of
the bubble wall is . For the potential () the
condition for the validity of the thin-wall approximation is 
. In other words, in this limiting case
the energy-density difference between the true and false vacuum is
much smaller than the height of the barrier . For the
calculation of particle spectrum we use the standard technique
developed in. The results relevant for our
discussion can be summarized as follows. The coordinate system
used in the Euclidean region is  where
 are usual angle coordinates on two-dimensional
sphere and  are related to  and 
as follows
  The coordinate system in
the Minkowski region may obtained by replacement 
, which yields
  The basic equation which
governs the fluctuation field  reads
 
where  denotes the partial derivative with respect
to  and  is the Laplacian operator on
three-dimensional unit hyperboloid. Since the bounce solution has
 symmetry in Minkowski region one can label  by the
eigenvalues of the angular momentum,  as well as by the
radial momentum, , and write
  where 
are eigenfunctions of the operator  with eigenvalues
. After substituting Eq.() into Eq.() and
analytically continuing of  to the Euclidean region by
replacement 
 one obtains the equation for the fluctuation field in the
under-barrier region
 
where . This is a zero-energy
Schro dinger
equation 
of a particle in the potential
  Thus,  is
given by solving Eq.() with  replaced by .
Since in the thin-wall approximation  is very close
to the true vacuum value  the solution obtained in this way
after the analytical continuation at the turning point 
will have the form

where . At  the field
 is in false vacuum state and correspondingly the
fluctuation field  satisfies the vanishing boundary
condition when . The spectrum of created
particles  is given by  For detailed description of the general
formalism see. 
If  is of order or
smaller than  one can approximate the potential  as
follows
  where 


. We have
neglected the contribution coming from the -term because
at  this term equals zero and at  this is of
order . The general solution of
Eq.() in regions  is written in terms of
modified Bessel functions. For solving this equation we have used
the program package Maple 7. 
In region  the
solution reads
 

 In region , the exact solution to this equation is
expressed in terms of Whittaker  functions. Using
the program package Maple 7 one finds that in region 
the solution has the form
 
where .
For  by taking into account that in the thin-wall
approximation  one gets
*  and
*  It is convenient to introduce
the following notations *  where 
 and the prime denotes
differentiation with respect to . These quantities are needed
for the matchings at . Using the program package Maple
7 one can estimate  at the
desired value of . 
In region  the solution
satisfying the vanishing boundary condition when
 reads
 
For our purposes the quantity of immediate interest is
, see. So, one can omit the
common multiplier of  coefficients as well as the common
multiplier of  coefficients. The matching at 
gives  
the proportionality coefficients are the same for  and ,
here and below the prime denotes differentiation with respect to
the whole argument. The matching at  gives
 
the proportionality coefficients are the same for  and .
In the thin-wall approximation  and for
evaluating the modified Bessel functions of the 's
one can  use the asymptotic formulae. 
For  one
can use the following asymptotic expansions , see,
 
For  the asymptotic expansions of modified Bessel
functions of purely imaginary order and their derivatives are
derived in. Motivated in part by the fact that
, where  is real variable, is the imaginary part of
 up to a multiplicative factor, recent investigations
have been carried out on the real part , denoted by
, Any
of  and  can be constructed from
the remaining two functions by the identity
 
Both  and  are real valued and even
functions of . 
For , introducing , where
, the leading terms of asymptotic expansions are
 
For  the leading terms of asymptotic expansions take
the form  where  are Airy functions.

For , introducing  and
, where , the leading terms
of asymptotic expansions are 
We can now analyze the particle spectrum. Using the leading
asymptotic terms from Eq.() for small values of 
one gets
 
Notice that this result is different from that one obtained in
 for small values of . Taking into account that
 are real valued functions
from Eqs.(,,) one obtains
 and
correspondingly
 
Thus, If  from Eq.() one simply concludes that
 is suppressed at least as
  As it is clearly seen from Eq.()
 vanishes for that values of  at which 
becomes infinity. Using Eqs.(,,) one
can easily estimate the term  with exponential
accuracy. If  is large, of order , but small than 
 such that  is not very close to  from
Eq.() one gets
 
where . For the values of  very close to
 one has to use Eq.(). If  is close to 
using Eq.() one gets
 
For  of order  such that  from Eq.()
one gets
 

For very large
momentum, assuming for instance , one can
approximate  as follows
 
Namely, we have replaced the well of the second term of
Eq.() in region  by the square well, and if  is
very large one can neglect the contribution coming from such a
deformation of the potential in region  in comparison with
the term . Now in region  the general solution of
Eq.() is expressed in terms of Bessel functions of purely
imaginary order. With no loss of generality one can choose the
solution in this region to be real valued function. For instance
in this region one can take
 
It is clear that for the particle spectrum one gets again the
Eq.() and simply concludes that for very large momentum
 is suppressed at least as
  The asymptotic behavior of
Bessel functions of large purely imaginary order can be found in
. Namely, in one can find the asymptotic
expansions of  and ,
 
and using the standard relation
 can determine the
asymptotic behavior of . Using
Eqs.(,) one can easily estimate the ratio
 with exponential accuracy. The matchings at
 give  and
 respectively.
Correspondingly, for very large momentum
 
Thus, we have explicitly shown that, in general, the particle
production in the thin-wall approximation is exponentially
suppressed. Using Eqs.(,) one can also
evaluate the ultraviolet finiteness  of the number of created
particles. Without carrying out the explicit computation from
these asymptotic formulae one concludes that for very large
momentum the particle production is controlled by the term
rational function of . As an
unessential to this problem we do not take into account the terms
enclosed in the braces in Eq.(). For this expression the
integral  is
certainly convergent. So we infer that the number of created
particles is ultraviolet finite. This completes the review.
Acknowledgments 
It is our pleasure to acknowledge helpful conversations with
Professors A.Khelashvili, G.Lavrelashvili and I.Lomidze.

 99 
S.Coleman, Phys.Rev. D15  (1977) 2929.
T.Vachaspati and A.Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D43  (1991) 3846.
T.Tanaka, M.Sasaki and K.Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D49 
(1994) 1039;
 K.Yamamoto, T.Tanaka, and M.Sasaki, Phys.
Rev. D51  (1995) 2968; 
T.Hamazaki, M.Sasaki T.Tanaka,
and K.Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D53  (1996) 2045.
L.Mersini, Phys. Rev. D59  (1999) 123521.
E.Kamke, Ordinary Differential Equations (Nauka, Moscow, 1971).
M.Abramowitz and I.Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions
(Nauka, Moscow, 1979).
B.Fabijonas, J. Comput. Appl. Math. 146  (2002) 323.
H.Bateman and A.Erde lyi, Higher Transcendental Functions,
Volume 2, (Nauka, Moscow, 1966).

