






















 
 
 
 


0 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
plus 2pt minus 6pt   plus 2pt
plus2pt minus 3pt  2pt plus 1pt minus 1pt  plus 2pt minus 2pt
plus4pt minus 4pt  height 7pt depth 2pt width 0pt 
 


0 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
plus 2pt minus 6pt plus 2pt
plus2pt minus 3pt  2pt plus 1pt minus 1pt  plus 2pt minus 2pt
plus4pt minus 4pt  height 7pt depth 2pt width 0pt 
 








ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 
 >0 (.)
#1.  >0
( .)#1 . 
()#1  by1  



#1#2   #1 
[#1]  #2
.    
by1  ;^^J 
^^J  #1#2  

References  
 

Ann. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
Commun. Math. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
J. Geom. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
J. Math. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
J. Phys.  A#1   (#2 ) #3 
Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A#1   (#2 ) #3 
Int. J. Theor. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
Mod. Phys. Lett.  A#1   (#2 ) #3 
Nuovo Cimento  #1 D  (#2 ) #3 
Nucl. Phys.  B#1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Lett.  #1 B  (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Lett.  #1 A  (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rev.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rev.  A#1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rev.  B#1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rev.  D#1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rev. Lett.  #1  (#2 ) #3 
Prog. Theor. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
Rev. Mod. Phys.  #1   (#2 ) #3 
Phys. Rep.  #1 C  (#2 ) #3 
Z. Phys.  C#1   (#2 ) #3 


    
 


2pt #1  



  1pt #1 
by 1 


JanuaryFebruaryMarchAprilMayJuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctoberNovemberDecember,  


#1   #1 
by #1 
by #1 


23cm 
15.7cm 
-1mm 
1
plus 1pt minus 1pt
8000
14.5pt plus 1pt minus 1pt 

#1#2  
#1#2   
#1#2   
#1 
#1 
  0    0.0433em0  
0pt 
 
 
tr  
  
  
  
( 
) 
 
 

R    X    Z    C  

twoline.eps 
twointav.eps 
twospectline.eps 








M. Reed, B. Simon,
Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics, 
Vol.II , Academic Press, New York, 1980 

S. Albeverio, F. Gesztesy, R. Hoegh-Krohn and H. Holden,
Solvable Models in Quantum Mechanics,
Springer, New York, 1988 

P. S eba,
Czech. J. Phys.  36  (1986) 667
 
I. Tsutsui, T. Fu lo p and T. Cheon,
 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.  69  (2000) 3473 

T. Cheon, T. Fu lo p and I. Tsutsui,
294 2001 1  

T. Uchino and I. Tsutsui,
Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics with a Point Singularity ,
quant-ph/0210084 

T. Nagasawa, M. Sakamoto and K. Takenaga,
Supersymmetry in Quantum Mechanics with Point Interactions ,
hep-th/0212192 

F. Cooper, A. Khare and U. Sukhatme, 
 Phys. Rep.  251  (1995) 267 

G. Junker,
Supersymmetric Methods in Quantum
and Statistical
Physics,
Springer,
Berlin, 1996 

F. Cooper, A. Khare and U. Sukhatme, 
Supersymmetry in Quantum
Mechanics,
World Scientific, Singapole, 2001 








C. V. Sukumar,
J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.  18  (1985) L57 

J. Goldstein and C. Lebiedzik and R. W. Robinett,
Am. J. Phys.  62  (1994) 612 

S. De Vincenzo and V. Alonso,
298 2002 98  

E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys.  B 185  (1981) 513 

E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys.  B202  (1982) 253 

N.I. Akhiezer and I.M. Glazman,
Theory of Linear Operators in Hilbert Space,
Vol.II ,
Pitman Advanced Publishing Program, Boston, 1981 

T. Fu lo p and I. Tsutsui,
264 2000 366  

L. J. Boya,
Eur. J. Phys.  9  (1988) 139 

I. Tsutsui, T. Cheon and T. Fu lo p,
J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.  36  (2003) 275 

 


23cm 
15.7cm 
-1mm 
1
plus 1pt minus 1pt
8000
15pt plus 1pt minus 1pt






23cm 
15.7cm 
0mm 
1

16.8pt plus 1pt minus 1pt 
plus 1pt minus 1pt
6000











KEK Preprint 2002-133 
quant-ph/0207xxx 




Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics 
under Point Singularities 

Takashi Uchino


and 
Izumi Tsutsui() 
email:izumi.tsutsui@kek.jp 
 




Institute of Particle and Nuclear Studies 
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) 
Tsukuba 305-0801 
Japan 
 




Abstract. We provide a systematic study on the possibility of supersymmetry (SUSY) for one dimensional quantum mechanical systems consisting of a pair of lines  or intervals   each having a point singularity. We consider the most general singularities and walls (boundaries) at  admitted quantum mechanically, using a  family of parameters to specify one singularity and similarly a  family of parameters to specify one wall.   With these parameter freedoms, we find that for a certain subfamily the line systems acquire an  SUSY which can be enhanced to  if the parameters are further tuned, and that these SUSY are generically broken except for a special case.  The interval systems, on the other hand, can accommodate  or  SUSY,  broken or unbroken, and exhibit a rich variety of (degenerate) spectra. Our SUSY systems include the familiar SUSY systems with the Dirac -potential, and hence are extensions of the known SUSY quantum mechanics to those with general point singularities and walls.  The self-adjointness of the supercharge in relation to the self-adjointness of the Hamiltonian is also discussed. 




















 




23cm 
15.7cm 
-1mm 
1

15pt plus 1pt minus 1pt 
plus 1pt minus 1pt
8000




1. Introduction 


A point singularity (or interaction) appears 
in various different 
contexts in physics.  It may, for instance, appear as a point defect or a junction of two
layers of materials, or may be considered as a localized limit of a finite range
potential in general.  A point singularity is usually modelled by the Dirac
-potential, which offers exact solutions to
a number of problems of interest both classically and quantum mechanically.
However, 

in quantum mechanics a point singularity is far from unique - 
in one dimension, for example,  the Dirac
 is just one of the  family of point
singularities allowed quantum mechanically
[, , ].  
In fact, recent investigations have shown
that these point
singularities can give rise to unexpectedly interesting phenomena which are
not available under the Dirac
-potential.  These include duality in spectra,
anholonomy (Berry phase) and scale anomaly [, ], which normally occur in more
complicated systems or quantum field theory.  

The first of these, the
duality, implies that the spectra of two distinct point singularities may coincide
if they are related under some discrete transformations and, in particular,
become completely degenerate if the point singularity is self-dual, i.e. ,  invariant under the discrete transformations.  The presence of degeneracy, and
also the graded structure which is naturally equipped with the system,  alluded us to
examine the possibility of supersymmetry (SUSY) with self-dual point singularities.
This has indeed
been confirmed in our previous paper [], where we have found 
a number of novel   and  SUSY
systems on a line  or interval  with the family of  point singularities
(under the walls at  
allowing for the general boundary condition for the interval
case).  More recently, SUSY on a circle with two point singularities has also been studied in
[].

Meanwhile, SUSY quantum mechanics (and its extensions) has been studied
intensively  over the years, 

initially to
provide SUSY breaking mechanisms in field theory and lately to establish
schemes to accommodate known solvable
models or generate novel ones (see, e.g. , [, ,
]). However, for some reason the investigation of SUSY quantum mechanics under
point singularities has evaded from the studies, and we know little
about it except that a suitable pair
There are works [, , ] on SUSY quantum mechanics for a pair of
interval systems one of which has the Dirac
-potential while the other  has a partner potential  with a finite
support.  In contrast, here we will consider a pair of line/interval systems
possessing singularities without such potentials.  
of the Dirac
-potentials can be made into a Witten model [,
] and realizes an  SUSY. The aim of this paper is to present a systematic
study of SUSY under point singularities, and thereby report that point
singularities admit a variety of novel SUSY systems including the known one.  The systems
we consider are those consisting of a pair of lines
 or intervals
 each having a point singularity, where the pair provides a 
graded
structure as the known Dirac
 system has.  The two point singularities
can in general be different and hence our total family of singularities
are given by 

.  We find that the line
systems with point singularities belonging to a certain subfamily 
generically possess an 
 SUSY, broken and unbroken, and that the SUSY can be promoted to
 for a further restricted parameter subfamily.  Similarly, for the interval systems, 
in addition to
the general  point singularities
we take account of the most general boundary conditions for the two sets of walls at 
 represented by
.  We then find that an 
 or
 (broken or unbroken) SUSY appears for a certain subfamily of the combined
parameter family characterizing the point
singularities and the walls of the system.  All of these SUSY systems are classified into
a number of different types, and their SUSY and spectral properties are summarized in
Appendix B.

The plan of the paper is as follows.  In section 2, we discuss the line systems, where we
provide our criterion for SUSY and thereby find SUSY systems ((A1) - (B2)).  Based on the
result of this section, the interval systems are then studied in section 3, where we
find quite a few distinct SUSY systems ((a1) - (d6)).  Section 4 is devoted to 
the question of the self-adjointness of the supercharge.  Our conclusion
and discussions are given in section 5.  Appendix A contains computations to
supplement our argument in section 4, and Appendix B furnishes the summary table 
for the various SUSY systems mentioned above.




2. Two lines with point singularity   

= 2 In this section, we investigate the possibility of
supersymmetry in a quantum system consisting of 
two lines each possessing a
singularity at 
.  The Hilbert space of our system is thus given by


.  Except for
the singular point which is now removed on each of the lines, the system is
assumed to be free and hence its Hamiltonian reads
, where 
denotes the  unit matrix.  
If we split the space in two at the singularity and thereby regard

, we can double the graded structure and identify
 with
 (see Fig.1).
Let  and  be the wave functions on the two lines,
respectively, representing a state in the Hilbert space.  According to the
above identification, the state may equally be represented by
 for , 2, where we have
defined
 for  and  for
.  Combining these, we can express a state in the Hilbert space
 by the four-components wave
function,









on which our Hamiltonian takes the form,













The first question we need to address is to find a proper domain on which
the Hamiltonian () becomes self-adjoint.  This is 
ensured by requiring the probability current 




 
be continuous over the two
lines (the dash denotes the derivative ).  If the two
singular points,  on line 1 and
 on line 2, were connected at one point, then the continuity condition at the
point would be (for brevity we hereafter denote  for )






Introducing an arbitrary real constant 
with dimension of length, 
we find that the condition () is equal to 
.   
This in turn can be written as [, ]




with a matrix , or equivalently, 



 
in terms of .
The matrix , which is called characteristic matrix  since it characterizes the nature of singularity,
specifies a self-adjoint domain 
 of the Hamiltonian () by means of
the boundary conditions at the two singular points
connected.  Of course, in our system the two points are disconnected, and
hence the actual continuity condition is 




Correspondingly,
our unitary matrix  must be specialized to 
, namely, 









Despite the specialization, we prefer to work in the four-components
description which is more convenient on account of the fact that all of the
components of  may be interchanged under SUSY transformations. 


6.5cm
N       Figure 1.  A system of a pair of two 
lines each having a singularity at  may be identified with two systems
of a pair of two half lines where the probability flow is allowed to pass 
between the two systems through .  
Our next task is to seek SUSY possible under the
Hamiltonian () with domain specified by ().  
We suppose that
the supercharge
 be a self-adjoint operator (which will be examined later) 
and of the form, 




where we set  and  is a real constant.  
 and  are Hermitian 
matrices and assumed to satisfy the conditions,





which lead to
 (more precisely,  should be written as 
 where   denotes the identity
operator in the Hilbert space ) with the Hamiltonian  in ().  The
extra term
 can then be absorbed into  by redefining , i.e. , by  the constant energy shift by , to realize the standard SUSY relation




Note that this redefinition does not alter the   
domain 
 because it does not affect our argument of the 
probability conservation.

Our aim now is to find a SUSY invariant pair  in the sense
that
the SUSY transformation generated by the supercharge  in ()
preserves the domain of each energy eigenstate 
with
The equation does not necessarily imply degeneracy in the energy level, because
some of the components in the vector eigenstate  may vanish.  




that is, we say that the pair  is SUSY invariant 







 
for
 satisfying ().
Our task to find such a pair may considerably be simplified if we recall
that any
 matrix
 can be decomposed as
 with an  matrix  and a diagonal matrix,





With this decomposition, we see from the boundary conditions () that
if

 then  for any 
. Hence, if a pair  satisfies the SUSY invariant condition
(), then
 also satisfies the condition (note
that 
 is again of the form ()). 
Choosing in particular 
, we can obtain a pair .  This implies that, if 
a pair  is a solution, so is .  Thus our aim is
achieved if we obtain a solution for the diagonal case  first, and
then transform it to  with 









for which  has the block diagonal form ().
We also note that the order of the factors  in  in
() is unimportant, because any  can be put into
 with some exchange matrix  so that 
 has a desired order of the factors.  
The exchange matrix  may be absorbed
into  by redefining , if  is
block diagonal as in  in ().  If not, we need to keep  as an
additional element in the decomposition of  when we use the ordered . 
We record, however, only two cases which we use later,
namely, 
 or
 where


















In short, the characteristic matrix  may be decomposed as





with
 having diagonal factors in a desired order, using an appropriate 
exchange matrix  which
may (or may not) be absorbed in  depending on the order one wants.
When we use  with  and obtain a solution for the SUSY pair
, we find the general solution by transforming it to
 as before.

We now consider the SUSY transformation generated by the supercharge 
in () for states obeying the boundary condition () for
diagonal 
.  Under the SUSY transformation, the eigenstate
 and its derivative are transformed into












If the transformed state
 is to satisfy the original boundary condition (), we need









Using (), the condition () becomes





At this point it is important to recognize that the original condition ()
provides relations among the components between
 and
, but not among those within  or . 
It follows that, if the condition () is identical to (), then 
the coefficient matrix for  in () must vanish. 
Furthermore, 
since the original condition () is energy independent, we require that
the equality () holds independently of .  
Thus the condition () actually
implies




and




where for
our later convenience we have replaced  with   in the second term.

From () one immediately sees that at least one element of the diagonal
matrix
 must be  (otherwise  has an inverse and hence we obtain 
 in contradiction to ()).  Let  be the number of 
elements among the four in ().  With the help of the exchange
matrix , we may chose the ordered diagonal 
 in () such that those  elements 
are arranged in the lower right corner, i.e.,  
.  
Under this arrangement,
the submatrix of  given by its upper left
 block has an inverse, and hence one observes in () that all
the elements in the corresponding block in
 must vanish.  On the other hand, since the submatrix of 

given by its lower right  block vanishes identically, one finds from
() that the elements in the corresponding block in  vanish, too. 
Combining these, one learns that
 has nonvanishing elements 
only in the blocks other than these two.  Since
such a  has 

(which is required for  in ()) only if
, a SUSY invariant pair can be found only
for the case,















Here,  takes the form,








where the  matrix  is seen to be unitary, , to
ensure the condition
. 

 For  we further need to determine  and for this we first set









Then () requires that 





where we have used the real diagonal matrix,









which is given in terms of the two scale parameters [] defined by




which are nonvanishing  because 
(see ()).
On the other hand,  in () is ensured if




 For the remaining condition  in () to hold, in addition
to what we already have, we need only 





We therefore arrive at the general solution of SUSY invariant systems, that is, 
a pair
 is SUSY invariant if
 has the form () and  with










where ,  is given by () and  is subject to
the conditions,






which are met by







where , , 2, 3, are the Pauli matrices.
Besides, if , we have the additional solution,







One can decouple the freedom of  in  and  by casting them into








and









by introducing








In fact,  is a special type of the unitary matrix 
in  () which
leaves
 in () invariant, 
, and this invariance
provides the freedom
 in the choice of the supercharge .

Given a  (and hence a ), there are at most four independent 
supercharges among those 
 
in () for
, and a set of independent supercharges may be
furnished by  







Because of the -term in the supercharges, however, 
the standard orthogonal SUSY algebra,




for all , cannot be realized unless , that is,






Thus, if we say that a system has an  SUSY if it has 
 supercharges satisfying (), then we see that 
our system can possess an  SUSY if the two angles  and
 in the characteristic matrix  are related by () and further 
if we specify the parameter  in the supercharge  by ().  
Otherwise,  the system possesses only an  SUSY.  
Note that the set of supercharges satisfying the orthogonal relation
() is not unique, since it can always be transformed by 

 with
 in the form () leaving the relation intact.


If , on the other hand,
one finds from () and () that
. 
This suggests that the SUSY system with a point singularity possessing
the standard SUSY algebra without
the
-term in () is basically unique - a SUSY is
realized only if the characteristic matrix
 has the diagonal part 

 modulo the possible exchanges of the  elements.  
Systems on a circle with different combinations of these special types of 
point singularities
have been studied in detail in [].

For illustration, we mention a simple but generic  case obtained by the 
diagonal 
 in ().  The boundary condition () then reads








Apart from the travelling wave eigenstates which are four-fold degenerate,










one finds the two bound states,


















which are allowed for
 and , respectively.  


To sum up, we have found that a system of two lines whose singularity is characterized
by  admits an  SUSY if the ordered diagonal matrix  
in the decomposition () has the form ().  The supercharge
is provided by




with  given by ().
The SUSY can be enhanced to  if , that is, if the conditions ()
are fulfilled. These SUSY systems
exhibit distinct features depending on the choice
of the matrix  and the angles  and .  In fact, the parameter
dependence of the features can be seen just by observing the example mentioned above,
because the energy spectrum depends only on the spectral parameters on account of the
conjugations on  which preserve the spectrum.  We
classify the SUSY systems into the four types:










In type (A1) and (A2) systems, the bound states 
() are mapped into themselves under the SUSY transformation
generated by the supercharge () with the diagonal  given in ().  
For type (A2) where the two angles  and
 coincide, one may also choose () with off-diagonal elements for 
so that the SUSY transformation induces the exchange
between  and .   In both of these types for which  
, therefore, the SUSY is broken.   In contrast, the ground state in type (B1), which
admits at least one bound state, is annihilated under the SUSY transformation, and
hence the SUSY is good (i.e. , unbroken).  Type (B2) possesses only degenerate 
positive energy states which
are related by the SUSY
transformation, and the SUSY is broken.  
The spectral and SUSY properties for types (A1) - (B2) are listed 
in the table in Appendix B.

Now we discuss how the previous works [, ] on SUSY interval systems with the
Dirac -potentials fit in our general scheme.  In order to realize the boundary
condition that arises under the Dirac -potentials with different coupling
constants on the two lines, we consider the general ordered diagonal matrix  in
() and
choose the conjugation matrix  and the exchange matrix  by

 in () and 
 given in (), respectively.  Then we find that the boundary condition ()
becomes







These are indeed the conditions that we find under the potentials 
 with strengths 
, and hence we see that  the pair of line
systems  having the Dirac
-potentials has an  SUSY for arbitrary strengths  and . 
In particular, if the two strengths are related by , which occur when the
angles  fulfill (), then one can enhance the SUSY to  by
choosing  as in ().  The case discussed in [, , ]
corresponds to
, where the pair of systems is regarded as a Witten model with .  Our
analysis shows, however, that the number of SUSY can be doubled if one takes into the
exchange parity operations between the half lines,  and . 




3. Two intervals with point singularity  

In this section, we study systems consisting of two intervals, each given by
  with a singular point at . 
As before, we split each of the intervals into two and thereby 
regard our Hilbert
space
 as  (see Fig.2).  Our Hamiltonian remains
to be the one in () shifted by  so that () holds.
Because of the walls at  we now
have, we need to impose, in addition to the boundary
condition () at , an extra boundary condition at . 
Let 
 be the characteristic matrix
for the condition at
 given in the block diagonal form (), and 
similarly  be the characteristic matrix
for the condition at
.
Since the probability current must vanish at 
 separately on the branches
, we require




Comparing with the previous case (), we realize that 
the characteristic matrix at the wall is diagonal, i.e. , 
 where
 is of the form () with  
being replaced by the corresponding parameter .
With such , the
boundary condition at  is provided by




Thus the two interval systems we are considering are characterized by
the matrix .

We now find systems that accommodate SUSY.  More explicitly, 
we seek a pair  with  and 
some supercharge 
for which the  boundary conditions both at  and  are compatible with the
SUSY transformations generated by
.  To this end, we first recall that, if the characteristic matrix 
 is decomposed as (), the supercharge  compatible with the 
boundary condition at 
is given by ().  Thus, what remains to be seen is under what conditions this
supercharge
 is simultaneously compatible with the 
boundary condition at .  As we did at the point  for the diagonal , 
at the point 
 we also put 






with some appropriate exchange matrix .
Then, by an analogous argument we see that the supercharge compatible 
with the boundary condition at  is given by
.
From the two compatibility conditions at  and
, one has





which implies





and





The total number of independent supercharges satisfying 
() and () gives the number of the SUSY that the system possesses.
This will be seen by the number of the free parameters in , and 
if we have
the full, four parameters, i.e. , if
, we may choose
 and  in () 
to furnish a basis of supercharges , , as in
() fulfilling the standard SUSY algebra ().


6.5cm
N      Figure 2.  A system of a pair of two intervals  each having a 
singularity at  may be identified with two systems of a pair of two half intervals
 where the probability flow is allowed to pass between the two systems through 
.  The flow is not allowed at the other ends . 
Because of the exchange matrices  and , our analysis becomes involved
compared to the previous case.  There are, however, two discrete operations 
which can be used to simplify our arguments.  These are the parity,






and the interchange,






where  is defined in ().  If systems that are connected by
these discrete operations are regarded to be essentially identical, 
there remain only the following 
four types of combinations for the diagonal matrices :
























To proceed, except when we examine the implication of the general  case, 
we shall
restrict our analysis to the case , that is, we assume that at  the two
angle parameters  and  satisfy () and the constant  is
chosen to be , and that similar conditions hold also at
 
(for which the angle  will be used for  in ()).   This
restriction simplifies our argument considerably and ensures that all the allowed (at
most four) supercharges satisfy the standard orthogonal SUSY algebra ().  
Since () implies
, we then have 

.  We thus have only one free scale parameter 
in all the boundary
conditions, and we shall specify it by the angle .  
With respect to the scale  set by , we introduce the sign
functions to the remaining three scale parameters,








which take either  or .  
Among the possible choices for the signs of 
 and 

 (the choice does not affect
the supercharge
), for definiteness we choose 
.
With this choice the  matrix at  and the corresponding 
 at 
defined similarly as () become














that is, they are proportional to either  or .
In order to solve () and (), 
we parametrize  and ,  as







with  and , and
consider the four types of the combinations, separately.

3.1. Type (a)  


In this case, the rotation matrix  
becomes irrelevant for determining the characteristic matrix , and 
we may choose 
 without loss of generality.
We then obtain three distinct solutions for () and ()
(for the detail, see Appendix A.1),



















All the above three 
solutions admit the four supercharges 
 in () and 
hence the systems possess an  SUSY.

In order to see what our SUSY systems are in more detail, let us first consider 
the type
(a1) solution which implies the boundary condition,








 For energy eigenstates of the Hamiltonian  fulfilling (), we find 
the series
of eigenstates,










where , , are arbitrary constants subject to the normalization
condition
, and we have introduced



 
Consequently, each of the energy levels is four-fold degenerate. 
In addition, we obtain the doubly degenerate ground states,










with vanishing energy . 
These ground states are annihilated by any of the supercharges , 
, and  hence we see that the  SUSY of type (a1) is good (unbroken).

For type (a2), the boundary condition becomes








which admits the energy eigenstates (with  given in ())










which are four-fold degenerate.  As before, the ground states are 










with energy .  Again, 
these doubly degenerate ground states are annihilated by the supercharges 
,
and  hence type (a2) provides an  good SUSY, too.  
Type (a3) furnishes essentially the same 
 good SUSY system as type (a2), except that the upper two components of 
all the eigenstates 
 are interchanged.


3.2. Type (b)  


This time the rotation matrix   
is irrelevant for specifying  and hence we take  
. 
As for type (a), we obtain from () and () the following
three solutions (see Appendix A.2):



















This time, since  is specified in Type (b1) and (b2), these two types admit only
two independent supercharges obtained, for instance,  by  and , and hence they possess an  SUSY.  Type (b3), on the other hand, admit
all the four supercharges  and hence has an
 SUSY.

 For type (b1), the boundary condition becomes













We then find two distinct series of eigenstates; one given by 










and the other by










where discrete , , 
are obtained as the solutions of 




 For  we have the 
additional eigenstates, 











while for
 we obtain










where 
 are the solutions of 




These provide the ground state of the system with energy





 For , the state  
reduces to 










while for ,  reduces to










These eigenstates are all doubly degenerate irrespective of the energy, and are
related by the SUSY transformations generated by the two supercharges mentioned
above.  We also note that the ground state energy is positive
 and hence the  SUSY of the system
is broken.  Type (b2) is essentially the same as (b1), and we will omit to give its
detail here.

For type (b3), the boundary condition is 









The energy eigenstates are 










where  are given in (). 
Besides, for , we have the ground 
states provided by () with the replacement ,
that is,  is the solution of ().  
 Further, if , 
the states () with the sine functions 
formally 
replaced by their arguments  become eigenstates.
All of these eigenstates are four-fold degenerate, and
they are related by the SUSY transformations generated by . 
As before, the 
 SUSY is broken in the system.

At this point, we briefly mention the  case for
which the supercharges () do not necessarily satisfy the standard
orthogonal SUSY algebra ().  
For simplicity, we only consider the special case where we have
 and choose  by
(). 
Here we can readily solve () and
() to obtain, for instance, the solution,




























The corresponding supercharges may then be provided by 
 
and , and the boundary condition
becomes









Because of the two scale parameters  and  we have
now, the energy eigenstates consist of the two series,

















where the discrete , , are given by ()
with . 
Similarly, for  there arise ground
states obtained by the replacement  in ()

















with energy 
.  As the scale parameters approach
 these solutions reduce to states analogous to () or ().  
All of these states are doubly degenerate and are
related by the SUSY transformations generated by the two supercharges,
implying that the  SUSY of the system is broken.


In the examples discussed above, we observe that the spectrum of the system consists of
one or two regular  series of levels specified by  or  
with integers ,
plus a few
isolated  levels some of which may become the ground states.  Obviously, these
correspond to states with positive and negative energies, respectively, if the constant energy
shift in the Hamiltonian is absent.   The same spectral composition will be seen in
all the examples we shall discuss below.


3.3. Type (c)  



The conditions () and () are met again by three distinct types of
solutions (see Appendix A.3):































where in (c3) the remaining parameters 
 and

 are determined from (). 
All of these types have an  SUSY, because they possess two independent
supercharges.  Explicitly, they may be chosen to be the pairs, 
 
and

 for (c1), 
 and
 for (c2),
and
 and 
 for (c3), respectively.

 For type (c1), the boundary condition reads














which admits two regular series of eigenstates given by











and 










 For , we have the
isolated eigenstate










which is the ground state with  and










with . 
 For , this reduces to










These eigenstates may be classified into the two series; one is a good SUSY series 
given by () and () and the other is a broken SUSY series  given by (),
() and ().

Type (c2) provides a system which is analogous to (c1), and we shall not present the
content of the system.  For type (c3), on the other hand, the boundary
condition is given by

















The eigenstates are then












and










We have the isolated eigenstate










which is the ground state with .  Also, for
, we have additionally 










with . 
 For , this reduces to a state obtained similarly as () 
from ().










Again, these eigenstates are classified into two 
series; one is a good SUSY series given by () and () and the other is a broken
SUSY series given by () and ().  For 
the special choice  and
, the resultant system (formulated in the original Hilbert space 
) turns out to be the SUSY system obtained under 
the attractive and repulsive pair of the Dirac
-potentials
.


3.4. Type (d)  


We here find from () and () six distinct types of solutions (see Appendix
A.4).  Among them, four are

































All of these have an  SUSY, where the supercharges may be given by 
 and  for type (d1) and (d2), 
or by  and 
 for type (d3) and (d4).
The remaining two are





















which have four supercharges , , 
and hence possess an  SUSY. 

For types (d1) and (d2), one observes that under the SUSY transformations
the eigenstates exchange either the upper two or the lower two
components.  This implies  that these systems are essentially the sum of
two disconnected single lines with a point singularity, and hence reduce to the systems
considered earlier in [].  Type (d3), on the other hand, provides a novel
SUSY system, and we here mention only the simple case
.  The boundary condition then becomes












and the eigenstates are 




















where  for . 
Unless  or , all eigenstates are 
doubly degenerate and 
related under SUSY transformations generated by the two supercharges, implying that
the  SUSY is broken.  For , except for the ground states which
are doubly degenerate, all excited states are four-fold degenerate, and
for , all eigenstates are four-fold degenerate (see
Fig.3).


6.5cm
N        Figure 3.  Energy levels in the  SUSY system of type (d3) for 
.   All the levels are doubly degenerate unless  or . 
Type (d4) has the boundary condition 














and the regular series of eigenstates are










The ground states are then found to be










with . 
The energy levels in the regular series are four-fold degenerate, while
the ground states are doubly degenerate.  The ground states are annihilated by the
four supercharges and, hence, the 
 SUSY is good.  When , the system becomes equivalent to
one given by
 in ().


 For type (d6), the boundary condition reads








for , 2, and 
the regular eigenstates are 










As before, for , isolated degenerate 
eigenstates are
obtained by 
 in ()










with .










All eigenstates, including the ground states, are four-fold degenerate and related by the SUSY
transformations, and hence the  SUSY is broken.  For , the system coincides
with one given by
 in (). 
These types of systems (a1) - (d6) discussed above are listed in Appendix B.

 Finally, we mention that a yet further extension of SUSY systems from those
considered in the present paper may be realized for restricted systems by incorporating
the possibility of  separate flips
of components of states.   Namely, for a state 
 
we may consider a number of discrete
transformations which flip each of the four
components, separately.  One of them is defined by












This and other similarly defined flip operators, 
,  and , are well-defined 
for systems for which no probability current flow is allowed at the
singularities.  Such systems occur when the characteristic matrix  is
diagonal , namely, 
when  for which the
four operators, which fulfill
, induce the
transformations 
 where 
 is given by the exchange of the corresponding diagonal components 
between  and
.  Now, if the pair  is a SUSY system, then clearly the
new pair 
provides also a SUSY system. For example, if we implement this extension to 
type (b3), we find three novel SUSY systems characterized by











where we have used  for the first, and the combinations
 and 
for the second and the third, respectively.
The spectral properties of these are, of
course, the same as the original systems.



 4. Self-adjointness of the supercharge    

In this section we wish to address the question of the self-adjointness of the
supercharge 
 in () for systems of 
two intervals discussed in section 3.  If  is a self-adjoint operator, then 
for any state  belonging to its
domain 
 
we have





and also  for the adjoint  of .
Since the -term in the supercharge () is regular, it drops out
from the above condition () leaving only the first derivative term there.
We may thus consider the simpler supercharge 
 in finding possible domains for 
below, based on the theory of self-adjoint extension [].

To start, let us consider an operator  given in the same differential
form as  but defined on the domain 










where  is the space of absolutely continuous functions 
on .  Clearly, its adjoint operator  has also the same
operator form as
 and has the domain

. 
Now we 
consider eigenvectors  (with eigenvalues ) of , i.e. , 
 for , and thereby decompose any state
 as




where  are coefficient functions.   To implement the programme of
self-adjoint extension for , one needs to find the solutions for

, which, under the decomposition (), becomes





Since the four eigenvectors are independent, the equation
() must hold for each , and consequently we obtain
 or





In view of (), we find 
 and hence the eigenvalues of  are
 (both doubly degenerate).  Accordingly, 
the deficiency indices are found to be , implying that
the supercharge  admits a  parameter family of
self-adjoint domains for systems of 
two intervals. 

The appearance of the  family may be understood directly from
the condition () which reads





Exploiting the freedom of conjugation by 
,  and  (and also
, if necessary), we may take  in  with no
loss of generality. 
Then we see by an argument similar to reach () 
that () is ensured 
if the state satisfies the boundary condition at the ends of the intervals,




where we have introduced ,  

 and a dimensionless real constant
.  The choice of the boundary condition is indeed
specified by the matrix  belonging to .

 For systems of two lines, on the other hand, the condition for  to
be self-adjoint arises only from the contribution at  in the foregoing
argument.  Thus the deficiency
indices of the operator  become  (since half of the
eigenfunctions () are no longer square integrable), and hence one obtains
a 
family of the self-adjoint domains for the supercharge .  These are
characterized by the boundary condition () restricted to the half 
subspace associated with
, where the group for the matrix  reduces to
. 

In seeking a SUSY system in the preceding sections, we have tacitly assumed that the
supercharge is defined, at least, on eigenstates of some, self-adjoint Hamiltonian. 
In regard to this, it is assuring and also interesting to observe that, in fact, the
domain of any self-adjoint Hamiltonian is contained in
some domain of a self-adjoint supercharge.   To see this, for brevity 
we consider
only the conditions associated with the endpoint
 for a general characteristic matrix , since an analogous
argument applied to the other endpoint
.  

Now, given a , we choose some orthonormal set of eigenvectors
, , of , that is, 
with the vectorial inner-product .
In terms of these, we consider the decomposition of the boundary vectors 
 and
.
The boundary condition () then becomes





Since the eigenvectors are independent each other, the
condition () must hold for each eigenvector, separately.   But since 
a SUSY system has  for two 
eigenvalues, which we choose  and , we obtain






To get a condition for other eigenvectors,  and , 
we replace  with the general  in
() (note that the diagonalization exploited in section 2 may not 
be available in
the interval systems) and multiply () by
 from the right, and similarly () by
 from the left to find






We then see that
the second term in (), decomposed similarly 
in terms of the eigenvectors, becomes






on account of the identities () and ().  By a similar argument, the
first term in () can also be seen to vanish.

It is important to recognize that () provides a relation between the 
characteristic matrix  and the corresponding supercharge , whereas 
() furnishes the self-adjoint boundary condition for the
supersymmetric Hamiltonian
.  (For intervals we need to add extra conditions at  analogously.)   
Thus,
what we have seen here is that the combination of the two conditions are sufficient
to ensure that the supercharge
 be self-adjoint, namely, the domain
of such  is contained in the domain of a self-adjoint .  




5. Conclusion and discussions 


In the present paper we have studied the possibility of SUSY 
in systems consisting of a pair of
lines/intervals each of which possesses a point singularity.  These two
point singularities are in general different and can be specified by the matrix 
 given in
().  The line systems are thus specified by such  and found to possess
an  SUSY if the matrix 
, when properly diagonalized into , takes the form ().  The
SUSY is enhanced to
  if , i.e. , 
if the two angle parameters  and  in
 and the constant  in the supercharge  satisfy
().   The SUSY is 
broken except for a restricted class of point singularities
allowing for supercharges with .   To specify the
interval systems, besides the matrix  we further need 
an extra matrix
 that characterizes the walls at the two ends.  
Exploiting the
freedoms in the two matrices, we have found various types of SUSY
systems which have either (good or broken)  or  SUSY. 
These newly found SUSY systems include the known SUSY system with the Dirac
-potential as a special case of type (B1) for line systems and also provide
a similar example for interval systems as type (c3).  The 
spectra and the SUSY properties for all of these SUSY systems are summarized in the
table in Appendix B.

One of the important points in our analysis is that our
supercharge  in () has the -term in addition to the
conventional derivative term.  This
-term allows 
us to acquire the variety of the SUSY systems having two
independent scale parameters  and , 
at the expense of the
constant shift of energy by
 in the Hamiltonian for realizing the standard SUSY algebra ().  
Without the -term, we obtain only a restricted class of SUSY systems 
given by a combination of Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions 
[].  For interval systems, we have essentially exhausted the SUSY systems
for the  case, but a large number
of novel SUSY systems for the general  case will exist under
the -term.  The introduction of the -term may in a sense be regarded as a
generalization of  the SUSY potential in the Witten model.  In fact, our supercharge
 in () has a structure analogous to (the doubly graded form of) 
the one used in 
the Witten model,  Moreover, for  the
supercharge  reduces essentially to the supercharge
of the Witten model with a constant SUSY potential [].  

Another point to be noted is the notion of SUSY itself.  Namely, to seek SUSY
systems we adopted the criterion [] that eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian  satisfy the same boundary condition even after the 
SUSY transformation by  is performed.  This is a necessary condition
for the complete SUSY invariance of the boundary condition (i.e. , valid for
any state, not just for energy eigenstates) but may be shown to be sufficient,
too.
We note that the issues such as the complete SUSY invariance
or the self-adjointness of
the supercharge  discussed in section 4 have not been fully addressed 
in generic SUSY quantum
mechanics, despite that they become important 
if we wish to put SYSY  
on a firm basis in systems with boundaries or singularities.  The relation
between the self-adjoint domains of  and  pointed out in this paper may
provide a first step toward the full investigation on these issues.

Related to the above two points, we mention that independent
supercharges fulfilling the criterion may not, in general, admit a basis set
realizing the orthogonal SUSY algebra ().  In our analysis, we have
defined the number  of SUSY by the number of supercharges fulfilling the
orthogonal SUSY algebra, rather than by the total number of the independent
supercharges.  One may instead accept the full SUSY algebra - though it may be
fairly involved - formed by the entire set of the supercharges as an extended
version of SUSY, adopting the total number of the charges for the number
 of SUSY.  




To extend our work, perhaps the most
straightforward is to put point singularities on more complicated one dimensional 
systems,
such as a circle or networks with loops and vertices.  We may also add a potential
 to our systems without changing our argument, as long as  is regular
at the singularities.  In fact, the possibility of SUSY of a circle system with two point
singularities has been studied recently in Ref.[], where the introduction of
regular potentials in the framework of the Witten model has also been discussed.  
We wish to stress, however, that the regularity of the potential is not essential,
that is, even if
 is singular (like the Coulomb
potential), we can treat it by generalizing slightly our
procedure of assigning the boundary/connection conditions at the singularities
[].  We believe that various novel SUSY systems will be
obtained under singular potentials if one employs the generalized approach developed in
this paper.  


Acknowledgement: 
I.T. thanks T. Fu lo p for useful discussions.
This work has been supported in part by
the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research on Priority Areas (No. 13135206) by
the Japanese
Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports and Culture.



Appendix A. Solutions for () and ()  



A.1. type (a) 
The choice of (a) for  and  implies , and hence () is
fulfilled if




On the other hand, from () we have
 which, in view of (), becomes
 or  




because  is invertible.  With  and 
in (), 
() is seen to be





that is,





Using the parametrization of  in (), the second equation of ()
becomes





which is satisfied under the three cases:









Combining these with () and the fist equation of (), we obtain the
solutions (a1) - (a3). 


A.2. type (b) 
In this case we have  and .  Then () is solved by




Similarly to type (a), with the solution () the condition () implies

from which we find





Using (), the second equation of () becomes





which is satisfied under the three cases:








Combining these with () and the first equation of (), we obtain 
(b1) - (b3).



A.3. type (c) 
Here we have  and .
Then () implies









where  are defined in (), 
whereas () gives










The first equations of () and () are satisfied by



 From the second equations of () and (), we have




which implies









form which we obtain







By , eq.() is seen to be satisfied under the there cases:









Solving the second equation of () for the three cases of (), we obtain (c1) - (c3).


A.4. type (d) 
Here we have , and 
from () we find

















 From () we have 















 From the first equation of () we obtain










whereas from the first equation of () we find










The first and third equations of () and () imply









() is satisfied by




 From the second equations of () and (), we have







The second equations of () and () hold automatically 
by () and () which are satisfied under the six cases:












Solving the third equations of () and () for 
the six cases of (), we obtain (d1) - (d6).

Appendix B. Spectral and SUSY properties
  
The following table summarizes the spectral as well as SUSY properties of the
various types of SUSY systems obtained for two lines and two intervals.


 Two lines
 #& #& #& #& #&# 
Type&Number of&SUSY&Spectrum of 
&Degeneracy of &Number of
& supercharges& &regular series&regular series&isolated  eigenstates  
(A1)&  = 1&&
& 4&0 or 1 or 2 (A2)&  = 1&&
& 4&0 or 2 (B1)&  = 4&&
& 4&1 or 2 (B2)&  = 4& &
& 4&0  
 


 Two intervals
 #& #& #& #& #& # 
Type&Number of&SUSY&Spectrum of&Degeneracy of
&Number of
& supercharges& &regular series&regular series&isolated  
eigenstates  
(a1)&  = 4&&
& 4&2 (a2)&  = 4&&
& 4&2 (a3)&  = 4&&
& 4&2 (b1)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&0 or 2 (b2)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&0 or 2 (b3)&  = 4&&
& 4&0 or 4 (c1)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&1 or 3 (c2)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&1 or 3 (c3)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&1 or 3 (d1)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&1 or 3 (d2)&  = 2&&
, & 2+2&1 or 3 (d3)'&  = 2&&
& 2&0 (d4)'&  = 2&&
& 2&0 (d5)&  = 4&& & 4&2 (d6)&  = 4&&
& 4&0 or 4  
 
Note: 2+2  means that two distinct types of doubly degenerate
eigenstates exist;
 and  
denote good and broken SUSY, respectively;  and  are given in
() and (); and (d3)' and (d4)' refer to
the special  case in type (d3) and (d4), respectively. 



15.5pt plus 1pt minus 1pt
plus 1pt minus 1pt
8000
