



17cm 23 cm -0.5cm -1cm

H  
R  
N  
C  
K  
Id   
Z  

Y ^ (Z)  
d dZ   
d^2 dZ ^2  
_  
x^  X^a x'^X'^b'   
x^  X^a  
x'^X'^b'   







"Massive" spin- field in de Sitter space 


T. Garidi, J-P.Gazeau and M.V. Takook

 - LPTMC, Universite Paris 7  Denis Diderot, boite 7020
F-75251 Paris Cedex 05, France.

 - Federation de recherche APC, Universite Paris 7
Denis Diderot, boite 7020, 
F-75251 Paris Cedex 05, France.

 - Department of Physics, Razi University, Kermanshah, IRAN,

 - Plasma Physics research centre, Islamic Azad
University,P.O.BOX 14835-157, Tehran, IRAN   
garidi@ccr.jussieu.fr, gazeau@ccr.jussieu.fr,
takook@ccr.jussieu.fr 

 
             

 

In this paper we present a covariant quantization of the
"massive" spin- field on de Sitter (dS) space. By "massive"
we mean a field which carries a specific principal series
representation of the dS group. The work is in the direct
continuation of previous ones concerning the scalar, the spinor
and the vector cases. The quantization procedure,  independent of
the choice of the coordinate system, is based on the
Wightman-Garding axiomatic and on analyticity requirements for
the two-point function in the complexified pseudo-Riemanian
manifold. Such a construction is necessary in view of preparing
and comparing with the dS conformal spin- massless case (dS
linear quantum gravity) which will be considered in a forthcoming
paper and for which specific quantization methods are needed.

04.62.+v, 11.10.Cd, 98.80.Jk 
                             

                              


Introduction 

As recent observational data clearly favors a positive
acceleration of the present universe, the de Sitter model
represents an appealing first approximation of the background
space-time. In two previous papers,
quantizations of  "massive" spinor fields and  vector fields on
the dS space have been considered. The spin- case is of great
importance since the massless tensor field (spin-) is among the
central objects in quantum cosmology and quantum gravity on dS
space (dS linear quantum gravity). It has been found that the
corresponding propagator (in the usual linear approximation for
gravitational field)  exhibits a pathological behaviour for large
separated points (infrared divergence).

On one hand this behaviour may originate from the gauge invariance
of the field equation and so should have no physical consequences.
Antoniadis, Iliopoulos and Tomaras have shown that
the large-distance pathological behavior of the graviton
propagator on dS background does not manifest itself in the
quadratic part of the effective action in the one-loop
approximation. This means the pathological behaviour of the
graviton propagator may be gauge dependent and so should not
appear in an effective way as a physical quantity.

On the other hand some authors argue that infrared divergence
could be exploited in order to create instability of dS space
. Tsamis and Woodard have considered the field
operator for linear gravity in dS space along the latter line in
terms of flat coordinates, which cover only one-half of the dS
hyperboloid. Hence they have found a quantum field
which breaks dS invariance, and  they have examined the resulting
possibility of quantum instability.

Nevertheless, a fully covariant quantization of the linear
gravitational field without infrared divergence in dS space-time
may reveal to be of extreme importance for further developments.
It will be considered in a forthcoming paper. Such
a quantization requires preliminary covariant quantizations of the
minimally coupled scalar field and the "massive" spin- field
respectively.

Recently, de Vega and al. have shown that,  in flat
coordinates (not global)  on de Sitter space-time, the infrared
divergence does not appear in the "massless" minimally coupled
scalar field. The question  of the covariant minimally coupled
scalar field has been completely answered in after
introducing a specific Krein QFT. We have shown that the effect of
that quantization, without changing the physical content of the
theory, appears as an automatic renormalization of the ultraviolet
divergence in the stress tensor and of the infrared divergence in
the two-point function. By using this method for linear
gravity (the traceless rank-2 "massless" tensor field) the
two-point function is free of any infrared divergence.
This result has been also obtained by.

Here, we present a fully covariant quantization of the "massive"
spin- field. Our method is based on a rigorous
group-theoretical approach combined with a suitable adaptation of
the Wightman-Garding axiomatic, which is carried out in terms of
coordinate independent dS waves. The whole procedure originated by
 is based on analyticity requirements in the
complexified pseudo-Riemanian manifold. The SO unitary
irreducible representations (UIR) acting on symmetric, traceless
and divergence-free tensor eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami
operator have been investigated in. Previous studies
of the "massive" spin-2 field have been carried out in
 with a specific choice of coordinate (flat
coordinates) covering only one-half of the dS hyperboloid, and in
 where the forbidden mass range for spin-2 fields has
been clarified, and the null-mass limit considered. This limit has
also been analyzed in and recently a consistent theory
for a massive spin- field in a general gravitational background
has been presented in.

In section II, we describe the dS tensor field equation as an
eigenvalue equation of the SO Casimir operators. The
notations and the two independent Casimir operators are
introduced. It will be convenient to use ambient space notations
in order to express the spin-2 field equation in terms of the
coordinate independent Casimir operators. The latter carry the
group-theoretical content of the theory and it will be reminded
how they enable us to classify the dS group UIRaccording to two parameters  and  which behave like a spin
() and a mass () in the Minkowskian limit, depending on the
nature of the involved group representation.

Section III is devoted to the field equation and its solutions.
The dS tensor modes are written in terms of a scalar field 
and a generalized polarization tensor  
 As for
spinor and vector fields,  the tensor  is a
space-time function in dS space-time. There is a certain extent of
arbitrariness in the choice of this tensor  and we fix it in such
a way that, in the limit , one obtains the polarization
tensor in Minkowski space-time.

In section IV we derive the Wigthman two-point function 
. This function fulfills the
conditions of : a) positiveness, b) locality, c) covariance, d)
normal analyticity, e) transversality, f) divergencelessness and
g) permutational index symmetries. The four conditions c), e), f),
and g) allow one to associate this field with a spin- unitary
irreducible representation of the dS group. The positivity
condition permits us to construct a Hilbert space structure. The
locality is related to the causality principle, which is a well
defined concept in dS space. The normal analyticity allows one to
view  as the boundary
value of an analytic two-point function 
 from the tube domains. The analytic kernel
 is defined in terms of dS
waves in their tubular domains. Then, the Hilbert space structure
is made explicit and the field operator  is derived.
We also give a coordinate-independent formula for the unsmeared
field operator . Brief conclusion and outlook are
given in section V. It is in particular asserted that the
extension of our approach to "massless" tensor field (
gravitational field in a dS background in the linear
approximation) requires an indecomposable representation of the dS
group in view of the construction of the corresponding covariant
quantum field. Finally, we have detailed the classification of the
unitary representation of SO in appendix A. In appendix
B we relate our construction to the maximally symmetric bitensors
introduced in Reference. In appendix C and D we
respectively present the "massive" vector and tensor two-point
functions.

Field equations on de Sitter space 
Ambient space notations and Casimir operators 
The de Sitter space is a solution of the cosmological Einstein
equation with positive cosmological constant . It is
conveniently described as a hyperboloid embedded in a
five-dimensional Minkowski space
 
where  diag. The de Sitter
metrics reads

where the 's are   space-time intrinsic coordinates of
the dS hyperboloid.

An immediate  realization space is made of a second-rank intrinsic
tensor field  satisfying the conditions of
divergenceless, tracelessness, and index permutational symmetry
respectively:
 
The wave equation for such fields propagating in de Sitter space
can be written as 
where  is the d'Alembertian
operator.

Let us now adopt ambient space notations (for details see
), namely  for the field. With
these notations, the relationship with unitary irreducible
representations of the dS group becomes straightforward  because
the Casimir operators are easy to identify. The tensor field
 has to be viewed as a homogeneous
function of the -variables  with homogeneous
degree  and thus satisfies ,
 
The direction of   lies in the de
Sitter space if we require the condition of transversality
 
With these notations, the conditions  read as
 
where  is the tangential (or transverse) derivative
on dS space,
 
The tensor with components

is the so-called transverse projector.

In order to express Equation () in terms of the
ambient coordinates, we use the fact that the "intrinsic" field
 is locally determined by the transverse tensor
field  through
 
For instance, it is easily shown that the metric 
corresponds  to the transverse projector .
Covariant derivatives acting on a l-rank tensor are transformed
according to
 
where the transverse projection defined by
 
guarantees  the transversality  in each index. Applying this
procedure to a transverse second rank, symmetric tensor field,
leads to
 

The kinematical group of the de Sitter space is the -parameter
group SO (connected component of the identity in
SO ), which is one of the two possible deformations of the
Poincare group. There are two Casimir operators
 
where
 
The subscript  in ,  reminds that the
carrier space is constituted by  second rank tensors. The orbital
part , and the action of the spinorial part
 on a tensor field  defined on the
ambient space read respectively
 
The symbol  holds for the
usual antisymmetrical tensor. The action of the Casimir operator
  on  can be written in the more explicit form
 
In the latter,
, and
the vector symmetrizer  is defined for two vectors
 and  by 
.

We are now in position to express the wave equation
 by using the Casimir operators. This can be done
with the help of Equation () since
. The d'Alembertian operator
becomes
 
and the wave equation  is rewritten as
 
Finally, using formula () for the tensor field 
 which satisfies the conditions
 the field equation becomes
 

As expected, this formulation of the field equation has now a
clear group-theoretical content. In fact, using the representation
classification given by the eigenvalues of the Casimir operator,
we will be able to identify the involved field. At this point let
us clarify what we mean by "massive" spin-2 de Sitter field.
Inasmuch as mass and  spin are well-defined Poincare concepts,
we will consider exclusively  the de Sitter elementary systems (in
the Wigner sense) associated to a UIR of SO that admit
a non-ambiguous  massive spin-2 UIR of the Poincare group at the
 contraction limit. This contraction is performed with
respect to the  subgroup SO which is identified as the
Lorentz subgroup in both relativities, and the concerned de Sitter
representations are precisely those ones which are induced by the
minimal parabolic  subgroup SOSO
(a certain nilpotent subgroup), where SO
is  the space rotation subgroup of the Lorentz subgroup
in both cases. This fully clarifies the concept of spin in de
Sitter since it is issued from the same  SO.
"Massive" spin-2 unitary representation of the de Sitter group SO  
The operator  commutes with the action of the group
generators and, as a consequence, it is constant in each unitary
irreducible representation (UIR). Thus the eigenvalues of
 can be used to classify the UIR's i.e., 
 
Following Dixmier we get a classification scheme using
a pair  of parameters involved in the following possible
spectral values of the Casimir operators :
 
Three types of scalar, tensorial or spinorial UIR are
distinguished for SO according to the range of values
of the parameters  and , namely : the
principal, the complementary and the discrete series. In the
following, we shall restrict  the list to the unitary
representations which have a Minkowskian physical spin-2
interpretation in the limit  (for the general situation see
 and Appendix A). The flat limit tells us that for the
principal and the complementary series it is the value of 
which has a spin meaning, and that, in the case of the discrete
series, the only representations which have a physically
meaningful Minkowskian counterpart are those with  (details
about the mathematics of the group contraction and the physical
principles underlying the relationship between de Sitter and
Poincare groups can be found in andrespectively). The spin- tensor representations relevant to the
present work are the following :
 
[i)] The UIR's  in the principal series where
 and  correspond to the Casimir
spectral values:
 
with parameter
 (note that  and  are
equivalent).
[ ii)] The UIR's  in the complementary series where
 and  correspond to
 
[iii)] The UIR's  in the discrete series where
 correspond to
 
The spin-2 "massless" field in de Sitter space corresponds to
the latter case in which the sign  in 
stands for the helicity. A forthcoming paper will be entirely
devoted to this specific field.
Equation  leads to 
 which enables us to write the
respective "mass" relations for the three types of UIR
previously described :
 
The  spin- "mass" range can be represented by 

 
 



#1#2#3#4#5#6  
xxxxxxsplain 

#1#2#3
#1<17#1<20#1<24#1<29#1<34#1<41#3 
#1#2#3#125<25#2pt  
pt@pt#3 
 
Mass range and spin- SO unitary irreducible
representations. 










The forbidden mass range has been discussed by Higuchi in
 and contrary to his point of view we do not consider
 in the range of  the complementary series as a "mass".
This is because the complementary series with   is not linked
to any physical representation in the Poincare flat limit sense.
The crucial point is that  (unlike  !) is
confined between the values  and  and therefore simply
vanishes in the limit . On the contrary, for the principal
series, the contraction limit has to be understood through the
constraint . The quantity , supposed to depend on
, goes to the Minkowskian mass  when the curvature goes to
zero. In short, we only consider as "massive" tensor fields,
those ones for which the values assumed by the parameter  are
in the range  which corresponds to the principal series of
representations. Eq.  then gives
 

Let us recall at this point the physical content of the principal
series representation from the point of view of a Minkowskian
observer (at the limit ). The principal series UIR
, contracts toward the tensor massive
Poincare UIR's  and  with negative and
positive energies respectively. Actually, the group representation
contraction procedure is not unique and it has been shown that the
principal series UIR can contract either toward the direct sum of
the two tensor massive Poincare UIR's 
or simply (forthcoming paper)
 
In contrast, in the massless spin- case, only the two
aforementioned representations , in the discrete
series with , have a Minkowskian interpretation. The
representation  has a unique extension to a direct
sum of two UIR's  and  of the conformal group
 with positive and negative energies respectively
. The latter restricts to the tensor massless
Poincare UIR's  and  with positive and
negative energies respectively. The following diagrams illustrate
these connections
 

 

where the arrows  designate unique extension,
and  (resp. 
) are the massless Poincare UIR's
with positive and negative energies and  positive (resp. negative)
helicity.

De Sitter tensor  waves 
Field Equation solution 
Our aim is now to solve the "massive" spin-2 wave equation for
the dS  mode 
 
In ambient space  notations, the most general transverse,
symmetric field  can be written in terms of
two vector fields  and a scalar field  through the
following recurrence formula 
with  satisfying the conditions . The symbol
 denotes a constant vector and  
. The
operator  is the generalized gradient 

 which makes a symmetric transverse tensor field
from the transverse vector . The algebraic machinery valid for
describing fields in anti-de Sitter space can be easily
transferred mutatis mutendis  to dS space formalism by the
substitutions (see for instance):

 Reference provides the following
useful relations
 
 
Defining the generalized divergence 
 and
, one also has
 
 
 Putting  given by
 into  and from the linear
independence of the terms in () one gets
 
Note that in these formulas, 
corresponds to the principal series of representation with spin
 and that  is chosen to be divergenceless. Using the
equations  (), the divergenceless condition
combined with Eq. () leads to
 
where  .
Finally, the traceless condition which yields
 
compared to the divergence of Eq. () allows to express
 in terms of :
 

Thus, the fields  and  are respectively "massive"
vector field (e.g.  transforming under the vector UIR
 of the principal series), and "massive"
scalar field (e.g.  transforming under the scalar UIR
 of the principal series):
 

Note that the equations for  and  are compatible with the
relation . The equations
() and () show that the massive vector 
determines completely the tensor field  which can now be
written
 

As explained in the solutions  to Eq.
 are defined on connected open subsets of 
such that , where  lies on the
null cone . They are
homogeneous with degree  on  and
thus are entirely determined by specifying their values on a well
chosen curve (the orbital basis )  of . They can
be written as a product of a generalized polarization
vector  with the so-called
(scalar) dS waves 
where . As such, the dS waves
are multivalued and it will be explained later how suitable
analyticity criteria yield univalued defined waves. The solutions
to Eq.  read
 
where  is another constant vector.  Note that contrary to the
Minkowskian case, the polarization tensor is a function of
space-time. The simplest form of 
compatible with the Minkowski polarization vector in the flat
limit (see) is obtained through the choice 
 and reads
 
It is easy to see (flat limit) that the three  Minkowski
polarization four-vectors  with
 are linked to  by:
 
We demand that the Minkowski polarization  vectors satisfy the
usual relations
 
which is achieved if the 's are such that
 
These conditions are easily derived by working with a well adapted
(to the flat limit) orbital basis. This basis, characterized by
the values  of the component  will be discussed
later on. A remarkable feature connected with the use of ambient
space notations is that with Eq. () one shows that
the properties of the dS polarization vector are very similar to
the Minkowskian case:
 
It follows from Eq. () that the two spin-
families of solutions to Eq. () read

 where
the operator  is given by
 
These spin-2 solutions can be brought into the form
 
where the 's are the generalized
polarization tensor components,  is a normalization
constant and where we have again omitted the superscript
. Because of the conditions
, , and
, the  components  reduce
to 5 independent components which correspond precisely to the 
 degrees of freedom of a spin- field.

The arbitrariness due to the introduction of  the constant vectors
 in our solution has partly been removed in
(), by comparison with the Minkowski polarization
vector one eventually reaches by going to the flat limit (see
). We now apply the same procedure in order to fix
the value of , that is we investigate the behaviour of
equation () in the  limit. More precisely,  we
show that  contracts
toward the usual Minkowski tensor polarization and takes a simple
form if  is chosen to be equal to  and denoted by  in
the following. It is a matter of simple calculation to get the de
Sitter polarization tensor starting with Formula ( ):
 
where 
. In view of () one obtains
 
It is easy to check that the tensor polarization
() satisfies the properties

(tracelessness), 
and the  relation
 
The dS tensor waves  are homogeneous with
degree  on the null cone  and on the dS
submanifold  characterized by  with 
being constant. This is due to:
 
which is obvious from the definition of 

 
Note that as a function of , the wave
 is homogeneous with degree zero
().
Flat limit and analytic tensor wave 
It order to compute the flat limit of the polarization tensor, it
is useful to precise the notion of orbital basis  for the
future null cone 
. Let us choose a unit vector  in  and
let  be its stabilizer subgroup in . Then two
types of orbits are interesting in the present context :
 
[(i)] the spherical type  corresponds to 

 , and is an orbit of 
.

[(ii)] the hyperbolic type   corresponds to .
It is divided into two hyperboloid sheets, both being orbits of
.
The most suitable parametrization when one has in view the link
with massive Poincare UIR's is to work with the orbital basis of
the second type

 with the null vector  given in
terms of the four-momentum  of a Minkowskian
particle of mass 
 
An appropriate choice of global coordinates is given by
 
where the dS point is expressed in terms of the Minkowskian
variables  measured in units of the dS radius
.

The Minkowskian limit of the dS  waves at point  can be written
as 
Since the contraction is done with respect to the Lorentz subgroup
 ( is invariant under ) the
equations  indicate that the orbital basis
 can contract toward the sum of two solutions with
opposite energies (see).

The  polarization tensor limit is easily obtained with the help of






 Finally one recovers the Minkowskian massive
spin-2 polarization tensor:





which satisfies

and
 
Hence, we have shown that in the limit ,
 and 
behave like the plane wave  and the polarization
tensor in Minkowski space-time respectively.

Although the "massive" field equation solutions
 and  are complex
conjugated, they  cannot be associated with the positive and
negative energies respectively as in  the Minkowskian situation.
Actually, despite the fact that the solutions are globally defined
(in a distributional sense) in dS space, the concept of energy is
not (absence of global timelike killing vector field). As a
result, concepts like "particle" and "antiparticle" are rather
unclear and the differences between these two solutions is not
really explained or understood. In terms of group representation
these two solutions are equivalent, because the two
representations  and  are.
 Note that the minimally coupled scalar
field requires both sets of solutions in order to achieve a
covariant quantization. This will certainly also be
the case for the spin-2 massless field in dS space since it is
constructed from a minimally coupled scalar field as it will be
shown in.

In the present case, the "massive" free field covariant
quantization can be constructed from the positive norm states
alone since  is closed under the group
action:
 
This is easily proved since the vector polarization satisfies
 
The dS waves solutions, as functions on de Sitter space,
 are only locally defined since they
are singular on specific lower dimensional subsets of , for
instance on spatial boundary defined by 
, and multivalued
on dS space-time. In order to get a global definition, they have
to be viewed as distributions which are boundary
values of analytic continuations of the solutions to tubular
domains in the complexified de Sitter space . The
latter are  defined as follows:
 

For an univalued determination, we must introduce the forward and
backward tubes of . First of all, let
 be the forward and backward tubes in
. The domain (resp.  stems from the causal
structure on :
 
We then introduce their respective intersections with ,
 
which are the tubes of . Finally we define the
"tuboid" above  by
 
 Details are given in. When 
varies in  (or ) and  lies in the
positive cone  the  wave solutions are globally
defined because the imaginary part of  has a fixed sign
and .

We define the  de Sitter tensor wave  as
the boundary value of the analytic continuation to the future tube
of Eq. (). Hence, for  and 
 one gets the two solutions
 
Two-point function and Quantum field  
The two-point function 

As explained in, the dS axiomatic field theory is
based on the Wightman two-point double tensor-valued function
 
Indeed, this kernel entirely encodes the theory of the generalized
free fields on dS space-time , at least for the massive case.
For this, it has to satisfy the following requirements:
 
[a)] Positiveness 

for any test function 
, we have
 
where  denotes the dS-invariant measure on 
.  is the space of functions 
with compact support in .

[b)] Locality 
for every space-like separated pair , i.e.  
,
 
[c)] Covariance 
 
for all  SO.
[d)] Index symmetrizer 
 
[e)] Transversality 
 
[f)] Divergencelessness 
 
[g)] Normal analyticity 
 is the boundary value
(bv) in the distributional sense of an analytic function


Concerning the last requirement,
 is actually maximally
analytic, i.e.  can be analytically continued to the "cut
domain"

The Wightman  two-point function 
 is the boundary value of
 from  and the
"permuted Wightman function" 
 is the boundary value of
 from the domain

Once these properties are satisfied, the reconstruction theorem
  allows to recover the corresponding quantum field
theory. Our present task is therefore to find a doubled tensor
valued analytic function of the variable   satisfying
the properties a) to g). Following Reference (in which
the construction has been done for the scalar case), the analytic
two-point function 
 is obtained from the dS
tensor waves  . The parameter  refers to
the principal series. The two-point function is given in terms of
the following class of integral representations
 
where   is the natural 
invariant measure on , induced from the 
Lebesgue measure and the normalization constant
 is fixed by local Hadamard condition. The latter selects
a unique vacuum state for quantum tensor fields which satisfies
the dS field equation. In order to check wether condition a) to g)
are satisfied by Eq. () let us first  rewrite  the
two-point function in a more explicit way. This will be done by
using the scalar and the vector "massive" analytic two-point
functions  ,  (where
). The latter satisfy the complex versions of
the Casimir equations:
 
In appendix C and in Reference it is shown how 
 can be written in terms of the scalar analytic
two-point function
 
The Wightman scalar two-point function 
is given by 
The normalization constant  is determined by imposing
the Hadamard condition on the two-point function. This has been
done in Ref. where the scalar two-point function has
been rewritten in terms of the generalized Legendre function  for
well chosen space like separated points  and . It has been
established that  with
 and
 




This normalization corresponds to the Euclidean vacuumand  is the generalized Legendre function of
the first kind. There are several reasons which explain the
appearance of  and . First
of all, both correspond to the commonly used two-point functions
(see for instance reference) as it is checked in
Appendix C. Moreover, since the vector two-point function is
written in terms of the scalar two-point function it exhibits the
two building blocks of the tensor expression which are well known
and simple to manipulate. As a matter of fact, the flat limit is
very easy to compute in this framework.

We have seen that the  spin-2 analytic two-point function
() is obtained from the tensor waves
(). Let us cast the latter into the more suitable
form
 
by using the property
 
We then simply develop the two-point function and obtain :
) 
From  the  property
 
and  the relation 
 it is clear that
the analytic two-point function can be written in  the general
form:
 
The differential operators  and  are given by
 
Eventually, the analytic tensor two-point function is given in
terms of the scalar analytic two-point function by:

 with 
a differential operator discussed in appendix D. The boundary
value of  gives the following integral
representation for the Wightman two-point function:
 
with
 
This relation defines the two-point function in terms of global
waves on the real hyperboloid .

Let us now check if this kernel fulfills the conditions a) to g)
required in order to get a Wightman  two-point function. We recall
that  the existence of the latter which is requested by dS
axiomatic field theory.
 
The positiveness property follows from the relation
 
where
 
The hermiticity property is obtained,  by considering boundary
values of the following identity
 
which is easily checked on Eq.
().

In order to prove the locality condition, we use  the hermiticity
condition and the following relation:

 This  easily
follows from the form of the two-point function for space-like
separated points given in Appendix D :

 and from the  relation One finally gets




It should be noticed that the space-like separated pair ()
lies in the same orbit of the complex dS group as the pairs
() and (). Therefore the locality condition

 holds.

The group action on the dS modes ()
and the independence of the integral  () with
respect to the selected orbital basis  entail the covariance
property
 
The symmetry with respect to the indices , 
and ,  and the transversality with respect to 
and  are guaranteed by construction. So is the divergencelessness
condition.
The analyticity properties of the tensor Wightman two-point
function follow from the expression of the dS tensor waves
().
Remark 

A massive spin-2 two-point function had already been proposed in
Ref.. Although the approach we have used here is very
different (in Ref. the coordinates are non global, the
modes have a spin-0 and spin-2 content..) it has been possible to
check that our vector two-point function is in agreement with the
one presented in. This is of importance since it
confirms for tensor fields the validity of the integral
representation method () originated in for
the scalar case. However, explicit  comparison for the spin-2 case
would be a rather tedious task given the differences between both
formalisms and the involved expression of the spin-2 two-point
function given in. It seems that one can at least say
that the ambient space formalism presents the advantage of
simplicity. This is again verified by performing the flat limit as
it is seen in the next paragraph and this was already the case
when the unitary irreducible representations had to be identified
in section II.


The flat limit 
The flat limit is straightforward to compute with  the help of the
orbital basis . The measure
  is chosen to be   times the
natural one induced from the  Lebesgue measure. This
yields  and the
constant  reads
 

One finds the massive spin-  Minkowski two-point function:
 
where the factor  is due to our definition of the operators
 and . This limit can also be computed (more
explicitly) starting with Formula (). The
flat limit for the scalar and vector two-point functions have been
computed in, one obtains:
 
where  and  are
the scalar and vector massive  Minkowskian two-point functions
respectively. Under the constraint  which implies
 
one finally gets the massive spin- Minkowski two-point function
(see for instance)
 

The quantum field 
 The explicit
knowledge of  allows us to make the QF
formalism work. The tensor fields  is expected
to be an operator-valued distributions on  acting on a
Hilbert space . In terms of Hilbert space and field
operator, the properties of the Wightman two-point functions are
equivalent to the following conditions:
 
Existence of an unitary irreducible
representation of
the dS group 
 
Existence of at least one "vacuum state" 
 ,
cyclic for the polynomial algebra of field operators
and invariant
under the above representation of the dS group.
Existence of a Hilbert space  
with positive definite metric that can be described as the
Hilbertian sum




where .
Covariance  
of the field operators under the representation ,




Locality 
for every space-like separated pair 


KMS condition or geodesic spectral
condition which means the vacuum is defined as a physical state
with the
temperature .

Transversality 


Divergencelessness 


Index symmetrizer 

Given the two-point function, one can realize the Hilbert space as
functions on  as follows. For any test function 
, we define the vector valued distribution
taking values in the space generated by the modes

by :
 
where  is the smeared form of the
modes:
 
The space generated by the 's is equipped with the positive
invariant inner product
 
As usual, the field is defined by the operator valued distribution
 
where the operators 
 and

 are respectively antilinear and
linear in their arguments. One gets:
 
The unsmeared operator reads
 
where  satisfies the canonical
commutation relations (ccr) and is defined by

The measure satisfies
 and

 yields
the homogeneity condition

 The integral
representation () is independent of the orbital
basis  as explained in.  For the hyperbolic
type submanifold  the measure is
 and the ccr are
represented by

 


The field commutation relations are
 



Conclusion 

In this paper we have considered the "massive" spin- tensor
field that is associated to the principal series of the dS group
SO with 
and corresponding to the nonzero "mass"
. In our view, the use of the
"mass" concept is more forced by tradition than relevant to our
analysis. The use of ambient space formalism endowed the de Sitter
physics with a Minkowskian-like appearance. The main differences
hold in  the space time dependence of the de Sitter polarization
tensor. This formalism yield simple expressions and make de Sitter
QFT look almost like standard QFT in flat space time.

The group theoretical point of view allows a systematic and
complete study of the spin-2 field theory and legitimates the
restriction of "massive" fields to those which carry principal
series representations. Indeed, in the case of the complementary
series (), although the
associated "mass"  is
strictly positive, the physical meaning of their carrier fields
remains unclear since the  limits of these representations in
the complementary series do not correspond to any physical
representation of the Poincare group.


 Since   and
 are strictly  non zero, "massless" spin-2 fields must
belong to the discrete series among which only 
have a physically meaningful Poincare limit. Now since the
associated "mass" is ,
and is expected to be real, the only possible value of  is 
with . Hence  correspond precisely to
"massless" tensor fields (linear quantum gravity in dS space) in
perfect agreement with the fact that on  one hand these
representations have non ambiguous extensions to the conformal
group  and on the other hand, the latter are precisely
the unique extensions of the massless Poincare group
representations with helicity . In this case  should
be replaced by  in the formulas of the present
paper. The projection operator  (Eq.
) on the classical level) and the normalization
constant  (Eq. () on the quantum level)
then become singular. This singularity is actually due to the
divergencelessness condition needed to associate the tensor field
with a specific UIR of the dS group. To solve this problem, the
divergencelessness condition must be dropped. Then the field
equation becomes gauge invariant, i.e.  
 is a solution of the field equation for any
vector field  as far as  is. As a result, the
general solutions transform under  indecomposable representations
of the dS group. By fixing the gauge, the field can  eventually be
quantized.

A second type of singularity appears. It is due to the zero mode
problem of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on dS space inherited
from  the minimally coupled scalar field.
Accordingly, we feel that a Krein space quantization along the
lines presented in
  can be successfully
carried out in the spin-2 massless case in dS space. This
situation will be considered in a forthcoming paper
.



Acknowledgements  : We are grateful to J. Renaud
and S. Rouhani for useful discussions.

 
Classification of the unitary irreducible representations of
the de Sitter group SO. 
 Unitary irreducible representations (UIR) of
SO are characterized by the eigenvalues of the two
Casimir operators  and  introduced in Section
II. In fact the UIR's may be labelled by a pair of parameters
 with   and , in
terms of which the eigenvalues of  and  are
expressed as follows:




According to the possible values for  and , three series of
inequivalent representations may be distinguished: the principal,
complementary and discrete series. We write  when  or 
have spin meaning.
 
Principal series representations , also called
"massive" representations:
 with
 
The operators  and  take respectively the
following forms:



They are called the massive representations of
the dS group because they contract toward the massive spin 
representations of the Poincare group.
Complementary series representations
 :
with
 
The operators  and  take forms:



 Here, the only physical
representation in the sense of Poincare limit is the scalar case
corresponding to  and also called conformally
coupled massless case.
Discrete series  and : with
 
In this case, the only physical representations in the sense of
Poincare limit are those with . They are called
the massless representations of the dS
group.
Note that the substitution  does not alter the
eigenvalues; the representations with labels  and
 can be shown to be equivalent. Finally, we have
pictured some of these representations in terms of  and .
The symbols  and  stand for the discrete series
with semi-integer and integer values of  respectively. The
complementary series is represented in the same frame by  bold
lines. The principal series is represented in the Re
plane by dashed lines.

 
 



#1#2#3#4#5#6  
xxxxxxsplain 

#1#2#3
  #1<17#1<20  #1<24#1<29  #1<34#1<41       #3 
#1#2#3  #125<25  #2pt  
      pt    @pt  #3 
 
SO unitary irreducible representation
diagrams. 











Maximally symmetric bitensors in ambient space 
Following Allen and Jacobson in reference we will
write the two-point functions in de Sitter space (maximally
symmetric) in terms of bitensors. These are functions of two
points  which behave like tensors under coordinate
transformations at either point. The bitensors are called
maximally symmetric if they respect the de Sitter invariance.

As shown in reference, any maximally symmetric
bitensor can be expressed as a sum of products of three  basic
tensors. The coefficients in this expansion are functions of the
geodesic distance , that is the distance along the
geodesic connecting the points  and  (note that 
can be defined by unique analytic extension also when no geodesic
connects  and ). In this sense,  these fundamental tensors
form a complete set.  They can be obtained by differentiating the
geodesic distance:

and the parallel propagator

The geodesic distance is implicitly defined for
 by
* 
The basic bitensors  in ambient space notations are found through:

restricted to the hyperboloid by

For , one finds



 and



with . For
, ,    are multiplied by  and
 becomes . In both cases we
have






"Massive" vector two-point function 
Given the important role played by the "massive" vector Wightman
two-point function in the construction of the spin- two-point
function we briefly present  here a derivation of it (for details
see Reference). In addition we compare our two-point
function with the one given in Reference. We consider
the "massive" vector Wightman two-point function which
corresponds to the principal series of representation of
SO and satisfies:



 This bivector is obtained as the
boundary value of the analytic bivector  two-point function
obtained with the modes ():
* 
With the  help of Eq. () and the relation

 it is easy
to expand the transverse bivector  in terms of the analytic scalar
two-point function :
 
The analytic "massive " scalar two-point function is
* 
which satisfies:


The choice of normalization corresponds to the Euclidean vacuum
and  can be written as a  hypergeometric function (see
):





In order to show that our vector two-point function  is the same
two-point function as the one given by Allen and Jacobson in
Reference, we develop  using
essentially

 One finds


 with
 
where

is the second order differential operator deduced from the Casimir
operator expressed with the variable  in place of .
The functions  and  satisfy the property

with


which is solution of the equation


Finally, let us write the intrinsic expression of the two-point
function   obtained as the boundary
value of . The intrinsic expression is:

 Since





one gets



and in the case of SO:

This is the expression given by Allen and Jacobson in Ref.
 and.

Another expression for the spin- Two-point function 
We present another form of the spin- two-point function, which
is useful for the proof of the locality condition. We begin with
the term :
* 
We rewrite this equation using the relations
* 
where 
. This is obtained by
simple calculation of


 with the
help of Eq. () and where we have written
. One gets:
* 

Now, given that
* 
where  is the trace of the vector two-point
function given by




We find the following form  for the spin-2 two-point function :

* 
where 
 and
* 
The two-point function can be rewritten as

where the differential operator  obviously satisfies
. This property serves to prove the
locality condition.
 99 

 Gazeau J.P. and Takook M.V., J. Math.
Phys., 41  ; Garidi T., Gazeau J.P. and
Takook M.V., Comment on, J. Math. Phys., 43  ;.
 Bartesaghi P., Gazeau J.P.,
Moschella U. and Takook M.V.,  Class. Quant. Grav.,  
.
  Allen B., Turyn M., Nucl. Phys. B,
.
 Floratos E. G., Iliopoulos J.,
Tomaras T. N., Phys. Lett. B, .
  Antoniadis I., Mottola  E., J. Math.
Phys.,  .
  Antoniadis I., Iliopoulos  J.,
Tomaras T. N., Nucl. Phys. B, .
 Ford H. L., Phys. Rev. D, .
 Antoniadis I., Iliopoulos  J.,
Tomaras T. N., Phys.
Rev. Lett.,
 .
  Tsamis N. C., Woodard R. P., Phys.
Lett. B, ; Comm. Math. Phys., .
  Garidi T., Gazeau J. P., Renaud J.,
Rouhani S. and Takook M.V., Linear covariant quantum gravity
in de Sitter space , in preparation.
 de Vega H.J., Ramirez J. and Sanchez
N., Phys. Rev. D, ;
 astro-ph/.
  Gazeau J. P., Renaud J., Takook
M.V., Class. Quant. Grav. , gr-qc/.
  Takook M.V., Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 16 (2001) 1691;
gr-qc/0005020.
 Takook M.V., These de l'universite Paris VI, 1997
Theorie quantique des champs pour des systemes
elementaires "massifs" et de "masse nulle" sur
l'espace-temps de de Sitter.   Takook M.V., Proceedings of the
Sixth International Wigner Symposium,   August, 1999,
Istanbul, Turkey, Bogazic i university Press, Vol 1,
gr-qc/0001052.
  Hawking S.W., Hertog T., Turok N.,
 Phys. Rev. D, ; hep-th/0003016.
  Higuchi A., Kouris S.S.,
Class.Quant.Grav. 17 (2000) 3077-3090, gr-qc/0004079.
  Higuchi A., Kouris S.S., On the
scalar sector of the covariant graviton two-point function in de
Sitter spacetime , gr-qc/0011062.
 Bros J., Gazeau J. P., Moschella U.,
Phys. Rev. Lett., .
 Higuchi A.,  J. Math. Phys. 28 , 1553
(1987).
 Gabriel C., Spindel P., J. Math. Phys.,
.
 Higuchi A.,  Nucl. Phys. B282, 397
(1987).
  Kogan I.I., Mouslopoulos S.,
Papazoglou A., Phys. Lett. B503, 173 (2001).
 Buchbinder I. L. and al. , Nucl. Phys.
B584 (2000) 615-640, .
 Dixmier J., Bull. Soc. Math. France, 
.
 Takahashi B., Bull. Soc. Math. France, 
.
 Allen B., Jacobson T., Comm.
Math. Phys., .
 Fronsdal C., Phys. Rev. D, 
.
 Dirac P. A. M., Ann.  Math., .

 Gazeau J. P.,  Hans M., J. Math. Phys.,
.
 Lipsman L., Springer Verlag, Group
Representations , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, .
 Barut A. O., Bohm  A., J. Math.
Phys., .
 Levy-Nahas M., J. Math.
Phys., .
 Bacry H., Levy-Leblond J.M., J. Math.
Phys., .
 Mickelsson J., Niederle J., Comm.
Math. Phys., .
  Angelopoulos E. and Laoues M.,
Rev.  Math. Phys., 10, 271, (1998).
 Gazeau J. P., Letters in Mathematical Physics, 8
(1984) .
 Bros J., Moschella U., Rev. Math.
Phys., .
 Fierz M.,  Pauli W., Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.,
 A. () .


 Gel'fand I. M., Shilov E.G., Academic
Press  Generalized functions, Vol. I. .
 Streater R. F. and Wightman A. S., W.
A. Benjamin, Inc.   PCT, Spin and Statistics, and All
That .
 Bros J., Viano G. A., funct-an/ Connexion between the harmonic analysis
on the sphere and the harmonic analysis on the one sheeted
hyperboloid: an analytic continuation viewpoint , .


































---------------------
The field operator  can be written as
 
where  satisfies the canonical
commutation relations (ccr) and is defined by

The integral representation () is independent of
the orbital basis  if we impose

 This  is because
 
 and
.







For the hyperbolic type submanifold  the measure is
 ccr are represented
by
 






----------------------------
la fonction a 2 points dans sa version "ansatz" !!!!!!!!!!!!!!
 
where ,  and
 is the natural  invariant
measure on , induced from the  Lebesgue measure
.
 
where  is the Heaviside function.
-----------------------------
 
where 
.
This expression can be simplified using ().
---------------------------------------
fonction a deux points vectorielle


 The relations
* 
together with the divergenceless condition 
  which is equivalent to

 allow to express the vector two-point
function in term of the scalar function :




 The trace of the vector two-point function is




----------------------------------------
 The  In terms of annihilation and
creation operators, the field operator
  is defined by
 











 in which
symbols with hat should be omitted.
-----------------------------------------
 

