unsrt  
 

  
Exceptional Projective Geometries and Internal Symmetries 
 
 
Sultan Catto
Physics Department
 The Graduate School and University Center
 The City University of New York 
365 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10016-4309
 and 
 Center for Theoretical Physics 
The Rockefeller University 

1230 York Avenue
 New York NY 10021-6399 
 
 
 

  
A new mneumonic devise is shown to emerge in connection with  numerical tensors exhibiting duality and reflecting the natural  splitting of -dimensional space. Then Desargues' and Pappus' theorems are shown to be connected  through a geometry that makes use of octonionic numbers exhibiting this duality. Construction of exceptional Hilbert spaces based on Jordan algebras and exceptional projective geometries is illustrated. A brief discussion of the Moufang plane and non-Desarguesian geometries is presented. 
 

PACS numbers: 12.40.Aa, 12.40.Qq, 11.30.Pb

 

 Work supported in part by DOE contracts No. DE-AC-0276 ER 03074 and 03075, and PSC-CUNY Research Awards.
Introduction 

There are some unique exceptional geometries which are connected with octonions and correspond to a finite number of degrees of freedom that cannot be extended. This is the new Hilbert space that we want tentatively to identify with the Hilbert space of internal symmetries carrying color and flavor quantum numbers.

One of the fundamental questions in particle physics is the understanding of the quark substructure of hadrons. We would like to understand the emergence of the hierarchy of interactions, the mass spectrum of quarks and leptons and the wider mass spread of the fundamental gauge bosons through the spontaneous breaking of a local symmetry based on a unifying group or supergroup associated with a gauge field theory.


Octonionic planes may possibly provide the geometrical foundation for the existence of internal symmetries like color and flavor. These octonionic geometries allow us to construct new finite Hilbert spaces with unique properties. The non-Desargues'ian geometric property makes them non-embeddeble in higher spaces, hence essentially finite. It also leads to peculiarities in the superposition principle in the color sector of the Hilbert space. This theory of the charge space, if correct, suggests a new geometric picture for the substructure of the material world, that of an octonionic geometry attached at each point of Einstein's Riemannian manifold for space time with local symmetry that leaves the properties of charge space invariant.

In what follows, we first introduce a simple description of octonion algebra.  numerical tensors will be shown to be dual and a new mneumonic devise will emerge as a useful device in their combined description. These will naturally lead into construction of two completely antisymmetric  tensors in . Then, a split octonion algebra will be shown that will close into a fermionic Heisenberg algebra leading to an algebra of color forces in QCD. Application to effective hadronic supersymmetry when the split units and their conjugates become associated with quark and antiquark fields, respectively, will follow, based on  supergroups, leading to new mass formulas describing mesons and baryons.

Last part of the paper deals with octonionic quantum mechanics and construction of exceptional Hilbert spaces based on Jordan algebras and exceptional projective geometries. Within this context a new geometric structure will be shown to emerge connecting Pappus' and Desargues' theorem with octonions and octonionic dualities. A brief discussion of the Moufang plane and its invariance group  (that replaces  group acting on complex (quaternionic)quantum mechanical spaces), and the non-Desarguesian geometries follow. These geometries admit as invariance groups the exceptional series (. 



Octonion Algebra 


An octonion  is a set of eight real numbers

 
that are added like vectors and multiplied according to the rules

 

 
where  is the multiplicative unit element and 's are the imaginary octonion units. 
The structure constants  are completely antisymmetric and take the value 1 for combinations

 
Note that summation convention is used for repeated indices. 

The octonion algebra  is an algebra defined over the field  
of rational numbers, which as a vector space over  has dimension 8. 
It can be described as the linear span of the units 
 subject to a non-associative multiplication given in its component form
in the following table:





























Table 1: Cayley Multiplication Table 


Defining the conjugates

 
the octonionic conjugate  is

 

The scalar part of the octonion () and its vector part () are

 
and

 

Conjugate of the product of two octonions  and  is

 
and their scalar product is defined by

 
which, in terms of octonion units gives

 

The norm  of an octonion is 

 
and is zero if , and is always positive otherwise. For a nonzero octonion , its inverse is given by 

 
with

 

The norm defined above satisfies

 

In analogous way to the quaternionic case in ,we now make the following definitions of vectorial products of octonion units, namely two new antisymmetric tensors: 

 
and

 
Componentwise they read as

 
and
 
These octonionic tensors naturally enter into covariant formulation of various cross-products in .
We can now write

 

 

Using the definition of commutator of two octonions

 
the product rule implies

 
and

 
so that

 

We see the relation between the commutator and  and  through the triality relation

 

We now define the associator  of three octonions by

 
which is completely antisymmetric:

 
and

 
It is also purely vectorial since

 

Since  commutes and associates with other octonion units, only the purely vectorial parts of  contribute to the associator .

We now define a completely antisymmetric 4-index object  related to the associator as

 

By means of the associator and the product rules, we find

 

Explicit calculation of the values of  show it is dual to  
in .  take value 1 for the following combinations:

 

Duality property between  and  in  is best seen in the following construction:

 

This table is read as

 
etc., for the triads,and

 
etc., for the associators.

We see that there are seven associative planes and their transverse non-associative planes. While an associative plane is closed under commutation, a non-associative plane closes under the associator.

We now present a new diagrammatic representations of octonionic multiplication tables on two consecutively drawn circles below. Diagrams below show the triad  and its associated 4-index object , corresponding to the last line in Eq.(). While six successive rotation of the triangle on the left circle through angle  shows the multiplication rule for the associated triads, the arrow-like figure on the right circle produces its dual part also through the same successive rotations. We receive the relations and multiplication rules shown earlier by simultaneous successive clockwise (or counterclockwise) rotations of the dials, while keeping the triangle on the left figure and the arrow-like figure on the right one intact. Here we also note that, along with the identity , the elements corresponding to the corners of the triangle in the left figure form a basis of of a  quaternion algebra. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 


We now put the two pictures together:
 
Fig. 2 


Keeping the solid-lined distorted arrow like figure and the triangle formed by the dashed lines intact, the successive rotations of the dial at increments  accounts for all the symmetries between 's and the 's given earlier.

We note that the associator plays an important role in the derivation of various properties of octonions. Lets take a look for example at the composition property of the norm for real octonions. Since  is purely vectorial, we deduce that Sc=Sc or Sc=Sc, so that

 
which is same as that of Eq.().

By way of writing down the three fundamental quadrilinear Moufang identities it can easily be shown that 

 
which defines a fully antisymmetric  index object . Reflecting the natural  splitting of -dimensional space, the  is dual to the . From  numerical tensors  and  , one can now construct two completely antisymmetric  tensors in . A detailed description will be given elsewhere.

Split Octonion Algebra  

The Cayley algebra over the field of complex numbers

 
is a split algebra, that is to say if has zero divisors. As a basis for 
 we can take

 

 

 

 
The multiplication table for the split complex Cayley algebra

 
It can be verified easily that the multiplication table for the split Cayley 
algebra is


































Table 2: Split Cayley Multiplication Table 


The split Cayley algebra over  actually has a -structure 
which for ease of notation we will simply denote by  and has the 
property that 

 

As this rational -structure is the main object of interest, we now 
proceed to describe it in terms of  matrices.
Let  be a field of characteristic  and let  be 
Euclidean three-space over the field of rational numbers. The split Cayley 
algebra over  (given in terms of Zorn's matrices) is defined by 

 
The bilinear multiplication of two Zorn matrices is defined by 

 
The matrix 

 
clearly acts as an identity element for this algebra. To obtain the split Cayley algebra over an arbitrary field , we need 
only replace the field  in the above construction by , i.e.  becomes , etc.
An explicit isomorphism between  and 
 is given by the correspondence

 

 

 

Under this mapping the conjugation of Cayley numbers carries over into a 
natural involution on the set of Zorn matrices:

 
One verifies easily that 

 
The expression

 
defines a quadratic form admitting composition, i.e. 

 
for all .
The symmetric bilinear form obtained by polarization

 
is non-degenerate. It is also inmediate that  has zero divisors, 
e.g.

 
The general theory of algebras ascertains that there is only one non-
associative algebra with unit over a field  carrying a non-degenerate 
quadratic form admitting composition and possessing zero-divisors. The 
description above of the split Cayley algebra will be useful to us when 
determining the derivation algebra of . For further details we refer the reader to our paper "Exceptional Quantum Mechanical Spaces and Their Invariance Groups: Physical Interpretation," S. Catto and Carlos Moreno, to be published.

To compactify our notation, we write

                         

                        
where  commutes with any .
                      
The automorphism group of the octonion algebra is the 14-parameter                       
exceptional group .  The imaginary octonion units                       
 fall into its 7-dimensional representation.                      
                       
   Under the  subgroup of  that leaves                        
invariant,  and  transform like singlets, while  and                       
 transform like a triplet and antitriplet respectively.  The multiplication table can now be                       
written in a manifestly  invariant manner (together with the                       
complex conjugate equations):                       


                        

                        

                        

                        
where  is completely antisymmetric with                        
for    = , , , , , , .                        

From these we deduce                       

                        
                       

Now, we put together the compactified multiplication table for the split octonion units:
 
 
Table 3 

It is worth noting that  and  behave like fermionic annihilation and creation operators:


                       

This fermionic Heisenberg algebra shows the three split units  to be Grassmann numbers. Being non-associative, these split units give rise to an exceptional Grassmann algebra.

Operators , unlike ordinary fermion operators, are not associative. We also have 
. The Jacobi identity
does not hold since 

 
where , anticommute with  and . 


We note that, like the imaginary units , the split units cannot be represented by matrices. Unlike the octonion algebra, the split octonion algebra contains zero divisors and is therefore not a division algebra.


The associators of split octonion units are given below:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defining hermitian conjugation as both complex and octonionic conjugation we write
 
 

We also make new definitions:
 
 
and

 
and see that the left handed product

 
and, in the component form the right handed product  survives
only as , i.e.
 
 
with

 
thereby reducing the octonions to purely vectorial quaternions. Next, we give some brief applications of the octonions in effective supersymmetric field theories and in quantum mechanical description of Hilbert space of internal symmetries. A new connections are found on connecting Pappus' and Desargues' geometries through octonionic projective geometries and their applications to dualities will be shown below.

Effective Dynamical Supersymmetry: A brief discussion 

A phenomenological manifestation of octonionic structure (based on Cayley numbers) has been found in connection with quark dynamics inside hadrons leading to an effective dynamical supersymmetry. It is based on  supergroups yielding combined classification of mesons and baryons. Under the color group ,  and  states transform as

 

Under the spin-flavor group , they transform as 66135, and 661521, respectively. Now, mesons are  states while baryons are  states. If one writes  as , where  is a diquark, , the quantum numbers of  are: for color, 3, since when combined with  must give a color singlet; for spin flavor, 21, since when combined with color must give antisymmetric wave functions. But the quantum numbers of  for color is 3, and for spin-flavor, 6. Thus  and  have the same color quantum numbers (color forces can not distinguish between  and ). Therefore there is an approximate dynamic supersymmetry in hadrons with supersymmetric partners

 
            
All hadrons can be obtained by combining  and : mesons are , baryons are , antibaryons are  and exotic mesons are . Since the dimensions of the internal degrees of freedom of  quarks is , and of diquarks for , 18 and for  is , then the corresponding supersymmetry is .

In a way similar to that used in the construction of mass formulas for  and  one can also construct mass formulas for  that describe simultaneously mesons and baryons. Important consequences of these formulas are: (i) slopes of mesonic and baryonic trajectories are identical; (ii) masses of some particles satisfy particular relations, for example , described by semirelativistic and relativistic formulations. Both of these are experimentally verified.  supersymmetry also naturally leads to the existence of  states. There are now several indications that  and  mesons are quark-antidiquark states. Review of this model and recent experimental situation is discussed in detail in Gursey and Tze, Anselmino, et al, and Klempt.


It is worth noting that  and  behave like fermionic annihilation and creation operators:
, , and . This fermionic Heisenberg algebra shows the three split units  to be Grassmann numbers. Being non-associative, these split units give rise to an exceptional Grassmann algebra. Thus this algebra allows: triplettriplet=antitriplet, and tripletantitriplet=singlet. Now the multiplication rules for color is given in Eq.(). But 8 is not allowed if we want color singlet mesons, and 6 is not allowed if we want to have color singlet baryons. Thus the multiplication rules of quarks and antiquarks are identical to those of split octonions. Therefore associating quark fields with split octonion units  by choosing uq, and antiquarks by uq, an effective supersymmetric model is constructed based on octonions where all the unwanted states are automatically  suppressed by means of this algebra. This model gave the first application in particle physics of dynamic (internal) supersymmetries. For a brief history of dynamic symmetries we refer to an article by Franco Iachello, and for an extensive review of octonions to John Baez's comprehensive article.

Octonions and Exceptional Hilbert Spaces 

        In recent years a careful study of the symmetries of the directly 
observed hadronic world and strong interactions led us to the colored quark 
substructure. Also, the properties of weak and 
electromagnetic interactions help us to unveil a deep symmetry between 
the directly observed leptons and the partly observable quarks. These 
fermions seem to be represented by local fields that belong to multiplets 
of a single unifying group  that is valid locally. What distinguishes this group ?  What is so basic about the exact color group? In trying to answer these questions we move to the next sphere of abstraction and see if the unification of strong, electromagnetic and weak interactions points to the geometrical properties of a deeper Hilbert space structure.
         
         During the ebullient first decade after the birth of Quantum 
Mechanics, the grand masters of the period explored all the possibilities 
for the extension of Quantum Mechanical concepts and methods. In 1933 
Jordan  suggested a new formulation of Quantum Mechanics based on 
what became to be known as Jordan algebras. In the standard formulation, 
states are represented by vectors (kets) in a Hilbert space, while observables 
are represented by Hermitian matrices acting on the states. In the Jordan 
formulation an algebra of observables is defined so that observables can be 
combined to give other observables. For instance, in classical mechanics if 
 and  are observables, so are  ,  and . If  and 
 are replaced by hermitian matrices  and , the only the combination

 
is a hermitian matrix, hence an observable representing the classical . 
The symmetrized product Eq.() is the Jordan product of  and . 
Unlike ordinary matrix multiplication which is noncommutative but associative, the 
Jordan product is commutative but not associative. The associator

 
is antisymmetrical in  and  and satisfies the Jordan identity

 
which makes the algebra of observables power associative so that
 is an unambiguous expression that represents the classical observable 
.
         
	In the Jordan scheme the states are also represented by certain 
hermitian matrices  associated with the kets .  They 
are the projection operators

 
that project the state . They satisfy the relations

) 
         
         Now, all the measurable quantities in quantum mechanics are transition probabilities of the form

 
where  is a hermitian operator and

 
is the matrix element of the observable  between the states 
and . We can write

 
We have to show that the expression between brackets can be expressed purely 
by means of the Jordan product. Let

 
We have

 
where the dot refers to the Jordan product.
        
	Furthermore we have the identity

 
so that as a special case

 
It follows that

 
where the right-hand side is expressed by the Jordan product only. Hence the 
absolute square of the matrix element  is

 
         
         In 1934, Jordan, von Neumann and Wigner showed that the 
Jordan algebras are always in one-to-one correspondence with the ordinary 
matrix algebra over complex numbers with one exception. There is an 
exceptional Jordan algebra  of  matrices over octonions 
which are hermitian with respect to octonion conjugation.  They have the form

 
Where the bar denotes octonion conjugation  are 
self-conjugate. Then Albert proved  was the only exceptional 
Jordan algebra.
         
	The octonion algebra is neither commutative nor associative, but 
because of  it is a normed composition algebra which together with 
real numbers, complex numbers and quaternions form the only normed composition 
algebras (the four Hurwitz division algebras). The algebra is alternative, 
as the associator

 
is antisymmetric in ,  and . The scalar part of the octonion  is defined as

 
The diagonal elements  of  in () are scalar
	 in this sense.
         
 A complex octonion is still of the form  but with complex 
components. The resulting complex  is still an element of an exceptional 
Jordan algebra although the complex octonions do not form a division algebra.
         
         To construct the equivalent of projection operators we introduce 
the Freudenthal product

 
The expression

 
is the determinant of .  Matrices  which obey the conditions

 
and

 
can be shown to satisfy also

 
so that they are projection operators. They have the form

 
where  are three octonions one of which is 
self-conjugate. Eq.() is satisfied if

 
         
          defined by Eq.() is a generalization of the 
projection operator Eq.() in the associative case. Hence matrix 
elements of an operator  can be defined analogously to Eq.() by

 
and we have a new quantum mechanics in a 3-dimensional octonionic Hilbert 
space. This is the exceptional Quantum Mechanical space discovered by Jordan, 
von Neumann and Wigner. In this case the octonions are real, so that the 
probabilities  are positive definite. If we take the 
special case , then

 
corresponds to the square of the transition amplitude . If we 
put (see Mostow)

 
then,  has a very simple geometric interpretation. The state 
 may be associated with a point with homogeneous coordinates 
 with the constraint Eq.(). The inhomogeneous 
coordinates

 
when  is self-conjugate, label a point in the two-dimensional 
octonionic projective plane as shown by Moufang in 1933. Then it is 
easy to show that  defined by Eq.() is the 
non-euclidean distance between the points  and  in the 
projective octonionic plane.
         
         Hence, in the octonionic Quantum Mechanics, a point represents a 
state associated with the projection operator  and the distance 
between two points is related to the transition probability between the 
corresponding states.
         
         The line in the projective plane defined by the points  
and  is associated with

 
         that obeys

 
         
         Lines and points obey all the postulates of projective geometry but 
do not satisfy the Desargues theorem. Hence the new Quantum Mechanical space 
corresponds to a new non-Desarguesian projective geometry.         
        
 The condition for a state  to be the superposition of states 
 and  in quantum mechanics can be reexpressed in 
geometrical language and in terms of the projection operators , 
  and . Geometrically, the point  with homogeneous 
coordinates  is on the line determined by the points  and 
. It follows that the determinant of the matrix with columns ,
 and  vanishes.  It is easily shown that this condition is equivalent to the relation

  
which uses only projection operators and the Jordan product. In this 
form the geometrical property can also be generalized to octonionic Quantum 
Mechanics, so that Eq.() expresses the condition for the state  to 
be a linear superposition of the states  and .
         
         The Desargues property can now be rephrased in Quantum Mechanical
language as follows.
         
         Geometrically we have a point  and 3 points , ,  not on a line. 
Take a point  on the line , a point  on the line  and a point  on 
the line  such that , ,  do not lie on a line. Now the lines  and 
 intersect at a point . Similarly  and  intersect at  and  
and  intersect at . The geometry is Desarguesian if ,  and  lie 
on the same line. The Desargues property holds in a projective geometry if 
the projective plane has dimension . In 2 dimensions it holds if the 
coordinates of the point are real, complex or quaternionic, i.e. if they 
belong to an associative algebra. On the other hand in the Moufang plane, 
the coordinates of a point are octonionic. Because of the non-associativity 
of octonions, there exist non-Desarguesian configurations.
         
         In Quantum Mechanics we take states corresponding to the points , 
, , . We superpose  and  to obtain  and proceed similarly for  and .
 We now construct a state  which is simultaneously a superposition of states 
,  and also or states , . We construct states  and  in the same way. 
If the states , ,  are linearly related we have the Desargues property. 
If not, we say that we have a non-Desarguesian Quantum Mechanics. It follows 
that the octonionic Quantum Mechanics of Jordan, Wigner and von Neumann is 
non-Desarguesian. It represents a completely new kind of Quantum Mechanics 
in a finite dimensional Hilbert space in which the superposition principle 
is modified for states corresponding to non-associative triples.


Let us now look at the Desargues' theorem, making the following  octonionic entries in the places of the above letters. First of all, we see that from the entries of 's that contain  element are the  combinations  and . Accordingly, in the figure below we place  in the place of :

 
 
Fig. 2                      


Notice that ,  and . 

Now we connect  with , and  with , and the point where the lines meet is marked . Similarly, lines connecting  with , and  with  meet at , and finally lines connecting  with  and  with  meet at :


 
 
Fig. 3                      
We can now go ahead and replace point  with , since  and . Similarly since  point  is replaced by , and finally  is replaced by  since .

 
 

 Fig. 4                      

We notice that points  (or, their replacements ,  and ) are collinear (Desargues' theorem on a plane) and that all the points in the above figure are mapped onto a line . Note that the lower triangle  is also mapped into line . 

By replacing  with any other , , we can reproduce  different combinations of triads associated with the full rotation through increments of an angle  of the dial described earlier.

We now proceed to Pappus' theorem, connect it with octonionic projective geometry described above and relate it to duality: We begin by drawing two arbitrary lines ( and ) with arbitrarily picked points  on , and  on . We connect the first two pairs,  to , and  to , denoting the point where they cross by . Similarly, connecting  to  and  to , we denote the point where they cross by , and connecting  with  and  with  we get the point . Pappus' theorem tells us that these point ,  and  are collinear. This is shown in the picture below: 
 

 
 

 Fig. 5                     

 

We can now replace the points , ,  and  on the  line, and , ,  and  on the  line. Notice that since ,  is replaced by , and since  we replace  by , and because ,  is replaced by . We notice because of Pappus' theorem, collinear points  () is dually mapped onto two arbitrary lines with entries  (its dual ). This is shown in the picture below:
  

 
 

 Fig. 6                      

Therefore all other remaining  triads of 's are mapped onto their dual 's. 
         
         We now describe how two other features in quantum Mechanics can be 
rephrased in the Jordan formulation and hence generalized to octonionic 
Quantum Mechanics.
         
         The first concerns the insertion of a complete set of states.  If  denotes the unit matrix, we have

 
         so that the relation

 
can be transcribed as

 
which is also valid in octonionic quantum mechanics.
         
         The second is related to the Jordan formulation of compatible 
observables. In the associative case we have an identity that relates the 
associator to the double commutator, namely

 
so, that if  is arbitrary and , ,  are hermitian the equation

 
implies

 
  Since Eq.() does not hold in the octonionic case, we define the 
compatibility of the observables  and  by Eq.() for arbitrary 
. This is a condition which only involves the Jordan product of octonionic 
observables.
         


Invariance Properties of the Exceptional Ouantum Mechanics (). Generalization to Complex Jordan Algebras (). 

         
         In the case of the usual Quantum Mechanics transition amplitudes are 
invariant under unitary transformations as

 
when

 
Then the projection operators transform as

 
The observables  that are linear combinations of projection operators 
also transform in the same way

 
so that the Jordan product  of two observables  and 
 also transforms like a projection operator, since

 
         
         It follows that, in a -dimensional Hilbert space, with  
hermitian matrices associated with observables and projection operators 
for states, the automorphism group of the Jordan algebra of observables 
is  or . In order to find the invariance group of octonionic 
Quantum Mechanics we must find the automorphism group of the exceptional 
Jordan algebra. This was shown to be the group  by Chevalley and 
Schafer more than a decade after the discovery of exceptional 
Jordan algebras.
         
         The infinitesimal action of  on an element  of the Jordan 
algebra can be written simply.
         
         If  and  are traceless octonionic hermitian matrices we
have

 
         The transformation property of the projection operators  
for  states  is obtained by putting .  Let us show that 
this gives the unitary group in the associative case. Let

 
	Then, using Eq.() we can write

 
Exponentiation gives

 
which shows that  is transformed by a unitary matrix. In the octonionic 
case the finite transformation of  is given by the series

 
which only involves the Jordan product and can no longer be written in the 
form Eq.(). When  involves only one octonion and  is a purely scalar 
matrix then Eq.() can be integrated in the form Eq.() 
with  replaced by an 
antihermitian octonionic matrix involving one octonion only. It is seen that 
the full group is determined by the traceless hermitian matrices  and 
 so that it has 52 parameters. The invariants under the  
transformation are

 

 

 
         An irreducible representation of  is obtained by taking =0. 
It corresponds to traceless Jordan matrices.  We have seen that octonionic 
Quantum Mechanics based on real octonions provides us automatically with a 
finite Hilbert space with  symmetry. Since  has 
 
as a maximal subgroup we have a fundamental justification for the color degree 
of freedom and the SU(3) flavor. Under this group we have the 
decomposition 

 
The color singlet part which is a SU(3) flavor octet 
lies in an ordinary quantum mechanical space with SU(3) symmetry involving 
one of the octonionic imaginary units while the colored degrees of freedom 
involve the remaining six imaginary units.
         
The behavior of various states under the color group is best seen if 
we use split octonion units defined in Eqs.(,).

We can now consider the general element  of the Jordan algebra 
with complex components. It can be decomposed as follows

 
Here , ,  are  complex matrices,  denotes transposition and  
 and  are antisymmetric so that

 
         
         If we associate  with the (,3) representation of a group 
,  with (3,1) and  with (1,), then, 
together with the color index  we find that  has the 
 decomposition

 

Comparison with Eq.() tells us that  is the 27-dimensional 
representation of the exceptional group . The color singlet part  
can be associated with the lepton matrix , that is, in terms of the  flavor group the leptons fall in a  matrix that represents the :

 
Meanwhile,  and 
 respectively are associated with left-handed quarks and right-handed antiquarks: the (3,1) quarks and the  antiquarks are

 
It follows that lepton and colored quark fields can be 
combined in a complex Jordan matrix of the form Eq.() which is hermitian with respect to octonionic conjugation only, so that

 
         
         The  representation of  corresponds to .
         
         The  transformation of  involves three traceless real 
octonionic Jordan matrices  ,,  and we have

 
         
         This shows that  is a subgroup of  and that  has 
= real parameters. The Freudenthal product of  and  
projects out the  representation out of the symmetric product 
of , so that we can write

 
         
         Another  invariant operation is the triple product defined 
by Eq.(), so that

 
are also invariant if  transform like (27). Finally we 
can construct the invariant

 
It follows that, with three Jordan matrices , ,  we can associate 
the invariant

 
         
	Given one ,  is not  invariant. But we can construct 4 
invariant real quantities  and  defined by

 

 

         A geometry which generalizes the projective geometry of the 
Moufang plane can be based on the complex matrices . It is called the 
geometry of complex octonionic planes.  A generalized point (or 
state) is defined by  such that

 
         
         The distance  between points  and  or the 
transition probability  is given by

 
and is  invariant.
         
         It is possible to associate idempotent projection operators with 
such states and generalize the quantum mechanical formalism. The geometry 
is more complicated than the Moufang geometry and all its quantum mechanical 
implications have not yet been worked out. However, the existence of this 
 invariant exotic geometry and its close correspondence with the 
phenomenological symmetries of quarks and leptons as reviewed in the 
preceding section provides a strong motivation for the reformulation of the 
properties of the complex octonionic planes in purely quantum mechanical terms.
         
         If it turns out that  or  describe correctly the internal 
symmetries of fundamental fields we may seek the origin of these symmetries 
in the properties of unique finite Hilbert spaces associated with exotic 
geometries.


Conclusions 

The symmetries of the hadronic spectrum and the hadronic decays have 
uncovered a colored quark substructure. Weak and electromagnetic interactions 
showed us that quarks behave like leptons and a local field theory of both 
leptons and quarks makes sense. Strong interactions are well described by a 
local gauge theory based on the exact color group while weak and 
electromagnetic interactions are unified within a gauge field theory of 
spontaneously broken local flavor group. The symmetries between leptons 
and quarks led us to the notion that these fundamental fermions belong to 
the same multiplet of a unifying group. The successful candidates for such 
a unifying group have turned out to be subgroups of the exceptional group 
. On the other hand, the only non-trivial generalizations of the Hilbert 
space of Quantum Mechanics and the algebra of observables involve algebraic 
and geometrical structures connected with the exceptional groups  and 
. These unique and intrinsically finite structures exhibit an exact 
color symmetry originating in octonions that go in the building of these 
exotic structures.
         
	 The fundamental symmetries of elementary 
particles seem to point to field theories based on local internal symmetries 
connected with structures that can be constructed by using octonions.
         
         The finite octonionic structures are grafted to each point of 
space-time, or to each state of an infinite Hilbert space in which the 
Poincare group or the conformal group act unitarily. The octonionic structure 
at a point  is related to the one at point  by an automorphism of 
this algebraic structure. Hence the parameters of the automorphism must be 
functions of  and we must have local invariance under the automorphisms of 
the octonionic structure. This introduces a connection which 
describes how the automorphism at point  is obtained from the one at . As a result the 
internal space and the  space become connected in a fibre bundle structure 
with the Hilbert space of the external group as a base and the observables of 
the charge space or the generators of the automorphism of their algebra as a 
fibre. This provides the geometrical picture associated with a local gauge 
field theory based on the automorphism algebra of the internal octonionic 
observables.
         
Octonionic observables form a Jordan algebra. Then the automorphism group is an 
exceptional group  or , and a gauge field theory of 
quarks and leptons based on exceptional groups emerges as shown by Gursey and collaborators. It is also possible to 
consider super Jordan algebras for generalized Jordan algebras involving 
both bosonic and fermionic observables. In this case the automorphism 
group is a supergroup. If the generalized Jordan algebra is octonionic then 
its automorphism is given by an exceptional supergroup. In the case the 
supergroup is simple it can be the supergroup  or the supergroup 
 . The latter has 40 parameters and its Lie subgroup is 
 which admits the phenomenological 
 
as subgroup. Here again SO(7) is the normal group of purely imaginary 
octonions and SU(3) is the subgroup of the  automorphism of the 
octonionic algebra. If the  model becomes untenable phenomenologically 
the super  is another possible candidate. Instead of leptoquarks and 
diquarks it would introduce spin 3/2 gauge particles alongside with gauge 
bosons, so it would be similar to supergravity when used as a local 
supersymmetry group.
         
         Many problems still remain to be solved. The outstanding ones are concerned with the building of Fock space (tensor 
products with exceptional structures), the understanding of color confinement 
and the realization of the ultimate synthesis with supergravity. Then we might
also be able to understand the emergence of a superheavy mass scale that 
seems necessary for the unification of strong interactions with 
electromagnetic and weak interactions and for the explanation of large 
renormalization shifts in experimentally accessible parameters like the 
Weinberg angle as well as for the quasi-stability of the proton.
 99 

 C-H. Tze and F. Gursey, On the Role of Division, Jordan and Related Algebras in Particle Physics, World Scientific, 1996.
 I. Yokota, J. Fac. Sci. Shinsu Univ. 3  (1968) 61.
 S.Catto and C.J. Moreno, to be published.

 S. Catto and F. Gursey, Nuovo Cimento A86  (1985) 201.

 S. Catto and F. Gursey, Nuovo Cimento A99  (1988) 685.

 M. Anselmino, et al. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65  (1993) 1199.
 E. Klempt, "Baryon Resonances and Strong QCD," arXiv:nucl-ex/0203002.
 

 F. Iachello, Proceedings of ICGTMP, Ed. XX, 1992(?), Ciemat Publ.

 J. Baez, Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 39(2)  (2002) 145-205.

 M. Gunaydin and F. Gursey, J. Math. Phys. 14  (1973) 1651.



 S. Catto, Symmetries in Science, VI  (1993) 129. Ed. B. Gruber, Plenum Press. 

 P. Jordan, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Go ttingen, (1933) 209.  

 F. Gu rsey, "Non-associative Algebras in Quantum Mechanics and
Particle Physics." U. Virginia, 1977.

 P. Jordan, J. von Neumann and E.P. Wigner, Ann. Math. 35  (1934) 29.

A.A. Albert, Ann. Math. 35  (1934) 65.

H. Freudenthal, Adv. in Math. I, 145 (1965)  .

G.D. Mostow, "Strong Rigidity of Locally Symmetric Spaces."
(Princeton U. Press, 1973).

R. Moufang, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 9  (1933) 207.

C. Chevalley and R.D. Schafer, "An Introduction to Non-Associative 
Algebras." (Academic Press, New York 1966).

M. Gu naydin and F. Gu rsey, Phys. Rev. D9  (1974) 3387.

F. Gu rsey, P. Ramond and P. Sikivie, Phys. Lett. 60B  (1976) 177.

J.R. Faulkner, Memoirs of the Am. Math. Soc. No.104 (Providence,
RI 1970) .

F. Gu rsey and L. Marchildon, J. Math. Phys. 19  (1977) 942.
 
V. Kac, Comm. Math. Phys. 53  (1977) 31.







