













mathbbm22cm 15cm 1mm 5mm 5mm
 
R  
L  
D  
W  
E  
F  
M  
O  
A  
G  
V  
  
tr  
det  
  
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
H  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 ^T  
 
/ 
A/ 
 
 
 
   
c  
w  
z  
m   
   
g  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
Q   
Q  
S   
V   
   
   
a   
b   
c   
d   
  
  
  
g  
g_1  
g_2  
g ) 
R) ^4 
U  
  
  
M  


 

    #           hep-th/0302083            IPM/P-2003/007            
             
         

 
  SYM theory from Matrix Model  

 

  Reza Abbaspur, Ali Imaanpur
and  Shahrokh Parvizi 



 Institute for Studies in Theoretical Physics and Mathematics (IPM)

P.O. Box 19395-5531, Tehran, Iran


 Department of Physics, School of Sciences 

Tarbiat Modares University, P.O. Box 14155-4838, Tehran, Iran 




 
We study   SYM theory in the context of matrix model.
By adding a superpotential of the scalar multiplet, , of
degree , we reduce the theory to  .
The  distinct critical points of 
allow us to choose a vacuum in such a way to break the gauge group to
its maximal abelian subgroup.
We compute the free energy of the corresponding matrix model in the
planar limit and up to two vertices. This result is then used to work out
the effective superpotential of  theory up to one-instanton
correction. At the final step, by scaling the superpotential to zero,
the effective  couplings and the prepotential of the 
theory is calculated which are in accord with the previous results.




Introduction 

The study of  supersymmetric gauge theories has proven
important in understanding the more realistic theories such as
QCD. This is because on one hand they share many common properties
like chiral symmetry breaking, the existence of a mass gap, and
color confinment in the infrared. On the other hand,
supersymmetry puts strict, though tractable, conditions on the
dynamics of the theory which makes the theory easier to analyze.
Therefore, a thorough understanding of supersymmetric gauge
theories will help in unravelling the low energy phenomena, of the
kind mentioned above, of the corresponding nonsupersymmetric
theories. This is one, among many others, main reason that
supersymmetric gauge theories are so appealing to study.

A remarkable advance in the understanding of supersymmetric gauge theories
and their relations to Matrix models has recently been achieved through the
work of Dijkgraaf and Vafa. Consider the 
supersymmetric Lagrangian which consists of an  vector
multiplet  in the adjoint representation of the gauge group 
. Here  and  are  vector and chiral multiplets
respectively. Upon adding a superpotential  to the 
Lagrangian, the supersymmetry gets reduced to . Dijkgraaf and
Vafa have put forward the proposal that the low energy dynamics of this 
 theory can be completely determined by perturbative
calculations of the free energy of a zero dimensional matrix model in the
planar limit. The potential of the matrix model is taken to be the same as 
, but with 's regarded as constant  matrices in the
Lie algebra of . The most important feature of this correspondence is
that by perturbative calculations in the matrix model side one learns about
the nonperturbative effects - mainly due to instantons - in the gauge
theory side. Specifically, let  be a polynomial of degree  in 
. The classical supersymmetric vacuum is then characterized by a
constant diagonal matrix with elements , the critical points of 
. Let  indicate the multiplicity of  in the vacuum such
that . This choice of vacuum breaks the gauge symmetry as
follows



The instantons contributions to the effective superpotential are then given
by



where  is the free energy of the matrix model in the planar
limit, and .

Using the perturbative calculations in the matrix models, the effective
superpotential of a wide class of  supersymmetric gauge
theories has been obtained in complete agreement with the earlier results.

Interestingly, one can go even one step further to extract information about
the low energy dynamics of the  theory itself. This can be done
as follows. One introduces a superpotential  of degree ,
with  a real parameter, breaking the  supersymmetry down
to . Since  has  critical points, one can choose
the vacuum as



therefore the  gauge group classically breaks to . By adding
the superpotential , one infact freezes the whole classical vacuum
manifold  of  theory to a point , the vacuum of 
 theory. In conclusion, one computes the effective
superpotential of this theory and notices that there are some low energy
quantities which are independent of the parameter , and hence must be
identified with the corresponding quantities in the  theory. In
this way, using the perturbative analysis of the matrix model, the
prepotential of   theory was rederived in.
This method was further generalized for the gauge group , and again
with complete agreement with the Seiberg-Witten solution of  
 gauge theory. It is our aim in this paper to work out the
Seiberg-Witten solution of   gauge theory by
perturbative computations of the free energy of the corresponding matrix
model.

In the above context of gauge theory/matrix model correspondence, 
  gauge theories have also been examined from different points of
views. The perturbative matrix model language,
though, has only been used to analyze the gauge theory in the trivial vacuum
sector. However, as mentioned above, to get to the  results we
need to choose a vacuum which breaks  or  gauge group to 
 representing a typical point on the Coulomb branch of 
vacuum moduli space, and then performing the perturbative calculations
around the corresponding matrix model vacuum. This is what we will do in the
next section.

The organization of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we introduce the
matrix model action including fluctuations around the vacuum and their ghosts
counterparts which are necessary for our special gauge fixing. In section 3,
we calculate the free energy of matrix model which consists of three parts; 1)
Nonperturbative part including the contribution of the group volume and
quadratic integral, 2)two loop planar free energy and 3) unoriented planar
graphs. In section 4, we derive the effective action and the coupling constant
 for the  gauge theory. We convert the results in
terms of the periods 's. We conclude in section 5 and derive the
Vandermonde determinant for Fadeev-Popov ghosts in the appendix.




The Matrix Model Superpotential 

In this section, we introduce a superpotential  of the scalar
multiplet which is of degree  for the group .  is
chosen such that it has  distinct critical points 's. To be
explicit, let us introduce the superpotential as
 
where
 
and  is a real parameter which, at the end, is scaled to zero to read
off the effective  gauge couplings of the  effective
theory. 's are  critical points of 
 
Taking the vacuum as
 
will break the gauge group classically as
 

In the matrix model side, as mentioned before, one takes the same 
playing the role of the potential of the model, but with 's now
considered as constant  matrices in the Lie algebra of 
(Note that there is no meaningful relation between the dimension
of matrices of the gauge theory and those of matrix model. So we have chosen
even dimension for matrix model, though, the gauge group is .) .
To set up the perturbation theory, let us expand the
superpotential around the critical points of . This we do by
substituting  in , where  is
the vacuum
 
This choice of vacuum will break the gauge group of the matrix model as
follows
 
so that
 
Upon considering the small fluctuations around the vacuum (), up to
the second order in ,  reads
 
Further, it is easy to show that the quadratic part is as follows,
 
where we have decomposed the   matrices in
terms of  matrices, with  the Pauli
matrices and ,
 
 are now  matrices.





















The important point to notice here is that there are elements of 
which are absent in the quadratic part of the action. These include 
 for  and  for . Therefore,
these are not propagating fields and one should gauge them away. Note that
the total number of degrees of freedom that we are going to gauge away is
exactly equal to the number of broken gauge generators in (),
i.e.,
 
As we will show in the appendix, the gauge fixing can be implemented by
introducing the Faddeev-Popov ghosts. The ghost action takes the following
form
 
The kinetic part of the ghost action can be obtained by expanding the ghost
action around the vacuum
 

Let us then fix the gauge to  for , and 
 for . Doing so, the interacting part of the
ghost action becomes,
 
The kinetic and interaction parts of the "bosonic" action, on the other
hand, are found in this gauge to be
 
where we have used the notation 
 for . Performing the sum
over  we obtain
 
where use has been made of
 
together with the following definitions
 

With the matrix model perturbative action in hand, now we can find the free
energy of the matrix model by which the gauge theory effective action and
other related quantities are found in the following sections.

The Matrix Model Free Energy 

In this section we calculate the free energy  of the matrix
model which consists of two parts; 1) The non-perturbative part which comes from the volume of the gauge group
and the integration over the quadratic part of the action. 2) The perturbative parts which are coming from the interacting parts of the
matrix model.

We evaluate the nonperturbative part of  in the subsequent
subsection, and will show that it has the following form

 

Nonperturbative Part of the Free Energy 

The nonperturbative part of the matrix model free energy 
comprises of three partrs. These include the integral over the
kinetic terms of 's, those of ghosts , and the
volume factor of the broken gauge group. Let us discuss each part separately
with some detail. First, the kinetic terms of 's consist of three
parts:
 
Accordingly, the Gaussian integral over 's can be performed easily,
giving the result
 
Taking into account the appropriate  factors, and ignoring the linear
terms in  in the planar limit, gives rise to a contribution to 
 of the form

 

Now, we consider the ghost sector. There are three types of ghosts 
which correspond to the blocks  of the original matrix
. As explained in the Appendix, in the eigenvalue representation of
the partition function, the integral over all types of these ghosts produces
the correct Jacobian of the matrix model in the symmetry broken phase,
 
where  stands for the eigenvalues in the -th
block. Integrating the kinetic terms of the ghosts then amounts to replacing
the vacuum values  in the above expression.
This will give
 
After inserting the  factors and ignoring the linear terms in 
, the ghost contribution to  becomes
 

Finally, let us turn to the volume factor vol  for the broken
(matrix model) gauge group 
. Using the asymptotic expansion of the volumes of the
groups  and  in the large  limit (see
), we can write it as
 
We have kept the next to leading order terms in the above expansion as they
are crucial in cancellation of some numerical factors appearing later. The
contribution of the volume factor to  thus becomes
 

Summing the above three contributions and the linear terms 
 coming from the vacuum value of  we get
the final result for the non-perturbative part of the free energy
 
where  are defined as follows
 
and  is an arbitrary cut-off. Powers of  are
inserted by hand in the above expression in a way to subtract the overal
term  from 
. This corresponds to a freedom in choosing the scale of 
in the original model. Indeed, by rescaling  as 
 the overal measure of the the  matrix model
scales as  . This
produces a change in the planar free energy as
 
which in the 't Hooft limit (with  a finite quantity)
has precisely the same form  as we introduced in the
above formula .

Two Loop Matrix Model 

Having obtained the propagators and the interaction terms up to the forth
order around the vacuum () in section 2, we are now in a position
to do the perturbative calculations of the free energy  in the
planar limit and up to two vertices. Consider the two loops Feynmann
diagrams in Figure 1 and those including ghosts in figure 2
, the two loop free energy can be calculated as follows,
 
where
 

Restoring the coeficients  and , and taking 
 we find:
 

Note that  and 
.

Unoriented Planar Contribution to the Free Energy 

Here, we explicitly calculate the unoriented graphs contributions to the
free energy. Notice that since  (as well as  and )
matrices are antisymmetric, i.e., take value in the Lie algebra of 
, the corresponding propagators must accordingly be antisymmetrized
 
where  indicate the matrix indices.
Therefore, unoriented planar graphs, i.e., graphs with the topology of
sphere with a crosscap, must also be considered in the computation of the
free energy in the planar limit. This will modify the expression for the
effective superpotential to 
where  is the contributions of the un-oriented planar graphs to
the free energy, and  for the  group. Further,
since in the case at hand the gauge group is broken to  in the gauge
theory side, we set .

We mentioned above that the unoriented graphs come from the
anti-symmetrization of the propagators for the antisymmetric matrices (more
precisely from the second term in the r.h.s. of  Eq. ()).
In the present
case, due to the decomposition in terms of the Pauli matrices and since 
 are symmetric while  is antisymmetric, the
matrices , ,  and 
become antisymmetric, whereas  is a symmetric one. Thus the
propagator for  matrices will be,
 
As a result it can be seen that the contributions of  and 
 to the unoriented part infact cancel each other. More
interestingly, note that  and  can be put together
to form a hermitian  matrix
 
This is consistent with the symmetry breaking pattern in (), and
explains why these matrices do not have unoriented graphs.

Next, let us write down the result of the calculations of the unoriented
contributions to the free energy. Effectively, these are coming from a twist
on , , and  propagators. The
unoriented contribution reads
 
It is easy to show that the above unoriented free energy can be derived by
taking the derivative of the oriented part with respect to 
, i.e.,
 
What we have done in this section is a nontrivial illustration of the above
'derivative rule' (). This rule can be understood naively in some
simpler examples. Putting a twist on a propagator reduces the number of
index loops by one. This has to be done for each loop, and thus, starting
with a graph of order , we end up with a graph of order 
which is the derivative rule. In our case, however, this naive picture can
not be applied. For example, we see that an unoriented graph can be
constructed by a twist on  propagators, while it can be
derived from the derivative of another graph with respect to . But
our result shows that this comes true!

Effective Superpotential and  Prepotential from Matrix
Model 

In the previous section, we derived the free energy of the  matrix
model in the planar limit and up to two vertices. The prescription given by
Dijkgraaf and Vafa enables us now to write down the 
effective superpotential , which is
 
where, as before, we have set . Moreover, the effective 
couplings can also be calculated through the formula
 
where  are the vev of the gluinos obtained by extremizing
the effective superpotential . We recall that the 
prepotential is expressed in terms of the periods 's. Therefore, if
we reexpress () in terms of 's, we can work out the 
 prepotential  by a double integration of the following
formula
 

In the following subsections, we write down the details of these calculations.

Coupling Constants from the Matrix Model 

For the sake of simplicity in applying the above prescription to our case,
let us introduce the notation  with the capital
indices running as . Then  and 
will have the following general forms
 
where  are totally symmetrized coefficients of the free
energy at  while  are defined as
follows
 
Plugging expressions () and () for the components of 
 in (), we get  up to order 

 
where we have defined the coefficients
 
and the integers  are given by
 
Also in () we have defined the new cut-off  as
 
(The real gauge theory cut-off  is the one defined by the last
equality.) Upon extremizing  we obtain
 
where the new coefficients are defined in terms of the old ones as
 
For small , we can solve the equation ()
to find roots  by iteration. The result up to
the order  is given by
 
which is indeed a function of 's. The coupling matrix  is
embedded in the larger matrix  defined as follows
 
We note that the perturbative and -instanton parts of  in the
above decomposition come from  and 
 terms in the matrix model side, respectively. By
differentiating  and , and
using the above perturbative solution of , one can
see that  and  have the
following forms in terms of 's,
 
with  and  defined in terms of ,s in
() and (). As expected, these quantities turn out to be
independent of the
parameter . Therefore, the coupling constants of the unbroken 
factors of the  gauge theory are given by the  components of
the above equation.

For later purposes, let us express  at the extremum in
terms of the parameters in ,
 

 Computation of the Periods within the Matrix Model 

In ref. a method was proposed for computation of the
periods  of the Seiberg-Witten curve by a purely perturbative
calculation of the planar tadpole diagrams within matrix model, which does
not make any reference to the actual form of the Seiberg-witten curve or
differential. We use similar ideas to derive a rather different mehod within
the same framework, based on differentiatiating with respect to the
variation of the potential of the matrix model by linear source terms. To be
specific, let us consider our original matrix model with linear source terms
of the form Tr, with 
 some infinitesimal parameters. The planar free energy of this
modified matrix model is given by the following equation
 
where we have put(
Note that we do not need to consider a source coupling to the 
block, since it is an antisymmetric matrix and has Tr
corresponding to . Also  has zero trace.) 
. After all,
this implies a simple relation between the planar tadpole diagrams given by 
Tr and the free energy as(For
the precise definition of the operators 
 see below.) 
 

Addition of the sources amounts to replacing the block superpotentials by
 
in which
W()&& _i Tr  w(_i) 

w _i (x)&& w(x)-_i x.
This modification clearly changes the vacuum of the matrix model. The true
shift in the vacuum can be easily obtained by going to the eigenvalue
representation of the matrix model, in which the vacuum values of 
's in several blocks are determined by extremizing the associated
superpotentials, that is for the  block by the equation
 
This implies changing the vacuum, the zero point energies, the couplings and
the propagators of the original matrix model according to the following
relations(
The  choice in the last line of these equations correspond to a
modifications of the propagators for , while the  choices
give the changes in their vertex factors.) 
 
It is important to note that, though the quantities  are
explicit functions of the set of all 's, in the above procedure we
should replace only the  in the argument of holding all
its (-dependent) coefficients fixed. We now note that the planar free
energy  is in general a function of  and the parameters
. The above discussion then indicates that
the addition of the source terms to the matrix model has the net effect of
changing  as follows
 
This shows that the differential operator 
 must be precisely defined as follows
 

Now, we turn to the calculation of the Seiberg-Witten periods. By the same
line of reasoning as in ref., we are persuaded to
define these periods  in matrix model using the following equation
 
in terms of the planar tadpole diagrams ( are defined as in previous
subsection). Upon expansion around the vacuum, ,
one then sees that 
 which in the above formula implies the expected
expansion of  as  Using the
relation 
 for the tadpole, we can then rewrite 
 as
 
Noting to the general formula for  in terms of 
, we are led to the final general formula for 
 
where in going to the last step, we have used the fact that 
 at . For using this formula in
practice, we should be careful to use the full expression of 
 in terms of the  and  without
using the explicit forms of  in terms of the set of all 
's.

Let us illustrate application of this formula to the case of our interest.
The explicit form of  in this case is
given by eq.() in terms of the parameters  and
 up to . Noting to the origin of
these quantities in the non-perturbative and perturbative parts of 
, we see that 's can be written as functions only
of , while 's may be expressed as
functions of 
. Thus our formula () to  is simplified
to
 
For taking the derivatives in this equation, we must know the correct
dependence of  upon 
This is easily achieved using the expressions for 
 and the ones for 
, leading to the results
 
In deriving these relations, we have used the expressions for 
 as follows
 
Hence, for  we find
 
We can further simplify this formula using the general identity
 
Here, the derivative on the r.h.s is understood to act on the full 
-dependence of  including both its argument and its
coefficients. For  from this identity in the last equation,
we obtain the final result for 
 
This equation may be reversed for  in terms of  to give
 
with  understood to be 
 and 


For determining the prepotential , we need to express 
 in terms of  instead of  using above
equation.Writingthis for simplicity as 
 and using the expansion of  as 
eq.(), we obtain
 
Here,  and  are given
precisely by the same expressions given previously in terms of 's,
now written by replacing . More explicitly, they are
written as
 
with  being the same coefficients of  in
which we replaced .

One can show that the resulting expression for  in the eq.(
) leads to a set of integrable equations for the prepotential 
 whose solution up to one-instanton order reproduces the known
result in the  literature.


Conclusion 

We studied the  theory with the gauge group  using the
Dijgkraaf-Vafa proposal of Matrix Model approach to the  SYM
theories. This was done by adding a superpotential to the 
theory which broke it to , then using the corresponding matrix
model, we computed the effective action for  gauge theory, with
a nontrivial vacuum breaking the group into its maximal abelian subgroup. We
chose this vacuum as we were interested in finding the 
prepotential in the Coulomb branch. For this reason, and to derive the 
 effective couplings, we finally turned off the superpotential by
sending its coeffeicient  to zero. As expected, the coupling constants 
 were independent of  and thus were identified with the 
 effective  couplings. At the end,  were
integrated to find out the prepotential of  theory.

In the calculation of the effective action, we carefully considered the
unoriented graphs of the anti-symmetric matrices, and observed that their
contributions can be rederived from the derivative of planar graphs with
respect to the supergluball field, . This provided an interesting and
nontrivial example of the 'derivative rule'.

We also computed the periods of  theory by adding a source
term to the matrix model action. This is equivalent to computing tad-pole
graphs. In contrast, we have done the calculation of periods in such a way
that its results can be used for any model.

The extension to  gauge group is straightforward. On the other hand,
for  group, the calculation steps are the same, however is more
complicated due to the presence of Pffaf() in the superpotential.

Note Added  .
There is some overlap with a work that appeared during
the course of this investigation.
They have derived the SO/SP effective action.



Acknowledgement   We would like to thank M. Alishahiha for useful comments and discussions. We
are also grateful to C. Vafa for valuable discussions on his proposal.

































Appendix 

In this appendix, we will show that the Faddeev-Popov ghost action needed to
fix the gauge to ,   is
the one given by (). To begin with, let us first diagonalize the
matrix  by an orthogonal  transformation, and call the
eigenvalues ,
 
The superpotential () is thus
 
Further, if we define
 
then
 
The superpotential () can now be written as
 

In diagonalizing the  matrix, one also has to take into account the
Vandermonde determinant, which appears in the measure as the Jacobian of the
transformation. For the group , this determinant reads
 
where
 
Let us now write the second part of the Vandermonde determinant 
 as an integral over ghosts. First note that for a fixed 
 and  we have
 
where . Therefore
 
Using definition (), this can be written as
 
where the subindex  indicates the trace is over 
matrices. It is also understood that  and  are 
 and  matrices, respectively. The Vandermonde
determinant  now reads
 
Therefore, the partition function turns out to be
 
where the measure is
 

With the Vandermonde determinant  in the measure (),
one cannot go very far in perturbation theory. However,  can
be re-absorbed in the action; simply drop the determinant, and in effect
change the -diagonal  matrices into some 
matrices  with 's as their eigenvalues. At the end, the
partition function will be
 
Noticing that  and  (as  and  are 
 Lie algebra valued), the ghost action can be written as
 
which is the same action written in ().


fig1.ps 

Figure 1) Two loops without ghosts


fig2.ps 

Figure 2) Two loops involving ghosts.











 999 
  R. Dijkgraaf, and C. Vafa, A Perturbative Window into
Non-Perturbative Physics , hep-th/0208048 .

  R. Dijkgraaf, and C. Vafa, Matrix Models, Topological
Strings, and Supersymmetric Gauge Theories , Nucl.Phys. B644 (2002) 3-20, 
hep-th/0206255 .

  R. Dijkgraaf, S. Gukov, V. A. Kazakov, and C. Vafa, 
Perturbative Analysis of Gauged Matrix Models , hep-th/0210238 .




  S. Naculich, H. Schnitzer, and N. Wyllard, The N=2 gauge
theory prepotential and periods from a perturbative matrix model calculation 
,  hep-th/0211123 .

  H. Ita, H. Nieder, and Y. Oz, Perturbative Computation of
Glueball Superpotentials for SO(N) and USp(N) , JHEP 0301 (2003) 018, 
hep-th/0211261 .

  S. K. Ashok, R. Corrado, N. Halmagyi, K. D. Kennaway, and C.
Romelsberger, Unoriented Strings, Loop Equations, and N=1
Superpotentials from Matrix Models , hep-th/0211291 .

  B. Feng, Geometric Dual and Matrix Theory for 
Gauge Theories , hep-th/0212010 .

  H. Fuji, and Y. Ookouchi, Comments on Effective
Superpotentials via Matrix Models , JHEP 0212 (2002) 067, hep-th/0210148 .



  H. Ooguri and C. Vafa,

Nucl. Phys. B 641 , 3 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0205297].




  S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and N. Wyllard,

Nucl. Phys. B 651 , 106 (2003) [arXiv:hep-th/0211123].



E. D'Hoker, I. M. Krichever and D. H. Phong,
"The effective prepotential of N = 2 supersymmetric
SO(N(c)) and  Sp(N(c)) gauge theories,"
Nucl. Phys. B 489 , 211 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9609145].




  Y. Ookouchi, and Y. Watabiki, Effective Superpotentials
for SO/Sp with Flavor from Matrix Models , hep-th/0301226 .





