
definition Definition [section]
theorem Theorem [section]
example Example [section]
observation Observation [section]
lemma Lemma [section]
proposition Proposition [section]
corollary Corollary [section]
CERN-TH/2003-037 










4-D gauged supergravity analysis
   

    of Type IIB vacua on  
   


 L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria,  S.
Ferrara and M. A. Lledo. 

 CERN, Theory Division, CH 1211 Geneva 23,
Switzerland. 

 Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di
Torino,  Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, I-10129
Torino, Italy  and    INFN, Sezione di Torino,
Italy.  

INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati,
Italy 







 
We analyze  vacua of type IIB string theory on 
 in presence of three-form fluxes from a four
dimensional supergravity viewpoint. The quaternionic geometry of
the  moduli space together with the special geometry of the NS
and R-R dilatons and of the -complex structure moduli play a
crucial role in the analysis. The introduction of fluxes
corresponds to a particular gauging of ,  supergravity.
Our results agree with a recent work of Tripathy and Trivedi. The
present formulation shows the power of supergravity  in the study
of effective theories with broken supersymmetry.


Introduction 

Recently, compactifications of string and M-theories in presence
of -form fluxes have received much attention. They give rise to
effective models where the moduli stabilization is a simple
consequence of a combined Higgs and super Higgs mechanism
-.

Interestingly enough, many of these models are examples of
no-scale supergravities - in the
context of string and M-theory-.
Their low energy effective limits can be understood in terms  of
gauged supergravities, which, for a special choice of the gauging,
allow partial supersymmetry breaking without a cosmological term
-.

A particularly appealing class of examples is obtained by
considering type IIB theory compactified on orientifolds such as
 and 
, or Calabi-Yau manifolds
, in presence of three form fluxes. When
compactifiying on the orientifold  with fluxes, one
finds vacua with reduced supersymmetry 
, while in the case of , one obtains
vacua with  supersymmetry.

 It is the aim of the present investigation to obtain a gauged supergravity interpretation
 of the  vacua recently found by Tripathy and Trivedi
 for the  theory.
In absence of fluxes we obtain an ungauged  supergravity with
a certain content of hypermultiplets and vector multiplets
. Moreover, the underlying special and
quaternionic geometries for these multiplets is
determined by the properties of the moduli spaces.  The
introduction of fluxes is then equivalent to gauge some isometries
of the quaternionic manifold by some of the vectors at our
disposal in the theory.

 and  vacua stabilize many of the moduli and correspond
to two different gaugings: they differ in the choice of
quaternionic isometries and in the choice of vectors which realize
the gauging.


Let  denote generically the fermions of the theory, and let
 be a rigid supersymmetry  (constant) parameter in four
dimensional Minkowski space. A Poincare invariant configuration
must have all fields equal to zero except for the scalar fields,
which can be set to constants. This configuration has an unbroken
supersymmetry  if the values of the scalar fields are
such that
   The
crucial fact is that these are necessary and sufficient conditions
for the configuration to be a supersymmetric vacuum (with unbroken
supersymmetry )  with vanishing vacuum energy.

It is our purpose to find solutions to () in the low
energy effective  supergravity derived from compactifications
of the type IIB theory on  in presence of
fluxes. A similar analysis for the  theory has been
done in Refs..

Type IIB superstring on a  orientifold 

Type IIB compactified on  has been widely studied
in the context of the  type IIA-type IIB and type I-heterotic
string dualities.




 The bulk sector of this theory is largely based on
properties of the moduli space  of the  manifold
 and the torus . Before the orientifold projection
this theory has  supersymmetry. After the  projection,
and in absence of fluxes, the theory has  supersymmetry. We
discuss the spectrum of the projected theory. It
consists of the following multiplets:
1. the graviton multiplet, 
,

2. three vector multiplets, 
,

3. twenty hypermultiplets, 
.

We count first the scalar degrees of freedom remaining after the
projection. The internal manifold is parametrized by a pair of
complex coordinates on the  factor (indexed by ) and a
pair of real coordinates on the torus (indexed by ).  The
metric of the internal manifold is the direct product metric.  The
moduli space of the metrics on  is, up to a quotient by
discrete transformations,
  and has
dimension 58. We denote by  the parameter corresponding to
.

 The moduli space of the metrics on  is

of dimension 3 and parametrized by the Kaehler modulus  and
the complex structure :
 



Let  be the four form field of type IIB,
with self-dual field strength. There are 23 RR real scalars that
come from this form when the indices are taken along the internal
manifold. The massless modes correspond to cohomology classes. The
Hodge numbers of odd order on  are zero. For  even order, the
only non vanishing ones are  ,
  and . The
torus  has Betti numbers  and .  Then, the
components of  that will give rise to scalar
fields are of the following forms:
 

Finally, we have the two type IIB dilatons that  give two scalars
in four dimensions. We denote them by  and .

The manifold of the  metrics () with 
replaced by   (see below for an explanation), enlarges
with the 22 scalars of () and () to the
quaternionic manifold
This manifold has real dimension 80, corresponding to the 80
scalars of the twenty hypermultiplets.

To understand the assignment of the  factors to the scalar
manifolds, let us look at the kinetic term for the two-form field
strengths as they come from ten dimensions (up to a factor
depending on the dilaton),

 When compactifying on 
, the volume factorizes as
, where  is the
volume on  and  the volume on . Since the
bulk vectors in  arise by taking an index along , the
relevant term is

 The factor  is conformally
invariant in dimension 2 and depends only on the complex structure
of the torus , while the modulus  appears
explicitly.  Also, if one includes D7 brane gauge fields, their
four dimensional coupling depends on the  volume but not on
the  Kaehler modulus (We acknowledge an
enlightening conversation with C. Angelantonj on this point.) .
Then the coordinate  of the  volume seats in a vector
multiplet.  These couplings are insensitive to the rescaling of
the Einstein-Hilbert term.

The three complex scalars of the  vector multiplets are
  parametrizing the coset



The fact that the  complex structure moduli are in a vector
multiplet can also be understood by considering that type IIB on
the orientifold  is a truncation to  of
 supergravity corresponding to the compactification of type
IIB on , whose moduli space is

 There, the complex
structure moduli are in the factor , which
is a Kaehler-Hodge manifold.



The quaternionic manifold 
 as a fibration over 
 

The coset  is the
symmetric space associated to the Cartan decomposition

 We want to give a local
parametrization of this coset which displays
 as a submanifold of
. It can indeed be proven that globally,  is a
fibration over .


Consider the following decomposition of the Lie algebra
:
 
According to this decomposition, we can find a local
parametrization of   via the following element (coset
representative) of :
  where
 is a set of generators of the abelian
subalgebra  in (),  is
the generator of  and  is a coset representative of
, . It is given in terms of 57 parameters
, ,  as

Because of the action of , there is a submanifold
parametrized by the coordinates  with the topology of
.

In this parametrization, the Maurer-Cartan form is simply
  The connection and the
vielbein 1-forms are the projections of the Maurer-Cartan form
over the spaces  and  respectively. In fact, since  the
fundamental representation of  is real, these
projections correspond to the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of
the matrices,
* 

We want to write explicitly the vielbein one-form. We take  in
the fundamental representation of ,
, with  the coordinates on the
quaternionic manifold. Since  is a coset
representative, we will be interested in the transformation
properties to the right with respect to the subgroup
, and will denote it as
. The Maurer-Cartan form will have indices in
the same representation of ,

Notice that 
, where
 is the R-symmetry group and 
is the holonomy group of a general quaternionic manifold.


Since we are interested in showing explicitly the symmetry under
, we decompose

In this decomposition, the diagonal group  
 in  is identified with the first factor
.

For the vielbein we have,
 
with  the vielbein of the
scalar manifold  and
 
Notice that the space  corresponds to the 
representation of , which decomposes as

and each block in () corresponds to one of
these.

We note  that the components on the generators  of the
Maurer-Cartan form  contribute
both to the vielbein and to the connection of the quaternionic
manifold . In particular, the contribution of this term to
the -connection is proportional to
 
 These
formulae will be useful in the calculation of the scalar
potential.



Vector multiplets and special geometry 
The vector multiplet moduli space is

 It is a
special Kaehler-Hodge manifold of the series
 with .

Let  be the Hodge line bundle. The special geometry
 of  consists on a holomorphic
vector bundle  with structure group  and a
global section

 on  such
that the Kaehler form  is given by

In an open set the Kaehler potential is given by

 In a point  of the intersection of two open sets the section
transforms as





 where  
 define a constant, symplectic transformation:
 and
 is a holomorphic phase of the Hodge bundle.

From the doublet of two forms in IIB, , one can
obtain vector fields in four dimensions when one of the indices is
taken over the torus  (the odd cohomology of  is zero).
Then the four gauge fields  in four dimensions are
Therefore they are in the  representation  
 of the type IIB R-symmetry , times
the  associated to the  complex structure. In
the homomorphism  the
 goes to the fundamental representation,
so we can set an index  and denote the
gauge fields as .


We have therefore to choose a symplectic embedding of 
 in  such that  is an
electric subgroup. The third  instead acts on the
vectors as an electric-magnetic duality.

Let .  is embedded in
 as


 while the  third   is embedded as



In order to have the symplectic embedding chosen above explicitly
manifest in the theory, one has to choose a local frame for the
symplectic bundle. In this frame, the global section  of
the special geometry is given by:


with 
 and
where 
is the Kaehler potential of the submanifold
. The explicit dependence of
 in terms of the local coordinates 
is
 

It is important to notice that in this embedding 
cannot be written as . The prepotential
 does not exist. This allows to have partial breaking of
 supersymmetry, otherwise impossible.

The Kaehler potential of  is given by the formula
  where



From the symplectic section we get the following kinetic matrix
for the vectors


 which has the
important property




Gauging of the traslational isometries and fluxes 

The gauging of the present theory  involves the four abelian
vectors and the scalars of the quaternionic manifold, in
particular the axions of the 22 abelian isometries, whose Killing
vectors correspond in the Lie algebra () to a
Lorentzian vector of . We can in principle gauge a
four dimensional subalgebra of this abelian algebra. As in
() we denote by  with 
and , the 22 axions. Their covariant derivatives are
*  with
.  ,  are the
coupling constants. When performing the dimensional reduction, the
kinetic terms for the axions appear with these covariant
derivatives, and the coupling constants are related to the
three-form fluxes on .

More precisely, let us undo the relabeling of the 
vector index, ,  and  as
in Section , and the 22 vector indices
 as in (),(). Then
the coupling constants become

They can be identified with the three form fluxes with one index
on  and the other two on .

There are different choices for the coupling constants, according
to the supersymmetries that we want to have for the vacua:

 For configurations with  supersymmetry we
will take ,   and
. The vectors that are "higgsed" (that
acquire mass) are the vector partners of the IIB dilaton and the
 complex structure moduli.

 For configurations with  supersymmetry
we will take, in the first place, ,
 and only  different
from zero.  In this case, the vectors that acquire mass are the
graviphoton and the vector partner of the  volume modulus.

This means that  the coupling constant
-vector  (with metric

) has negative norm for 
configurations and positive norm  for  configurations. The
 is obtained by imposing the further constraint,



 For  supersymmetry preserving vacua, no
other choices are allowed, while for configurations with 
supersymmetry there exists a more general choice, with all
couplings  non vanishing. All the vectors acquire mass.
These configurations will be discussed separately in Section
.




Supersymmetric vacua 
As a consequence of the supersymmetric Ward identitiesone can obtain any supersymmetric configuration as a solution of
the constraints

where  is the constant parameter of the global unbroken
supersymmetry and  are the spin  fields. This
can be done without looking to the explicit form of the potential.
If we look for vacua with a Poincare symmetry, one has the
further constraint

with  the two gravitino fields.

In  supergravity, we have hypermultiplets and vector
multiplets. The fermion fields denote always the chiral
projections. We denote by  the gravitinos, with
 refering to the  R-symmetry; by 
the gauginos with , which form a contravariant
vector on the special Kaehler manifold ; and the
hyperinos by , with  (
is the number of hypermultiplets). The index alpha is a vector
index
 of , which together with  (index A=1,2)
form the reduced holonomy of the quaternionic manifold.


 We will denote   by   the  Killing
vectors of the translational isometries of  the
 quaternionic manifold, which will be gauged (hence with an index  as the vectors).
  Their  prepotential  is denoted by  , with  (it  is an  triplet).
  If  is the
curvature two form, and  its  components,
then

(The index  is contracted with the Euclidean metric).

In addition, we denote by  the Kaehler metric of the
special manifold ,  the Kaehler potential. In terms
of the holomorphic section  we can define

which is not holomorphic but is covariantly holomorphic 




The  supersymmetry transformations of the fermionic fields for a
constant parameter   are as follows:

 
where the hyperinos transformation laws are decomposed with
respect to the manifest holonomy , and


 with ,  given in ().

N=2  supersymmetric configurations 

To have  configurations with vanishing vacuum energy, the
variations of all fermions must vanish for any constant
supersymmetry parameter  (). This demands, from
equations () and (), that
 
 and, from the hyperinos variations (),
(), that
 
To preserve  supersymmetry, the graviphoton  cannot
acquire mass. We can switch on interactions for ,
with , gauging two of the isometries associated to
the 19 axions . We take the two Killing vectors  and
 whose only  non vanishing components are
*  for arbitrary constants  and
.



  Inserting in equation
(), this implies
 
Equation () stabilizes the two vector-multiplets
moduli , since from () we have:

 Let us note that to have  preserving vacua it is not
possible to gauge more than two vectors, since it would give extra
constraints on the , incompatible with
() in the given symplectic frame
(). Also, the two vectors that realize the gauging
have to be  and , which are in the same
multiplets as the coordinates  and . Indeed, it is
easy to see that this choice is the only one stabilizing the
moduli compatibly with the conditions 
of (). This same result is obtained in Ref.
, Section 5 with topological arguments.

 Equation () is solved by
recalling that, for gauged axion symmetries, the
expression for the prepotential  gets simplified to

where  is the -connection. In this case we
have


 where we have used equation ().

 then implies


The ,  are Goldstone bosons. They disappear form the
spectrum, making massive the gauge vectors  and . In
fact,  two of the original massless hypermultiplets (corresponding
to the degrees of freedom  and  for ) and the
two  vector multiplets of  and , combine into two long
massive vector multiplets .

We see that the  configurations are just an example of the
Higgs phenomenon of two vector multiplets. The residual moduli
space is

 The  factor
contains the  volume modulus, appertaining to  the remaining
massless vector multiplet. The moduli corresponding to the 
metrics form the submanifold

in accordance with Ref..

N=1 supersymmetric configurations 

In the  supersymmetric vacua, the  graviphoton and the vector
partner of  volume modulus are gauged. Indeed, in  any
truncation of  supergravity with Poincare
vacuum, the graviphoton must become massive. The charge
vector  (in  the notation of Section
) can be chosen with components
,  and the rest zero. This
means that  we switch on the charges of the isometries associated
to two of the three axions .

The relevant Killing vectors are * 
The quaternionic prepotential for constant  Killing vectors is

so

Using equation (), we have




We want to study vacua that preserve one supersymmetry (we choose
). We have to impose that  in
equations (-).

From the variation of the antichiral hyperinos we have
(,)
*  The first of these
equations implies   and the second one turns out
to be proportional to the equation for the variation of the
gravitino. We solve it below.

From the variation of the gravitino () we obtain
*  in terms of
 the mass matrix of the gravitinos: ( The sigma
matrices with the two indices down are 
.) 


 Using
(),  becomes proportional to
 
and an  invariant vacuum requires  

Finally, from the (antichiral) gauginos variation we find


 (Notice that we have used the complex
conjugate of the chiral gaugino ). The relevant
matrix is





The second term in the covariant derivative

 gives a contribution proportional to
(). The first term gives the conditions
* 
which imply

(Note that , so there are no further
constraints.)

Then equation () gives

and by using  we get

which implies  and  (the other possibility
 would give  and  outside their domain of
definition.) Note that at this point  as in the 
case. Also, this point is the self dual point of
 (fixed point of the transformation
).

We now summarize the massless spectrum of the  reduced
theory. From the 58 scalars of 
 there remain 20 scalars parametrizing
. From the 22 axions there
remain 20. All together they complete the scalars of 20 chiral
multiplets. The spectrum includes two massless vector multiplets
corresponding to  and  and an extra chiral
multiplet whose scalar field is  from the  vector
multiplet sector.

Models with  also exist and can be studied by writing the
full  potential. They can be also obtained by further gauging
the  theory obtained  in section ,  or by adding a
superpotential to the  theory. A complete description of the
non supersymmetric phases will be done elsewhere. In this paper we
will study the  vacua which have vector charge with 
 or with all .






Non supersymmetric vacua 
The study of  vacua requires the knowledge of the potential
of the scalar fields, which can be computed, for an abelian
gauging, with the formula

 where




 and




The three contributions are the square of the supersymmetry
variations of the hyperinos, gauginos and gravitinos respectively.
The first two terms are positive definite while the last
contribution is negative definite.

In the model at hand the last two terms become


 with 
. Then the scalar potential becomes
*  where we
have used equation ().  Note that  if
. In this case, all vacua with zero vacuum energy have
unbroken  supersymmetry.

The potential can be computed by recalling that in the case of
gauged axion isometries of the quaternionic manifold we have

We will consider here only the case when the  become charged
under the  symmetries.

Recalling  equations () and (), we see that the
quaternionic metric  along the  axion directions is


with  while




Therefore, the scalar potential is




 By taking  and
 we have
 
We want now to compute the extrema of the potential. The
conditions

are satisfied at the points where . We will see that this is
implied by the other extremum conditions. The equations

are solved by

 which gives

so that .  The conditions

 are fulfilled by .

As a function of  and , the potential  is
composed of two pieces .  is
given by  the two first lines in (), and it  is positive
definite.  is negative and  constant. The point 
is an extremum of  and a minimum of .  The value of the
potential at this extremum is

 This implies that the
potential is positive definite for all  and .

Summarizing,  we have that  and that  at the
extrema, so they are minima. The extremum condition does not fix
the scalars , ,  and the remaining  (all
of them  except for  with , which disappear from the
spectrum.)






 The gravitino mass matrix is
* 
At the point  we have  and ,
so that the eigenvalues squared are:

 which gives the gravitino masses
measured in terms of the  volume and the  Kaehler
modulus.

  More general vacua 
More general vacua, preserving  supersymmetry, can be
obtained by considering an arbitrary vector coupling .
 and  gauge two of the isometries , while  and
 gauge two of the isometries .

Taking the Killing vectors as

 we first notice that the condition on the vector multiplet
sector  still holds. In
the hypermultiplet sector, the condition for  vacua we had,
, is supplemented by the extra condition, coming
from the gauginos variation, . This eliminates from
the spectrum two extra scalars  together with the
axions . We are therefore left 18 chiral multiplets
from the hypermultiplet sector, no massless vector multiplets and
one chiral multiplet from the  vector multiplet sector.

If we relax the condition , the vacua will not
preserve any supersymmetry, but still will have vanishing vacuum
energy, as can be shown by looking at the scalar potential.

We want to note the close connection of the present  model
with another  model more recently discussed as an effective
theory for  vacua of the  orientifold
. The vector multiplet sector of that theory is
obtained by "higgsing" two of the three vector multiplets without
breaking  supersymmetry, as discussed in Section .
The scalars in the remaining hypermultiplets parametrize the
manifold , but since the
vector multiplet sector is the the same as in the 
truncated model of Ref., the pattern of the
supersymmetry breaking is very similar, and is insensitive to the
number the of hypermultiplets. This is because the relation

 is
still satisfied as in the model of Ref..





 This model
was also shown to be connected to the minimal  model studied
in Refs.. The vanishing potential of the theory in
Ref. was closely connected to the positive potential
of the theory in Refs., which lead to moduli
stabilization, as expected from the  orientifold
analysis.




 N=1  N=0 no scale supergravities 
In this section we find, by truncation from , a  theory
with a transition . The truncation 
 can be formally obtained by integrating out the second
gravitino multiplet, together with the states which receive mass
in the  phase transition. Twenty chiral multiplets
from the hypermultiplet sector remain massless in the truncation
together with one chiral multiplet from the vector multiplet
sector.

On the other hand, by relaxing the condition , which
makes the transition , none of the scalars in the
 theory take mass. This means that the 
transition must occur with a vanishing potential. To understand
this, we analyze the moduli space of the 21 chiral multiplets. The
left over moduli from the quaternionic manifold parametrize the
submanifold

which is a Kaehler-Hodge manifold with Kaehler potential
  where

and  parametrize the moduli space of the metrics

The remaining chiral multiplet contains the  volume modulus
with Kaehler potential . The
total Kaehler potential of the manifold of the scalars in the
chiral multiplets is a cubic polynomial

 The flux which breaks  to  corresponds to a
constant superpotential . In this situation
the scalar potential,


 is
identically zero. The gravitino mass is
related to the overall volume of ,

This is a standard  no scale model. However, it is different
from the one obtained by  compactification because it
has a much richer structure of moduli. The goldstino is
essentially the fermion superpartner of the overall 
 volume while all the other fermions receive a mass due to
the flux, equal to the gravitino mass.

Note that if instead of twenty  chiral multiplets we had
considered a model with two chiral multiplets in (), we
would have retrieved the analysis of.



Concluding remarks 


In the present investigation we have shown that compactifications
on  orientifold can be reproduced by a
gauged  supergravity which exactly gives the same 
vacua as obtained by analyzing the existence of the ten
dimensional supergravity solution.

The choice of the gauging is the crucial issue. The existence of
backgrounds with vanishing vacuum energy and broken supergravity
closely depends on the fact that the corresponding gauging
requires a choice of symplectic sections for special geometry
which do not admit a prepotential. This is required in order to
evade a no-go theorem on partial breaking of supersymmetry
.

This analysis can be generalized by including Yang-Mills degrees
of freedom coming from the branes, as well as more general fluxes
related to the supergravity charges ,
.

Our analysis extends previous studies on partial super-Higgs in
 supergravity considered in the literature
. In particular the no-scale
structure is closely related to the minimal modeland it only depends on universal properties leading to
cancellation of positive and negative contributions in the scalar
potential as it occurred in  no-scale models
.


Another interesting problem which is left aside here, is the
effect of the quantum corrections in these no-scale models. Some
work along these directions has recently appeared in the
literature.






Acknowledgments 
We acknowledge interesting discussions with C. Angelantonj, I.
Antoniadis, C. Kounnas and T. Taylor.


 Work supported in part by  the European
Community's Human Potential Program under contract
HPRN-CT-2000-00131 Quantum Space-Time, in which L. A.,  R. D. and
M. A. Ll. are associated to Torino University.

The work of S. F. has also  been supported by the D.O.E. grant
DE-FG03-91ER40662, Task C.

The work of M. A Ll. has also been supported by the research grant
BFM 2002-03681 from the Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia
(Spain) and from EU FEDER funds.


 99 
J. Polchinski and A. Strominger, "New Vacua for Type II String
Theory". Phys.  Lett.  B  388 , 736 (1996).



T. R. Taylor and C. Vafa, "RR flux on Calabi-Yau and partial
supersymmetry breaking". Phys. Lett. B  474 , 130
(2000).



P. Mayr, "On Supersymmetry Breaking in String Theory and its
Realization in Brane Worlds". Nucl.  Phys.  B  593 , 99
(2001).

P. Mayr, "Stringy Brane Worlds and Exponential Hierarchies,"
JHEP 0011 , 013 (2000), [arXiv:hep-th/0006204].

S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten, "CFTs from Calabi-Yau
Fourfolds," Nucl. Phys. B584 , 69 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/9906070]

K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, "M-theory, Orientifolds and
G-flux," JHEP 9908 , 023 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9908088].



G. Curio, A. Klemm, D. Lust and S. Theisen, "On the vacuum
structure of type II string compactifications on  Calabi-Yau
spaces with H-fluxes". Nucl. Phys. B  609 , 3 (2001).


 S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski,
"Hierarchies from Fluxes in String Compactifications".
hep-th/0105097.


A. R. Frey and J. Polchinski, "N = 3 warped compactifications".
hep-th/0201029.



S. Kachru, M. Schulz and S. Trivedi,
 "Moduli Stabilization from Fluxes in a Simple IIB Orientifold".
 hep-th/0201028.



 J. Louis and A. Micu,
"Type II theories compactified on Calabi-Yau threefolds in the
presence of background fluxes. hep-th/0202168.



 J. Michelson,
"Compactifications of type IIB strings to four dimensions with
non-trivial classical potential,"  Nucl.  Phys.  B   495  127 (1997).


 F. Cachazo and C.  Vafa,
"N = 1 and N = 2 geometry from fluxes," hep-th/0206017.


 G. Curio, A. Klemm, B. Kors and D. Lust,
"Fluxes in heterotic and type II string compactifications," Nucl.  Phys.  B  
 620  237 (2002)



 G. Dall'Agata, "Type IIB supergravity compactified on a Calabi-Yau manifold with H-fluxes,
" JHEP  0111  005 (2001)


 K. Becker and M. Becker,
"Supersymmetry breaking, M-theory and fluxes," JHEP  0107  038 (2001).


 M. Haack and J. Louis,
"M-theory compactified on Calabi-Yau fourfolds with background
flux," Phys.  Lett. B  507  296 (2001).


K. Becker and K. Dasgupta, "Heterotic strings with torsion,"
JHEP  0211 , 006 (2002).


















 C. Beasley and E. Witten,
"A note on fluxes and superpotentials in M-theory
compactifications on manifolds of G(2) holonomy," hep-th/0203061.


 S. Gukov and M. Haack,
"IIA string theory on Calabi-Yau fourfolds with background
fluxes," hep-th/0203267.

 L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo,
"Super Higgs Effect in Extended Supergravity". hep-th/0202116.

 L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo, "Gauging of Flat
Groups in Four Dimensional Supergravity". JHEP  0207 
010 (2002).

 L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo, "Duality and
Spontaneously Broken Supergravity in Flat Backgrounds". Nucl. Phys.   B640 , 63 (2002).






 R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara, S. Vaula, " Gauged Supergravity and IIB
Orientifold with Fluxes". hep-th/0206241.

 R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara, M. A. Lledo and  S.
Vaula, "No-scale  Supergravity Coupled to Yang-Mills: the
Scalar Potential and superHiggs Effect". hep-th/0211027.

 L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo,
" super Higgs,  Poincare vacua and quaternionic
geometry". JHEP  01  045 (2003).

G. L. Cardoso, G. Curio, G. Dall'Agata, D. Lust, P. Manousselis
and G. Zoupanos, "Non-Kaehler string backgrounds and their five
torsion classes," hep-th/0211118.

S.  Kachru, M. B. Schulz, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, "New
supersymmetric string compactifications,"hep-th/0211182.


K. Becker, M. Becker, M. Haack and J. Louis, "Supersymmetry
breaking and alpha' corrections to flux induced  potentials,"
JHEP  0206  060 (2002).



K. Becker, M. Becker, K. Dasgupta and P. S. Green,
"Compactifications of heterotic theory on non-Kaehler complex
manifolds.  I," hep-th/0301161.

 P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi,
"Compactification with flux on K3 and tori". hep-th/0301139.




 E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas and D. V. Nanopoulos,
"Naturally Vanishing Cosmological Constant In N=1 Supergravity,"
Phys.  Lett.  B  133  61 (1983).



 J. R. Ellis, A. B. Lahanas, D. V. Nanopoulos and K. Tamvakis,
"No - Scale Supersymmetric Standard Model," Phys.  Lett. B 
134  429 (1984). 

J. R. Ellis, C. Kounnas and D. V. Nanopoulos, "No Scale
Supersymmetric Guts," Nucl. Phys.  B  247  373 (1984).

For a review  see A. B. Lahanas and D. V. Nanopoulos, "The Road
To No Scale Supergravity,"
 Phys.  Rept.   145  1 (1987).



 E. Cremmer, C. Kounnas, A. Van Proeyen, J. P.
 Derendinger, S. Ferrara, B. de Wit and L. Girardello,
"Vector Multiplets Coupled To N=2 Supergravity: Superhiggs
Effect, Flat Potentials And Geometric Structure," Nucl.
Phys.  B  250  385 (1985).


 S.  Cecotti, L. Girardello and M. Porrati,
"An Exceptional N=2 Supergravity With Flat Potential And Partial
Superhiggs,"
 Phys. Lett. B  168  83 (1986).



 S. Ferrara, L. Girardello and M. Porrati,
"Minimal Higgs Branch for the Breaking of Half of the
Supersymmetries in " N=2 Supergravity," Phys.  Lett.  B 
366  155 (1996).



 V. A. Tsokur and Y. M. Zinovev,
"Spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in N = 4 supergravity with
matter," Phys.  Atom.  Nucl.  59  2192 (1996) [Yad.
Fiz. 59N12  (1996) 2277] ; "Spontaneous supersymmetry
breaking in N = 3 supergravity with matter," Phys.  Atom.
Nucl.  59  2185 (1996) [Yad. Fiz. 59N12  (1996) 1169];
"Dual versions of extended supergravities," Phys.  Lett. B 
378  120(1996).


B. de Wit, P. G. Lauwers and A. Van Proeyen, "Lagrangians of N=2
supergravity - matter systems," Nucl. Phys. B  255 ,
569 (1985).

J. Bagger and E. Witten, "Matter couplings in N=2 supergravity
," Nucl. Phys. B  222  1 (1983).







L. Andrianopoli, M. Bertolini, A. Ceresole, R. D'Auria, S. 
Ferrara, P. Fre and T. Magri, "N = 2 supergravity and N = 2 super
Yang-Mills theory on general scalar  manifolds: Symplectic
covariance, gaugings and the momentum map," J.  Geom. Phys. 
23 , 111 (1997); "General matter coupled N=2 supergravity,"
Nucl. Phys. B  476 , 397 (1996).

R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara and P. Fre, "Special and quaternionic
isometries: general couplings in N=2 supergravity and the scalar
potential," Nucl.  Phys. B  359 , 705 (1991).


 "Essays on mirror manifolds." vol.  II. Ed. S. T. Yau.
International Press, Hong-Kong
(1992).

 N. Seiberg, "Observations on the moduli space of
superconformal field theories, " Nucl. Phys. B  303  286
(1988).

S. Ferrara, J. A. Harvey, A. Strominger and C. Vafa, "Second
quantized mirror symmetry," Phys. Lett. B  361 , 59
(1995).

A. Klemm, W. Lerche and P. Mayr, "K3 fibrations and heterotic
type II string duality," Phys. Lett. B  357  313
(1995).



 M. J. Duff, J. T. Liu and J. Rahmfeld,
"Four-dimensional string-string-string triality," Nucl.
Phys. B   459 , 125 (1996).

E. Cremmer and A. Van Proeyen, "Classification of Kaehler
manifolds in N=2 vector multiplet supergravity couplings," Class. Quant. Grav.   2 , 445 (1985).



 S. Cecotti, S. Ferrara and L. Girardello, "Geometry
of type IIB superstrings and the moduli space of superconformal
field theories," Int. J. of Mod. Phys.  4  2475 (1989).

 P. S. Aspinwall, " surfaces and string duality,"
hep-th/9611137.

 R. Stora, private communication.

 A. Strominger, "Special Geometry," Comm. Math.
Phys.  133  163-180 (1990).

 L. Castellani, R. D'Auria and S. Ferrara, "Special
Geometry without special coordinates," Clas. Quantum Grav. ,
7  1767-1790 (1990).

 A. Ceresole, R. D'Auria and S. Ferrara,
"The symplectic structure of N=2 supergravity and its central
extension," Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl , 46  67-74 (1996).

A. Ceresole, R. D'Auria, S. Ferrara, A. Van Proeyen, "Duality
transformations in supersymmetric Yang-Mills theories coupled to
supergravity," Nucl. Phys.  B  444  92 (1995).


 R. D'Auria and S. Ferrara, "On fermion masses,
gradient flows and potential in supersymmetric  theories,"
JHEP  0105  034 (2001).

L. Andrianopoli, M. Bertolini, A. Ceresole, R. D'Auria, S.
Ferrara, P. Fre, T. Magri, "N=2 Supergravity and N=2 Super
Yang-Mills Theory on General Scalar Manifolds: Symplectic
Covariance, Gaugings and the Momentum Map", J. Geom. Phys. 
23  111 (1997).

L. Andrianopoli, R. D'Auria and S. Ferrara, "Supersymmetry
Reduction of N-extended Supergravities in Four  Dimensions". JHEP  0203  025 (2002).

 J. Louis,
"Aspects of spontaneous  breaking in
supergravity", hep-th/0203138.

A.R. Frey, A. Mazumdar, "3-Form Induced Potentials, Dilaton
Stabilization, and Running Moduli", hep-th/0210254.

 S. Ferrara and M. Porrati, "N=1 no scale
supergravity from IIB orientifolds", Phys. Lett. B  545 
411 (2002).

E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello and A. Van Proeyen,
"Yang-Mills theories with local supersymmetry: Lagrangian,
transformation laws and superHiggs effect," Nucl. Phys. B 
212  413 (1983).

 R. Barbieri, E. Cremmer and S. Ferrara,
"Flat and positive potentials in N=1 Supergravity," Phys.
Lett. B  163  143 (1985).

P. Fre, L. Girardello, I. Pesando and M. Trigiante,
"Spontaneous N = 2  N = 1 local supersymmetry breaking with
surviving  compact gauge groups," Nucl.  Phys.  B  493 , 231 (1997).

E. A. Mirabelli and M. E. Peskin, "Transmission of supersymmetry
breaking from a 4-dimensional boundary," Phys. Rev. D  58  065002 (1998).


S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas, M. Porrati and F. Zwirner, "Effective
superHiggs and Strm**2 from four-dimensional strings," Phys.
Lett. B  194  366 (1987).



S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas, D. Lust and F. Zwirner, "Duality
invariant partition functions and automorphic superpotentials for
(2,2) string compactifications," Nucl.  Phys.  B  365 
431 (1991).

S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. Linde and S. P. Trivedi, "De Sitter
vacua in string theory," hep-th/0301240.






















