












22.5cm16.8cm
-.4cm

equation section 


 



hep-th/0302182 


Tachyon Condensation and Universal

Solutions in String Field Theory
 

Tomohiko Takahashi E-mail address:
 tomo@asuka.phys.nara-wu.ac.jp  


  Department of Physics, Nara Women's University 

  Nara 630-8506, Japan  
February, 2003 




 
plus 0.2pt minus 0.1pt
We investigate a non-perturbative vacuum in open string field theory
expanded around the analytic classical solution which has been found
in the universal Fock space generated by matter Virasoro generators
and ghost oscillators. We carry out level-truncation analyses up to
level (6,18) in the theory around one-parameter families of the
solution. We observe that the value of the vacuum energy approaches the
D-brane tension as the approximation level is increased, but this
non-perturbative vacuum disappears at the boundary of the parameter
space. These results provide strong evidence for the conjecture that,
although the universal solutions are pure gauge in almost all the
parameter space, they are regarded as the tachyon vacuum solution at
the boundary.  


plus 0.2pt minus 0.1pt

Introduction 

String field theory is a promising approach to investigate
non-perturbative aspects of  string theory. As conjectured 
by Sen, we can describe the annihilation
process of D-branes by using the condensation of the tachyon in open
string field theory, in which there is a stable vacuum
 and the energy difference between the stable and
unstable vacua is in precise agreement with a D-brane tension
. Since these discoveries much progress
has been made in string field theory, particularly in the formulation of
vacuum string field theory, where some exact results
are obtained.
However, despite these developments, we have not yet found the analytic
classical solution, which is eagerly awaited, corresponding to the
tachyon vacuum in open string field theory. 

While there are some formal attempts to construct analytic
solutions in string field theory
,
strange problems often arise from such formal solutions.
For example, if  stands for the left-half integration of the
BRS current and 
 is the identity string field,
 is a formal solution in purely cubic string field theory
.  
The equation of motion is given by 
and then  is also a solution, around which the kinetic
operator becomes  and the theory should describe open strings with a
negative tension. Therefore ordinary D-branes and
negative tension branes are realized with the same energy density.
We find another example in the context of vacuum
string field theory as pointed out in.
From similar discussions, it follows that the solutions leading to pure
ghost kinetic operators provide the same energy density as the
perturbative vacuum. Usually, these unreliable results
are caused by midpoint singularities in a half string formulation. In
the former example, though the operator  appears in solving
the equation of motion, this operator itself is
ill-defined due to a midpoint singularity, 
as pointed out for example in. We find the same
singularity in the latter case. 

Fortunately, the analytic solutions found in escape
from all these problems related to the midpoint singularity.
In addition they have many remarkable features:
The solutions can be expressed by
states in the universal Fock space which is spanned by matter Virasoro 
generators and ghost oscillators acting on the  invariant
vacuum (so we call them universal solutions ). 
This universality is necessary for the solution corresponding to the 
tachyon vacuum. 
Secondly, open string excitations disappear after the string field
condensation to a specific class of the universal solutions
. This property is also
indispensable for the tachyon vacuum solution.
Consequently, we naturally expect that a certain kind of the universal
solutions is regarded as the tachyon vacuum solution.

Even if the universal solutions are irrelevant to the tachyon vacuum,
it should be emphasized that
they have intimate relations to gauge symmetry in string field theory,
which is an underlying principle in the theory
and which is much larger symmetry than existing in the low energy
effective theory. 
We can construct the universal solutions with a parameter.
They are pure gauge solutions in almost all the region of the parameter,
but they become non-trivial solutions at the boundary of the parameter
space. Hence, the non-trivial universal solutions can be
regarded as a kind of singular gauge transformations from the
perturbative vacuum.
Moreover, 
the gauge symmetry and the annihilation mechanism
of open strings are inseparable.
In the theory around the non-trivial solution, the
kinetic operator is given by the modified BRS charge which has the
cohomology with different ghost numbers from the original
cohomology. Therefore
all of on-shell states are reduced to gauge degrees of freedom
in the gauge unfixed theory and then open string
excitations disappear after the condensation.

Although the tachyon vacuum solution has already been obtained
approximately in the level truncated theory, 
we can not so simply compared the universal solutions with the
level truncated solution,
because the gauges of these solutions differ.
The energy density of the universal solutions, then, should 
be calculated in order to clarify the relation between these
solutions. However, if we try to calculate the potential height
directly, there are some technical problems which are remained to be
resolved.  To avoid these we should adopt other approaches at
present. 

The purpose of this paper is to apply level truncation scheme
to investigate the theory around the universal solutions, and to
determine the potential height of the solutions indirectly.
If a one-parameter family of the solutions can be interpreted as
explained above, the theory around the solutions should
describe the perturbative vacuum in the almost region of the parameter
and the tachyon vacuum at the boundary. Hence, we should 
observe the situation that in the theory for the almost parameter,
there is a non-perturbative vacuum which gives the same energy
density as the D-brane tension, but the non-trivial vacuum disappears at
the endpoint. 

In Section 2 we review the universal solutions in string field
theory with some new results,
and we explain the difficulty of calculating the potential height. In
Section 3 we analyze the non-perturbative vacuum in the theory around the
universal solutions up to level (6,18). Our results strongly suggest
that the non-trivial universal solution corresponds to the tachyon
vacuum. In Section 4, we give summary and discussions.




Classical solutions and potential heights 

universal solutions 

The action of cubic open string field theory is given by
 
By variation of the action, we find the classical equation of motion
 
One of the analytic solutions with translational invariance has been
found as 
 
where  denotes the identity string field.
The operators  and 
 are defined by 
 
where  and  are the BRS current and the ghost field,
respectively, and  stands for the contour along the left-half
of strings. 
The function  satisfies  and 
.

The solution () obeys the equation
of motion () in the following.
The anti-commutation relations of  and 
are given by
 
and others are zero.
We define similar operators  and  by
replacing the contour  in () to 
 corresponding to the right half of strings. Then, for the star
product, these operators satisfy
 
Through conservation of the BRS current and the ghost field on the
identity string field, we find that
 
From (), () and (),
if follows that
 
As a result, the equation of () is a classical solution
in the string field theory.

Though
the function  must cancel the midpoint singularity of
the ghost field on 
to make the operator  well-defined,
this cancellation actually occurs
due to the previous two
conditions for .
Around the midpoint ,
the ghost field behaves as 
and then its singularity is a pole at the midpoint.
If the function  is analytic around ,  can be expanded
as  because
. Therefore, 
 becomes 
regular at the midpoint and then the operator  is
well-defined on the identity string field.

In the following, let us consider the solution generated by the function
 
and we parameterize the solution by a real number .
The function is rewritten as 
on the unit circle , and
the parameter  is
larger than  accordingly.
In the region , the function 
can be expanded by the Fourier series
 
where  and .

Substituting the function into the form () and
expanding it by oscillators, we find the solution up to level two
 
where  denote matter Virasoro generators and 
 and  are given by
 
Using the Fourier series (), we can carry out these
integrations.
The results of the calculations are, for 
 
and for ,
 
It is interesting to note that
the solution has a well-defined
Fock space expression and  
the coefficients of its component states have no divergence. This
situation is different from the 
case of the dilaton condensation in light-cone type string field
theories. For instance, the functions
 and  have finite values as depicted in
Fig.  and then the coefficients become finite up to level two. 
Moreover, the Fock space used in the solution can be spanned by the
universal basis, because the
solution is made of the BRS current, the ghost field and the identity
string field. This universality is indispensable
for the tachyon solution. 
Finally, we indicate that
the solution is outside Siegel gauge since it contains
states proportional to the ghost zero mode .

  J.eps  
 Plots of the functions  and .  


physical interpretation 

To consider physical meaning of the solution, we expand
the string field  by the solution  and the quantum
fluctuation  as
 
Substituting this form into (), 
the action becomes
 
where the modified BRS charge  is given by
 
and  and  are defined by 
and , respectively. The first term
in the action corresponds to the vacuum energy at the solution,
and the second term represents
the action for the quantum fluctuation.

We can show that the solution for  is expressed by a
gauge transform of the trivial vacuum as
 
where  for a string field  is defined by its series as
, and the operator  is defined by
 
Consequently, we naturally expect that the theory around the solution
for  describes the physics on the perturbative
vacuum. Indeed, we can transform the action for the fluctuation 
into the original action through the string field redefinition
 
where , and  is the counterpart
of  related to right strings. The equivalence of these
actions is based on the fact that the original and
modified BRS charges are connected by the similarity transformation
 

However, since the operators  and  becomes
ill-defined at ,
the solution can not be represented by the pure
gauge, and
the theory around it can not be connected to the
original theory through the string field redefinition.
Consequently, 
the solution  at  represents a non-trivial 
vacuum, though the solution is a pure gauge for .
For example, the operator  is written by the normal ordered form
 
where  denote the oscillators of the ghost number current and they
are written by the ghost oscillators as
 
If we take , the first factor in () diverges
because . 
In order to find the singularity more explicitly, we write the string
field by the oscillator expression as
 
Using the normal ordered expression (),
we find that, through the redefinition of (), the
lowest level component field  is transformed as
 
where the abbreviation denotes the contribution from the higher level
component fields. Thus, by the string field redefinition, the component
fields are transformed into the linear combination of an infinite
number of fields. However, its coefficients
diverge at  and then this redefinition is
ill-defined. Similarly, the
operator  has a singularity at .

To find the physical meaning of the solutions from a different
viewpoint,
we can determine the cohomology 
of the new BRS charge 
and the perturbative spectrum around
the solution. As in ref. , the new cohomology
appears only in the sector with different ghost numbers from the original
cohomology. Consequently, in the gauge unfixed theory around the
solution, we can solve the equation of motion  as
.
Since the theory is invariant under the gauge transformation 
, 
all of the on-shell physical states become gauge degrees of freedom in the
theory perturbatively.

Hence, we find that the universal solution at  represents
a non-trivial vacuum, where there is no physical excitation
perturbatively. This is the very feature required for
the tachyon vacuum. As discussed above, the solution satisfies universality.
Putting these observations together, we expect that the
universal solution corresponds to the tachyon vacuum itself.


potential heights 


Formally, we can find that the potential height  is zero for
.(More precisely, the potential  is
divided by the D-brane volume 
as .) 
Indeed, the derivative of  with respect to 
is given by
 
where we have used the equation of motions for the last
equality. Since  and then
, it turns out that  is equal to zero. 
This zero potential height
can be shown only for , because the solution is ill-defined for
 
and it is undifferentiable at .
This formal discussion is consistent with the expectation that the
universal solution is a pure gauge for .

However, we can not calculate the potential height more explicitly
beyond the formal evaluation.
Substituting the solution () into the action
(), we find that
 
where we have used
 and . The identity string field is
written by the tensor product of the matter and ghost sectors and the
matter sector of the identity string field is given by
 
Then,  is an indefinite quantity
for any 
due to the infinite determinant factor of the matter sector.
Thus, it is difficult to evaluate the potential height
because we have not yet known how it should be regularized(
We are still suffering from the disastrous divergence even if we use
usual regularization with the insertion of 
.) . 

Instead of the exact calculation, we try to use level truncated
solutions to evaluate the potential height.
For ,
the solution () becomes
 
At level zero, the truncated solution is  and so
the function  defined in 
ref.  
takes the value
 
This provides 28 of the D-brane tension.
Furthermore, we calculate the function  at level two and, then,
it takes the value , which is far from a stationary point at
the level two potential.
For general , we are faced with such terrible behavior.
Although this result discourages us to perform further
calculations,
this is a natural result because our solution is not a
solution in the level truncated theory.

Hence, we can not calculate the vacuum energy of the universal
solutions at present, in order to compare it with the D-brane tension.



Level truncation in string field theory with the modified
kinetic term  

In this section we explore another possibility of clarifying the relation
between the universal solutions and the tachyon vacuum.
Instead of the direct calculation of the potential height,
we analyze the non-perturbative vacuum
in the theory expanded around the universal solutions.
By using the level truncation scheme in Siegel gauge, 
we can find the non-perturbative vacuum without any difficulty,
and moreover we come across the impressive result which supports our
conjecture for the universal solutions.


conjectures and setup 

As in (), the action for the fluctuation 
is written by
 
where the modified BRS charge is given by ().
Substituting
() into () and performing the
 integration, 
we obtain the oscillator expressions of the new BRS charge
 
where we expand the BRS current as 
.
The details of the calculation are presented in Appendix A. 

Under the Siegel gauge condition ,
the quadratic term in the action becomes
 
where .
Using the anti-commutation relation 
we can calculate the operator  as
 
Therefore, according to the notations of
, the potential in the new string field
theory is given 
by the 'modified' universal function
 
As seen in the previous section, we expect that 
the solutions  and  
are regarded as a pure gauge and the tachyon vacuum,
respectively. Consequently, in the case of , the action of
() describes the perturbative vacuum,
and then, in the potential, there is the stationary point which
corresponds to the tachyon vacuum.
On the other hand, 
the stationary point must vanish at ,
because 
the theory has already stayed on the non-perturbative
vacuum. Hence, due to our conjectures, 
the modified universal function
at the stationary point  must satisfy
 

Let us consider a level truncated expression of the modified universal
function. 
The new action is invariant under the twist
transformation 
.  Due to this symmetry, we have only
to look for a stationary point where  contains even level states
as well as the case of the original level truncated analysis.
In general, we can write a scalar string field  by the tensor
product of the matter and ghost states as
 
Our notations for the decomposition of states are almost same as
in Ref. . Up to level 6, the matter and ghost states,
 and , are given
in Appendix B and the decomposition of states is in Appendix C.

Using the component fields  with zero momentum,
we can express the modified universal function as follows,
 
The cubic coefficients  does not change from the previous
analysis in Ref. .
The quadratic coefficients are calculated as
 
where  denotes 
the level of the state ,(We set the level of ground
states as 
 and .) 
and  and  are defined by
 
Here,  and  are the matter and ghost parts
of the total Virasoro generators . In this expression,
  and  are converted to  and 
by the hermitian conjugation.
A list of the coefficients  up to level 6 is given
in Appendix B. Up to level 6, the coefficients 
 can be calculated by using  through the
following equations, 
 


level zero analysis 

At level  approximation,
the component field is  and then the modified universal
function is 
 
where  and .
It is easy to see that  has two roots
 
then
 
Therefore,  has a local minimum at


 


and  at this minimum takes the value


 


The  dependence of this value is depicted in
Fig. . Though this behavior is quite different from the
expectation that  does not affect the potential minimum for 
as in (), this  dependence is introduced merely by the
level truncation approximation.

The value  at  equals to the minimum
derived from the previous level truncation analysis,
because the kinetic 
operator  becomes  at  and the modified
universal function agrees with the universal function. This agreement is
realized for any level analysis as seen in (). In addition,
it should be noticed that the minimum is exactly zero at .

  plot0.eps  
 Plots of the potential minimum in level
  truncation.  


higher level analysis 

We apply the iterative approximation algorithm used by Moeller and
Taylor to higher level calculations.
However, there is a slight change
in the procedure to find the stable vacuum. 
According to Ref. ,
the solution which minimizes the potential of ()
has many branches, and which branch should be chosen is determined by the
condition that the solution
becomes the level zero stable vacuum if higher level fields are turned
off. As a result, the branch depends on 
the sign of the quadratic coefficients .
As an example, let us see the tachyon field .
Since the coefficient  equals to
 for any level analysis, 
the tachyon field which minimizes the potential
can be expressed by other
fields in the following,
 
Here, ,  and  are given by
 
where 
 is the number of truncated fields.
Thus, the branch is determined depending on the
value of  in our analysis.

Let us consider the level two approximation. 
The level two field is given by
 
From () and (), we find the quadratic term of
the modified universal function as
 
The potential minimum is depicted in Fig. .
We observe that  and  approximations lead to almost same
results. At , 
the vacuum expectation values of component fields
and the potential minimum are equal to zero
as used  approximation. 
The vacuum energy are varying slowly in the neighborhood of ,
in which the potential height provide 96 of the D-brane tension.
For our conjectures, it is a desirable fact that the potential minimum
changes slowly along the expected vacuum 
energy. Thus, even at this level, we can expect that the universal
solution is a pure gauge at least near , as our conjecture.


  plot2.eps  
 The potential minimum in level two truncations. 
 
Let us progress to the higher level approximation. The
potential minimum using level four and six approximations is depicted in
Fig. .
Like level zero and two cases,
the results of the level  calculation
slightly change with the level . In the cases of both of level
four and six, the potential minimum displays a flat region
along the expected vacuum energy.
The potential heights and the vacuum expectation values become zero at
 as before. This behavior can be seen 
in detail in Fig. , which magnifies the area near
.

In these analyses, it is a remarkable fact that
the higher the approximation level is increased, the wider the flat
region grows. Moreover, the potential value in the flat
region approaches the expected value increasingly
as the level is raised.
At level six, the vacuum energy becomes almost
 in the 
region from  to .  In Fig. , we pick out the
values of the potential 
height for several points of .(Of course, our values at
 agree with previous results in 
refs. . But only the value at level
(6,12) does not coincide with a result in.) 
All of the values are about 99 of the D-brane tension at level
six. For our conjecture, the most important result is that the stable
vacuum disappears at  in every level analysis.
These potential behavior to the parameter  suggest that, if
the approximation level approaches infinity,  the potential
minimum takes the value of  for , but
it remains being zero at .
Hence, these results leads us to believe 
that the conjecture for the universal solutions, which is expressed by
(), should be true, and then
the universal solution at 
corresponds to the tachyon condensation conjectured by Sen.

  plot4.eps  
  plot6.eps  
 Plots of the potential minimum in level
 four and six truncations. 
 

  plot3L-zoom.eps  
 The enlarged graph of the potential minimum around . 
 
other universal solutions 



  
Vacuum energy in level truncation scheme for several points of . 

We can provide other universal solutions by choosing
the function in () as
 
where  . The case of  corresponds
to the previous example.
The action around the solution has the modified BRS charge
 
The kinetic operator in Siegel gauge is given by
 
At level zero, the modified universal function becomes
 
At the local minimum it takes the value


 


where the branch points  are given by
 

Let us consider the case of . The kinetic operator is given by
 
Similarly to the case of , the quadratic terms up to level six can be
calculated by the following equations,
 
The branch points are
 

The results of numerical analysis up to level six are depicted in
Fig. .

  plot2L-2.eps  
  plot3L-2.eps  
 The potential minimum for the universal solution with .  
 At , the potential minimum remains being zero for any
approximation level. From level four, the flat region
begins to spread along the expected vacuum energy. As a different
feature from the previous case, we observe 
that, if the level is raised, the shape of the curve
changes with the period of level two,
in particular near the point that the
potential minimum approaches to zero.
On the whole we can see that the curve tends to approach the step
function () as increasing the level.
However, it seems to converge more slowly than the case of .



Summary and discussions 

We have studied a non-perturbative vacuum in open string field theory 
around the universal solutions by using a level truncation scheme. We
have observed that, as increasing the approximation level,
the potential minimum gradually approaches to the step function which
equals to the D-brane tension for almost parameters and becomes zero at
the boundary. These result strongly support our conjecture that the
universal solutions are 
pure gauge for the almost parameter region, but the non-trivial solution
at the boundary corresponds to the tachyon vacuum solution.

Though this physical interpretation for the universal solutions is
plausible, we can construct them as many as
functions used in eq. ().
At least, the non-trivial solutions are countable by the natural number
as in eq. ().
On the other hand  the tachyon vacuum should be unique in string theory.
In order for them to be consistent,
these universal solutions must be changed by gauge
transformations. Though this gauge equivalence
remains to be proved, this may be probably
possible by the gauge transformation related to the operators
 as discussed in. In addition, the
equivalence between our 
solutions in this paper is consistent with the conjecture proposed by
Drukker which concerns the order of zero
of the function with the number of D-branes.

Finally, two problems at least are remained to be solved
in order to prove the correspondence between the universal solutions and
the tachyon vacuum,
First,
we should calculate the potential height
of the universal solutions exactly instead of these numerical
analysis. Secondly, we should find closed 
strings in the theory around the solutions. InDrukker discussed how closed strings should be appeared in the
theory, but we should show them more explicitly, for example as closed
string poles in amplitudes.

Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank H. Hata, M. Kanemune, I. Kishimoto and T. Kugo
for valuable discussions and comments.




Appendix 

Mode expansion of the modified BRS charge 

The modified BRS charge  is defined in () and the
function  is given by ().
We can easily evaluate the first term of () as
 

From (), we can find
 
If we differentiate the Fourier series of (), we get
 
where . From these equations, it follows that
 
Substituting () into (), we can evaluate
the second term of () as 
 
We can calculate the integrations in this equation and the results are


 
 


Substituting () and () into (),
we find that
 
Finally, from () and (), we obtain
the oscillator expression of the modified BRS charge as in
(). 


Table of matter and ghost states at levels  

The following table describe the matter and ghost states which
contribute to scalar fields at levels . The inner products
 and  are defined by
eqs. () and ().


 


Table of scalar states at levels  

The following table lists scalar states at levels .
 denote vacuum expectation values of the
scalar states  in level truncation calculations at .

 
 


 99 




A. Sen,
"Universality of the Tachyon Potential",
9912  (1999), 027 (hep-th/9911116).

A. Sen,
"Descent Relations Among Bosonic D-branes",
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A14  (1999), 4061, (hep-th/9902105).

V. A. Kostelecky and S. Samuel,
"On a Nonperturbative Vacuum for the Open Bosonic String",
B336 1990 236 .

A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Tachyon Condensation in String Field Theory",
0003  (2000), 002 (hep-th/9912249).

N. Moeller and W. Taylor,
"Level Truncation and the Tachyon in Open Bosonic String Field
Theory", 
B538 2000 105  (hep-th/0002237).

"Experimental String Field Theory",
D. Gaiotto and L. Rastelli,
hep-th/0211012.

L. Rostelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"String Field Theory Around the Tachyon Vacuum",
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 5  (2002) 353, (hep-th0012251).

L. Rostelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Boundary CFT Construction of D-branes in Vacuum String Field Theory",
hep-th/0105168;

L. Rostelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach,
"Star Algebra Spectroscopy",
J. High Energy Phys./ 0203  (2002) 029, (hep-th/0111281);

H. Hata and T. Kawano,
"Open String States around a Classical Solution in Vacuum String Field
Theory",
J. High Energy Phys. 0111  (2001) 038, (hep-th/0108150);

H. Hata and S. Moriyama,
"Observables as Twist Anomaly in Vacuum String Field Theory",
J. High Energy Phys. 0201  (2002) 042, (hep-th/0111034);

H. Hata and S. Moriyama,
"Reexamining Classical Solution and Tachyon Mode in Vacuum String Field
Theory", hep-th/0206208;

H. Hata and H. Kogetsu,
"Higher Level Open String States from Vacuum String Field Theory",
J. High. Energy Phys. 0209  (2002) 027, (hep-th/0208067);

H. Hata, S. Moriyama and S. Teraguchi,
"Exact Results on Twist Anomaly",
J. High Energy Phys. 0202  (2002) 036, (hep-th/020177);

K. Okuyama,
"Ghost Kinetic Operator of Vacuum String Field Theory",
J. High Energy Phys./ 0201  (2002) 027;

K. Okuyama,
"Siegel Gauge in Vacuum String Field Theory",
J. High Energy Phys./ 0201  (2002) 043, (hep-th/0111087);

K. Okuyama,
"Ratio of Tensions from Vacuum String Field Theory",
J. High Energy Phys./ 0203  (2002) 050, (hep-th/0201136);

T. Okuda,
"The Equality of Solutions in Vacuum String Field Theory",
B641 2002 393 , (hep-th/0201149);

Y. Okawa,
"Open string states and D-brane tension from vacuum string field
theory", J. High Energy Phys./ 0207  (2002) 003, (hep-th/0204012).

T. Takahashi and S. Tanimoto,
"Wilson Lines and Classical Solutions in Cubic Open String Field
Theory",
106 2001 863  (hep-th/0107046).

T. Takahashi and S. Tanimoto,
"Marginal and Scalar Solutions in Open Cubic String Field Theory",
J. High Energy Phys./ 03  (2002) 033 (hep-th/020133).

I. Kishimoto and K. Ohmori,
"CFT Description of Identity String Field: Toward Derivation of the
VSFT Action",
hep-th/0112169.

J. Kluso,
"Exact Solutions of Open Bosonic String Field Theory",
hep-th/0202045;

J. Kluso,
"Marginal Deformations In the Open Bosonic String Field Theory for N
D0-branes", hep-th/0203089;

J. Kluso,
"New Solution of the Open Bosonic String Field Theory",
hep-th/0205294;

J. Kluso,
"Time Dependent Solution in Open Bosonic String Field Theory",
hep-th/0208028;

J. Kluso,
"Exact Solutions in Open Bosonic String Field Theory and Marginal
Deformation in CFT", hep-th/0209255.

G. T. Horowitz, J. Lykken and R. Rohm,
"Purely Cubic Action for String Field Theory",
57 1986 283 .

I. Kishimoto and T. Takahashi,
"Open String Field Theory around Universal Solutions",
108 2002 591  (hep-th/0205257)

E. Witten,
"Non-Commutative Geometry and String Field Theory",
B268 1986 253 .

M. Schnabl,
"Wedge states in string field theory",
hep-th/0201095.

T. Yoneya,
197B 1987 76 .

H. Hata and Y. Nagoshi,
80 1988 1088 .

T. Kugo and B. Zwiebach,
"Target Space Duality as a Symmetry of String Field Theory",
87 1992 801  (hep-th/9201040).

D. Gross and A. Javichi,
"Operator Formalism of Interacting String Field Theory (I)",
B283 1987 1 ;

D. Gross and A. Javichi,
"Operator Formalism of Interacting String Field Theory (II)",
B287 1987 225 .

I. Kishimoto and T. Takahashi,
unpublished .

N. Drukker,
"Closed String Amplitudes from Gauge Fixed String Field Theory",
hep-th/0207266.

N. Drukker,
"On Different for the Vacuum of Bosonic String Field Theory",
hep-th/0301079.







