












plain 
thm Theorem [section]
lem [thm]Lemma 
prop [thm]Proposition 
*cor Corollary 
*KL Klein's Lemma 

definition 
defn Definition [section]
conj Conjecture [section]
exmp Example [section]

remark 
*rem Remark 
*note Note 
case Case 

 
 
ICN-2002-100

HOPF ALGEBRA PRIMITIVES AND RENORMALIZATION 



H. Quevedo(E-mail: quevedo@nuclecu.unam.mx ) ,
M. Rosenbaum(E-mail: mrosen@nuclecu.unam.mx )  and
J. David Vergara(E-mail: vergara@nuclecu.unam.mx )  

Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares, 

Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 
A. Postal 70-543, 
 Mexico D.F., Mexico. 
 
 




 The analysis of the combinatorics resulting from the
 perturbative expansion of the transition amplitude in 
quantum field theories, and the relation of this expansion
 to the Hausdorff series leads naturally to consider an 
infinite dimensional Lie
 subalgebra and the corresponding enveloping Hopf 
algebra, to which the elements
 of this series are associated. We show that in 
the context of these structures the
 power sum symmetric functionals of the perturbative 
expansion are Hopf primitives
 and that they are given by linear combinations 
of Hall polynomials, or
 diagrammatically by Hall trees. We show that 
each Hall tree corresponds to sums
 of Feynman diagrams each with the same number 
of vertices, external legs and loops.
 In addition, since the Lie subalgebra admits a 
derivation endomorphism, we also show
 that with respect to it these primitives
are cyclic vectors generated by the free propagator, 
and thus provide a recursion relation by means of 
which the (n+1)-vertex connected Green functions can 
be derived systematically from the n-vertex ones. 
By the application of an algebra homomorphism to 
these primitives and the use of the Connes-Kreimer 
twisted antipode axiom together with the Birkhoff 
algebraic decomposition, we investigate their 
relevance to the renormalization process and
arrive in a rather straightforward and heuristic 
manner at the basic equation of renormalization
theory from which the explicit relations between 
the bare and physical parameters of the theory may
be derived, and from which the corresponding 
renormalized Green functions, as well as the Renormalization
Group equations in the Mass Independent Renormalization 
Scheme result.
MSC: 16W30, 57T05, 81T15, 81T75. 



Introduction 


Based on the original work of Kreimer, a Hopf
algebra has been developed
 which provides the underlying mathematics behind the
Forest Formula in the process of renormalization in perturbative
quantum field theory (PQFT). This Hopf algebra is now generally
known as the Hopf Algebra of Renormalization and has been discussed
extensively in the above given references as well as others
contained therein. Basically it can be
represented by Feynman diagrams or decorated rooted
trees, where decorations are one-particle irreducible (1PI)
divergent diagrams without subdivergences. Other Hopf algebras
related to rooted trees and
to the Hopf Algebra of Renormalization have been discussed in the
literature, such as the vector space Hopf algebra of rooted trees
of Larson and Grossman. The connection of this
algebra with the algebra of Kreimer and Connes was analyzed in
 and more recently revised in. For a
formulation of the several Hopf algebras described in terms of
trees in terms of a single mathematical construction see van
der Laan.


The essential point of the Kreimer-Connes formalism is that given that a theory is renormalizable  an appropriately defined
twisted antipode, based on the minimal subtraction scheme of
renormalization, generates the counterterms corresponding to the
BPHZ Forest Formula and the antipode axiom provides a systematic
procedure for deriving the physically correct and finite
expression for a given diagram.

 However, the mere fact that the
twisted antipode axiom, or for that matter the Forest Formula,
provide a finite answer does not suffice to make the theory
physical. It is crucial, in order that the theory be
renormalizable, that the resulting counterterms are of the same
form as those in the original Lagrangian and that they can be
absorbed into the bare parameters of the renormalized Lagrangian
in a consistent manner. Generally this not possible, and in such a
case the theory is described as non-renormalizable.

Of course if
we know a priori  that the theory is renormalizable then the
Hopf algebra of decorated rooted trees or of Feynman diagrams
remains most valuable both as the mathematical structure behind
the Forest Formula as well as for a systematic construction
of renormalized Green functions.


The purpose of this paper is to show that a combined twisted
antipode axiom and algebraic Birkhoff decomposition applied to
primitives of other Hopf algebras that appear naturally in the
early processes of PQFT, at a pre-Feynman-diagram level, may also be
related to renormalization and provide a complementary insight on
the mathematical structures underlying the mechanics of that
process.


A partial motivation for the present work is provided by our
previous  study of normal coordinates in the space
of undecorated rooted trees, where we discussed their relevance
to the concept of
k-primitiveness and their role in the process of renormalization.
We showed there that for undecorated ladder trees, or to that
effect for non-branched trees with only one decoration (such as in rainbow
diagrams), the renormalization of the associated normal
coordinates is a one step procedure. However, when the diagrams
for a theory involve more than one decoration (as is usually the
case) ladder normal coordinates are in general no longer primitive,
even though one can still expect them to posses a milder pole
structure than that present in the rooted tree coordinates. Also there
were some pertinent questions left open in the above cited paper
concerning the physical interpretation of those normal coordinates
and whether perturbation theory could be formulated directly in terms
of them without having to go first through the algebra of rooted trees
or Feynman diagrams.
The Hopf algebras considered here provide to some extent answers to these
questions.


The paper is structured as follows: In section 2 we begin with a brief review of
the main steps that lead to the
perturbative expansion of the transition amplitude, and describe its relation to
the Hausdorff series and to the associated Hopf algebras for which the power sum functionals
are primitives. In subsections 2.1.1-2.1.3 the free algebra related to these
structures is discussed and it is shown that the functional primitives are linear combinations of the Hall polynomials that generate the Lie subalgebra of our free algebra. We also show that this Lie subalgebra admits a derivation endomorphism with respect to which all the primitives are cyclic vectors generated by the free propagator. The diagrammatic representation of the primitives in terms of Hall trees is also discussed in this section and shown to give a clear image of this cyclicity and of the iteration process by means of which the -vertex connected Green functions can be constructed from
the -vertex ones.  Section 3 is devoted to the study of the
algebraic Birkhoff decomposition in the context of the Hopf algebras here considered, and the possible relevance of these algebras to the
the process of renormalization through the implementation
the twisted antipode axiom of Kreimer and Connes, combined with the Mass
Independent Renormalization Scheme. This procedure thus allows us


to derive the expressions
that relate bare and physical parameters of the theory, the equations
of the renormalization group and the renormalized Green functions.




























Algebraic Structures in Perturbation Quantum Field Theory 

Let us begin with a brief summary of the essential steps in PQFT
leading to the Green functions, with the dual purpose of making our presentation
self contained as well as for identifying the basic mathematical and physical
entities to which the Hopf algebras considered here are related.


For an arbitrary field theory the Euclidean
transition amplitude (the formulation in Minkowski space is achieved by analytic continuation) is given by
 
Here  denotes the set of fields appearing in the theory, and
 denotes the set of arbitrary currents introduced to drive each
field.
Using functional derivatives the amplitude () can be rewritten as
 
where 
 is the Lagrangian of interaction written in terms
of functional derivatives of the field currents , and
 is the free generating
functional. The symbol  stands for
integration over the variable  (after acting to the right with
the functional derivative). Note that the functional derivatives
with respect to the currents act according to the Leibnitz rule on
the term , and functional derivatives that
go through to the right of that term cancel
when acting on . Thus here  is a functional and not an operator.


To simplify our exposition we shall consider the neutral
scalar  theory in Euclidean 4-dimensions when doing
explicit calculations. It is well known that this theory is
renormalizable and a clear discussion of the steps leading to its
renormalization may be found in. For this case  the transition
amplitude in () reduces to
 
and () becomes
 
where
 
 
 
and
 
is the Feynman propagator in 4-dimensional Euclidean space.


Writing  and rearranging ()
results in
 
where, in order to make both sides of the above equation
consistent, we have explicitly included the action on the identity
function of the operator inside the logarithm, so as to cancel
derivations to the right of . Now let
 
where the second equality is the formal power series expansion of the first one in terms of
the coupling constant  in the potential.
If we further define
 
it then readily follows from () that
 

Note that in the theory of symmetric functions an
expression like () relates the complete homogeneous symmetric functions to
the so called power sum symmetric functions or Schur polynomials, so we can use the
combinatorics of that theory




to write down the explicit (invertible) relation between the functionals  and the ,
as homogeneous polynomials of order  in the latter. This is given by
 
where  is a composition  of
nonnegative integers,  is its weight,
 is its length and 
.
In terms of the Feynman diagrammatic representation, the  correspond to linear
combinations of connected graphs each with  vertices. 


Defining the operator
 
where the adjoint operator in the second equality is defined as
the right normed bracketing: 
, one can verify that the functionals
 introduced above are given by the recursion relations
 
where  denotes the action of the operator () on the
identity function. 


In the same way that  generates a recursion relation for the functionals ,
we will show bellow that a derivation operator can be defined which when acting on the
 leads to expressions analogous to (). We first analyze some of the
algebraic structures behind the operators occurring in () and ().



Algebraic Structures 

As mentioned in the Introduction, one of our goals in this paper is to
investigate the relevance to the process of renormalization of
Hopf algebra primitives that occur naturally at a prediagram stage
in PQFT. Therefore these primitives must be related to the two entities appearing
in the perturbation expansion of the transition amplitude, i.e.  the complete
homogeneous symmetric functionals and the power sum symmetric functionals.

From the theory of symmetric functions we know that one can
associate respective Hopf algebra structures to these two sets of
functionals for which the  are primitives. In
addition to the above, there is a free algebra generated
by the operator  and the functional 
for which the  are also primitives. We describe these
three Hopf algebras which are related by the following diagram
 
 





















The Free Algebra  and its Hopf Algebra Structure 
Let  be the unital free associative 
-algebra over a field of characteristic
zero (including ) and
generated by the two-letter alphabet 
 of non-commuting
variables, with concatenation as multiplication and unit (neutral)
element  the empty word.
Let  be the
infinite dimensional free Lie algebra on  where its elements
are submodules of  with Lie bracket as multiplication.
 is the enveloping algebra of . We can give
 a Hopf algebra structure by defining a
primitive coproduct on the alphabet letters:
 
and extending it to words by the connection axiom. The antipode is given by
 
and is extended to words by the antihomorphism
 
The counit map  is defined on the generating letters by
 
and is extended to words by the connection axiom.
All the elements (Lie polynomials)  are primitives of this Hopf algebra:
 
and
 
where  is the coefficient in  of the unit element.













We introduce now on  a derivation  which maps 
 onto 0, and
 onto  by means of the operator
 
Clearly  is an endomorphism on .



Since  and 
 do not commute, the action of the derivation
 on an arbitrary function of  is given by
:
 
and, in particular,
 
where in going from the third to the last line we have made use of
(). Moreover since 
, we immediately get
 
Using now once more the fact that  is a derivation, we have that the exponential
map  is a homomorphism of algebras and
 
Furthermore, since  is a continuous homomorphism,
 
where
 
Writing
 
we obtain from () and () the Hausdorff series relation
 

Let us now define
 
which exhibits the operators  as cyclic vectors with respect to  generated by ,
and rewrite , introduced in (), as
 
where 
 is defined recursively by 


, 

, and the upper index
 in the sum above is the degree of the functional derivative in
 (=4 for the  theory).


It clearly follows from this and () that the cyclic vectors  are elements
of  and, hence, primitive elements of the Hopf algebra .


In addition, since  is also an endomorphism on  there is a
Hochschild cohomology associated with this algebra for which  is a 1-cochain
 with coboundary
 

Evidently , because of (),  so the Lie polynomials , and
in particular the , are 1-cocycles for this cohomology.



Note that by applying both sides of () to the identity function and
recalling () we recover (), with the functional  given by
 
Furthermore, since the  are made up by linear combinations of Lie
monomials that do not cancel when acting from the left on the identity they are obviously
also elements of  and primitives of the Hopf algebra .






 











We can derive a recursion relation for the cyclic functionals 
by observing that the right side of () can be written as
 
In particular, for 
 
which is in agreement with () and ().


To further see how to interpret the right side of
() for , use () and note that in
order to take into account the fact that the identity cancels
functional derivatives acting on it, we must first apply the 
derivations in () to  following the Leibnitz rule,
evaluate each of the resulting derivations on  inside the
commutators by acting on the identity function according to
(), and finally act with the resulting bracket
polynomial on the identity. Thus


 


 

Iterating on the above, we get the general recursion relation
 
It should be recalled however that in the implementation of () one has to take
 
, perform the derivations to the required order and then
  evaluate on the identity function. 





We can express the above results in graphical form by making use of Hall trees.
To this end recall that each Hall tree  of order at least 2 can be written as , where  and  are the immediate left and right subtrees, respectively, and such that the total ordering 
  
is satisfied. This ordering is lexicographical and is determined by the letters in the alphabet  that label the leaves. Also, each node in a tree corresponds to a Lie bracket and the foliage  of the tree is the canonical mapping defined by  if  is in  and  if  is of degree .
Now, since a Hall word is the foliage of a unique Hall tree, and since for each Hall word  there is a Lie polynomial , it can be shown that these Hall polynomials form an infinite dimensional basis of the Lie algebra  viewed as a -module.  Parenthetically, one also has that the decreasing products of Hall polynomials ,  form a basis of the free associative algebra .

Consequently, using the ordering  for
our two letter alphabet  and the algorithm given in the proof
of Theorem 4.9 in, we can always write the 's, 
as derived from () and (), as linear combinations
of Hall polynomials (equivalently Hall trees). Thus, for example 
 
so
 


and
 

 


Note that () and () for the functionals  and 
imply acting on the identity function from the left with the diagrams and replacing
in addition  the  in the foliage of () by . The corresponding Hall tree for  is obtained by grafting () onto each of the branches labeled with  and implementing the above mentioned algorithm. The procedure is then iterated to whatever order of the 's one is interested.





















 
 
  
   
 






 
 
 
















































By a straightforward calculation one can verify that the final expressions for  and
 in terms of propagators for the  theory are


 

 
The expressions for higher order 's are increasingly more lengthy, but amenable
to a systematic derivation by the above procedure. This we have done by developing a
REDUCE program which confirms the results given above.













































The Hopf algebra  

As we have seen in Eq.() the power sum symmetric functionals  appear
naturally in PQFT as a result of a perturbative expansion (in the coupling parameter of
the theory)
of the transition amplitude. In terms of the  these  are
 given  (cf  Eq.())
by the Schur polynomials. Using as generators the 's, one can construct a
 universal enveloping
algebra  by introducing a Poincare -Birkhoff-Witt basis

, and defining multiplication  as the disjoint union of the elements of
this basis. Further,
a coalgebra structure can be generated by defining the coproduct  
and a counit  as the augmentation of the algebra by
 


We can give this coalgebra the structure of a Hopf algebra by additionally
defining an  antipode  as
 the involutive homomorphism (because of commutativity)
 
where  is the coproduct operation with the primitive contributions removed.


Since  is commutative, by the Milnor-Moore
theorem there is a cocommutative Hopf  algebra in duality with it
which is necessarily isomorphic to the universal enveloping
algebra , where  is a Lie
algebra.
The generators  of  are infinitesimal characters
of , i.e  they are linear mappings
 fulfilling the conditions :
 
We shall denote by  the set of
infinitesimal
characters of .
Note that  is Abelian, since the coproduct in  is cocommutative.


The exponential mapping 

, equipped with a convolution product  and unit :
 
together with the inverse
 
generates a subgroup  of the group of characters of .


 is dual to the Hopf algebra  and it is multiplicative,
i.e. 
it satisfies
 

Moreover, from () and the fact that the Lie algebra of 

is Abelian, we have that the convolutive product in our case reduces to
 

The Hopf algebra  

The Hopf algebra  induces another Hopf algebra
 by applying a change to normal coordinates
 to our original Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt basis,
 constructed from the  coordinates, by means of the map with the canonical element
  which acts as an identity map, i.e. :
 

It is not difficult to verify that the non-linear relation between the 's
and 's
resulting from () is given by (), and that the 's acquire a
primitive coproduct
 
and an antipode given by
 
Note that since () is invertible .

As a parenthetical remark we point out that the normal coordinates that we construct here
differ from those recently discussed in in relation to the Hopf algebra
of rooted trees, by the fact that in the context of the latter the
comultiplication given by () corresponded to non-branched trees,
and that for the more general case of branched trees it was determined by application
of the Baker-Hausdorff-Campbell formula.































Hopf Primitives and Connected Green Functions 

 In order to establish explicitely the relation of the  functionals to the Green functions,
observe that because the n-legged connected Green functions in PQFT are obtained from the functional variation
 
we have that
 
where  are the Euclidean Green functions resulting
from adding all the connected Feynman graphs with  vertices and
 external legs ( is even for the  theory). Note also that () contains
contributions from the Green functions  which
correspond to vacuum terms. These contributions may be absorbed in
the 
  term in () via the normalization constant .

















The analytical expressions for the graphs composing the Green
functions result, in general, in ultraviolet divergences, and the
standard procedure for removing them is to first apply dimensional
regularization and then successively the Forest Formula. It is at
this stage where the Kreimer-Connes Hopf algebra formalism
provides an important insight into the underlying mathematics
behind the Forest Formula of renormalization. Indeed, by noting
that each Feynman diagram corresponds to a decorated rooted tree
(or a sum of decorated rooted trees in the case of overlapping
diagrams) and that these rooted trees, as well as the diagrams
themselves, are the generators of respective universal enveloping
Hopf algebras, these authors have shown that the operation with a
twisted antipode on the algebra provides a systematic application
of the Forest Formula and, consequently, a systematic procedure
for generating the counterterms needed by the theory in order to
cancel the unwanted infinities. Connes and Kreimer further show
 the relation between the algebra of characters,
dual to their Hopf algebra, and the Birkhoff algebraic
decomposition. A detailed exposition of these ideas may be found
in the papers cited in the Introduction.

Here we only stress once
more the fact that in our approach we deal with the Hopf primitives

rather than with Feynman
graphs directly. As we have seen, these Hopf primitives are
Lie polynomials where each monomial is a
Hall tree that itself corresponds to a sum of Feynman diagrams
with -vertices each and an equal number of external legs and loops.
This last observation can be read off directly from the word composed
by the foliage of a Hall tree. First because the number of external legs 
in the Feynman diagrams constituting a Hall tree is given by
 
where
* 
so all Feynman diagrams composing a given Hall tree have the same number of external legs.
Second, because the topology of the Feynman diagrams implies that the number of
loops is fixed by the number of vertices and the number of external legs
by the relation
 
where  is the total number of legs per vertex (=4 for the  theory),
and  is the number of loops, so also all Feynman diagrams composing a Hall tree have the same loop number. 


In order to see how the above discussed algebras and their primitives relate to renormalization, let us begin
by reviewing the essential ideas behind the algebraic Birkhoff decomposition.







The Algebraic Birkhoff Decomposition

 and Renormalization 

Let  denote the (unital) -algebra of meromorphic functions
on the Riemann sphere with poles at the origin, and
let 
 be the set of unital -algebra homomorphisms
 , considered as a -algebra
 under the convolution product:
 
where  is any word over .

Note that the elements in  are in a one-to-one
correspondence with the A -loop 
, via the bijection:
 
We therefore have the group homomorphism
 

Furthermore, let  be a
Birkhoff sum of the -linear multiplicative subspaces 
 and  , where 
z^-1   and
(C -0)
Holom (C). The projection 
 satisfying the multiplicative constraints
( is also known as the Rota-Baxter operator and () bellow as the
Rota-Baxter relations)
 
allows us to define the K-linear map  by
means of the iterative equations
 
The homomorphism , having its range in , is then given by the algebraic
 Birkhoff decomposition
 
Moreover, since the Lie polynomials 's are primitive to start with, we have that
() results in
 
so  is minus the principal part of the Laurent series expansion of
 about the origin,
while () and () yield
 

Observe that () may be related to the Connes-Kreimer twisting ansatz for the
antipode by making the identifications
 
and
 
where the subscript  here denotes the specific choice
of a renormalization scheme satisfying ().

Let us now apply formally the homomorphism 
 to the antipode axiom for
. We thus get
 
where  and  indicate that these operators now act on the
Hopf algebra of functions in .
This result, however, is not very useful for renormalization
purposes so, in order to be able to take into account the degree
of freedom allowed in renormalization due to the fact that
arbitrary scales occur as a result of the dimensional
regularization procedure, we
replace the antipode  in () by a twisted
antipode , using  the relation 
, following Connes and Kreimer procedure. We thus have
 
where now the right side is no longer strictly zero for
, but is only zero modulo terms
which we shall show correspond to the renormalized diagrams contained in the
.

Making use of (), () together with () and ()
in the left side of (), we get
 

Consequently, the antipode axiom has now become a homomorphism map from
primitives in the algebra  to
the algebra of holomorphic functions with range in .


In the next subsection we will show how the Hopf primitives  together
with their linear algebraic Birkhoff decomposition (),
and the specific choice of
the Mass Independent Renormalization Scheme, for which we know
that there are no finite contributions to the counterterms and for
which it can be shown that the multiplicativity of
 is compatible with the multiplicative constraints
(), lead to the basic equations of renormalization and the finite
and physically correct renormalized Green functions in PQFT.

Renormalization 

Let us denote by  the radius of an infinitesimal circle in the
Riemann sphere, and begin by identifying the mapping 
 of the Hopf algebra indeterminates 
with the functionals ,
after regularizing and redefining  so it remain dimensionless in
the regularized space of dimension . That is, we let
 
From (), (), () and () we then
have
 
Here
 
where we have put the projector  inside of the integration in the second
term of () after taking into account that the currents  are
good test functions, so the pole structure of the integrals is determined
by that of the Green functions.
In addition, this projection by  to  of the connected Green
functions is taken to be given by the Mass Independent Renormalization Scheme.


Note that since the power to which the letter 
occurring in a word describing the polynomials in 
 corresponds to the number of vertices in each of its
associated diagrams, we can therefore use this criterion to
introduce a gradation in the free Lie algebra  .
Moreover, since the diagrams in each  have the same
number of vertices and since ,
their subindex denotes their gradation in this algebra. Also note
that the linear decomposition  used to
derive () is only made possible
by the primitiveness of the 's in the Hopf algebra here considered.


Now, even though the left side of () is finite (because the right hand
is by construction)  when , the theory is only
renormalizable if the terms  in the left
side of () can be canceled out by a counterterm Lagrangian which, in
the regularized dimension , is of the form
 
Adding () to the original  Lagrangian
 
yields then the renormalized Lagrangian 
 of the theory,
after taking .


In terms of the bare field and bare parameters
 
we can write
 
The  associated to (), where the subscript 
denotes evaluation in terms of the bare parameters, can be written as
 
where we have incorporated the  in the last summand by making
use of (). Furthermore, note that by adjusting the  in 
we can set it equal to one, and rescaling in addition the bare currents by means of
 
(the inverse of the first equation in ()) and Fourier
transforming, we get  
where a symbol with a tilde is used to denote the Fourier
transformed variable, and 
 stands now for integration over momentum space.


In the Mass Independent Scheme the counterterms contain no finite contributions and
are polynomials in inverse powers of  with coefficients depending only on ,
so renormalization implies writing the bare parameters as:
 
and evaluating the coefficients in (). This is done by
substituting these equations into the right side of ()
and applying the requirement of finiteness of the resulting
expression, order by order in the . Finding the
coefficients in () to all orders of  is
tantamount to renormalizing the theory. One then obtains in
general that
 
where  are finite
functions in , depending on the previously evaluated
coefficients in (), and are also explicitely determined
by that process. Substituting () in the right side of
() and again setting  by choosing the
ill-defined constant  in it appropriately, we finally arrive at
 
where we have defined
 
These are the renormalized Green functions of the theory.


For the scalar  theory used here to exemplify our discussion,
one finds that to order :
 
and
 
where  here denotes the Euler-Mascheroni constant.


It is at this stage that we can make contact with the Forest
Formula or with its Hopf algebra equivalent of Kreimer and Connes.
Indeed, we have seen that the theory is renormalizable if and only if
() can be solved consistently for the coefficients of the bare
parameters. But only then we will have that


 
where the right side corresponds to the twisted antipode axiom formulation of
the Hopf Algebra of Renormalization (without the primitive contributions of the
coproduct), and the blob file=fig1.eps,height=6mm,width=1.3cm  with
 external legs denotes the -vertex 1PI Green functions.
Thus for our example
 
which is in agreement with ().


Note however that because the mass dependence of the coefficients in the bare parameters has been dropped in the Mass Independent Renormalization scheme, the renormalization group equations are much easier to integrate yielding recursion relations for these coefficients. So, if the theory is renormalizable, many of them can be calculated indirectly from the residues of the  bare parameters without the aid of Feynman diagrams. This would then provide an alternate way to evaluate the  corrections to the Green functions. 

Indeed, recalling that the renormalization group equations are obtained from ()
by making the change
of scales , and using the Euler trick (differentiate ()
with respect to  and set ) we get, for a scalar field theory, 
 
where
 

Clearly the solutions to the coefficients appearing in () greatly simplify in the Mass
Independent Renormalization Scheme since, as noted before, in this case the counterterms
contain no finite contributions and depend only on .
Thus, differentiating  () with respect to  one finds
that:
 
These equations are linear ordinary differential equations which depend only on the
value of the
residues in (). Having the expressions for
, , , one can solve in principle ()-(),
obtaining therefore the  energy scale dependence of  and  to a
 given order of . Hence their importance.


Moreover, the necessary finiteness of ,  and
 results, in addition to ()-(), in the
following recursion relations for 
) 
 
 
so, when solving for the coefficients of equal powers of  in the above equations, all the parameters in () can be obtained from the knowledge of the residues of the first order poles of the ,  and .


Discussion 
As already mentioned in the Introduction, given that a theory is renormalizable, the Hopf Algebra of Renormalization developed by Connes and Kreimer provides insight into the mathematical structures behind the Forest Formula and is extremely useful in numerical calculations since it gives a systematic procedure (subject to computer programming) for evaluating the renormalized Green functions. In a parallel vein, the Hopf algebra  investigated here, and in particular Eqs (),
() and () which result from considering its primitives together with their Birkhoff decomposition in the Mass Independent
Renormalization Scheme, help to exhibit some complementary  mathematical structures associated with the Hausdorff series expansion of perturbation theory and to the requirement of compatibility in the
solution for the constants in the bare parameters
of the theory (cf  () for our  example) which is essential to indeed achieve
renormalizability and arrive at physically meaningful entities. That is,
if and only if the theory is renormalizable the 's can be canceled
out by adjusting the coefficients in the bare parameters, order by order in the
perturbation parameter , in a consistent manner. This process will then
generate in general additional terms in  which when added to the
's yield the renormalized expressions. 


We have shown the relation of the 's to the Hall polynomials, and that of their graphic representation in terms of Hall trees to the Feynman diagrams. Also, making use of the  cyclic vector character of the 's with respect to the derivation endomorphism , which appears as part of the structure of the Lie subalgebra of , we have obtained a systematic procedure (also subject to computer programming) for constructing all the Green functions of the theory starting from the generator . Moreover, since each action of  introduces an additional vertex in the commutators conforming the 's, one could hope that a further study of this operator and its possible deformations would result in further mathematical insights on the process of renormalization. 


Finally, it has been conjectured that
because of the interplay of Quantum Mechanics and General 
Relativity at the Planck scale, space-time ought to be regarded 
as a derived concept whose
structure should follow from the properties of Quantum Field Theory.
PQFT, albeit its limitations
at distances of the order of the Planck length, is the only computational
tool available at present, and so the elucidation of the
mathematical structures behind that theory is a suggestive first step in 
pursuing this line of thought. 


We wish to conclude by adding to our previous remarks concerning
the exclusive use in our formalism of the  primitives of
the free Hopf algebra ,  that this is due to the fact that
we have worked with the connected Green functions associated with
the functional . If we had worked instead with the
generating functional  and its corresponding Green
functions, then the full algebras  or  
would be needed.




Acknowledgment.  The authors acknowledge partial support from CONACYT project G245427-E (M.R.), DGAPA-UNAM grant IN112401 (H.Q.), and DGAPA-UNAM grant IN117000 (J.D.V.).


 99 

 D. Kreimer, On the Hopf algebra structure of perturbative quantum field theories , Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 , 303-334 (1998).

D. Kreimer, On overlapping divergences , Commun. Math. Phys. 204 , 669-689 (1999).

D. Kreimer, Combinatorics of (perturbative) quantum field theory , Phys.Rept. 363 , 387-424 (2002), hep-th/00110059.

  A. Connes and  D. Kreimer, Hopf algebras, renormalization and noncommutative geometry ,  Commun. Math. Phys. 199 , 203-242 (1998); A. Connes and D. Kreimer, From local perturbation theory to Hopf and Lie algebras of Feynman graphs ,  Lett.Math.Phys. 56 , 3-15 (2001).

 A. Connes and  D. Kreimer, Renormalization in quantum field theory and the Riemann-Hilbert problem I: the Hopf algebra structure of graphs and the main theorem , Commun. Math. Phys. 210  , 249-273 (2000); A. Connes and  D. Kreimer, Renormalization in quantum field theory and the Riemann-Hilbert problem II: the -function, diffeomorphisms and the renormalization group , Commun. Math. Phys. 216 , 215-241 (2001).

 R. Grossman and R.G. Larson, Hopf-algebraic structure of families of trees , J. Algebra 126 , 184-210 (1989).

 F. Panaite, Relating the Connes-Kreimer and Grossman-Larson Hopf algebras built on rooted trees , Lett. Math. Phys. 51 , 211-219 (2000).

 M. E. Hoffman, Combinatorics of rooted trees and Hopf algebras , arXiv:math., CO/0201253.

 P. van der Laan, Some Hopf algebras of trees , arXiv:math., QA/0106244.


 C. Chryssomalakos, H. Quevedo, M Rosenbaum and J.d. Vergara, Normal coordinates and primitive elements in the Hopf algebra of renormalization , Commun. Math. Phys. 225 , 465-485 (2002).


 P. Ramond Field Theory. A Modern Primer , Frontiers in physics: Lecture Notes Series 51. Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Coompany Inc., 1981.

 I.G. Macdonald, Symmetric functions and Hall polynomials , Oxford Math. Monographs, Oxford university Press, 1995.

 I.M. Gelfand, D. Krob, A. Lascoux, B. Leclerc, V.S. Retakh and J.Y. Thibon,
Noncommutative Symmetric functions , hep-th/9407124.

 C. Reutenauer, Free Lie Algebras ,  London Mathematical Society Monographs New Series, Oxford University Press Inc, 1993.

 D. Kastler, Fields Institute Communications  XX  (2001), math-ph/0104017.

 D. Kreimer, Chen's iterated integral represents the operator product expansion , Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3  , 627-670 (1999).

 J.C. Collins, Scaling behavior of  theory and dimensional regularization , Phys. Rev. D, 10 , 1213-1218, (1974).

 D.J. Broadhurst and D. Kreimer, Renormalization automated by Hopf algebra ,
J. Symb. Comp. 27 , 581 (1999).

A. Connes and D. Kreimer, Lessons from quantum field theory , Lett.
Math. Phys. 48 , 85-96 (1999).



Renormalization group equations, Hopf primitives and the -function 

We have seen above that integrating () over , after replacing () in the left hand side, yields an expression for the scale dependence of the coupling parameter  and, furthermore, that the -function is uniquely determined solely from the knowledge of the residues of the bare coupling  parameter. Here, making use of the results in the last two papers cited in, we discuss the additional 

relation between the residues of the poles in  and the residues of the normal coordinates . That such a relation exists is suggested by considering the left side of (). Thus for example, for the four legged  Green functions in the  theory the first term is the four legged vertex with bare parameters which, when substituting (), reads
 
Clearly, since  is finite, the poles in () must be canceled by the poles from the remaining four legged diagrams in . This will then, in particular, relate the residues in the bare parameters in terms of the residues of the primitives .

More precisely, consider the flow  





Here  is an element of the Lie algebra  generated by the
infinitesimal characters  introduced in Sec 2.1.2;  is the inverse in the group  of
 
with 
valued in the enveloping Lie algebra  so that , , and  is a one parameter automorphism group of the algebra , while  is a derivation grading on this algebra such that  multiplies each Hall tree in  by its respective loop number (cf.  Sec 2.2).


Since  is a loop which when paired with the indeterminates  yields the scale dependent unrenormalized theory in the regularized space, it follows from the Birkhoff decomposition (for details we refer the readers to the last two papers in) that the function  is holomorphic and constant on the whole Riemann sphere, so
 
or, by (),
 
where the residue of the map  is defined as
 

Consequently
 
where in going from the first to the second equality and from the fourth to the fifth one we have made use 
of () and (), respectively.


Applying now the operator  to both sides of Eq() and evaluating at , , with no propagators for the external legs, one thus obtains
 
Comparing this last expression with ()) it follows that

















 


           




          






                                      
                                        
                                                                                                                                                                           
     
            

Re                    Im                             



          
          









                         
     