
0 


  cdsw - version 1.0  






draftcontrol0 



by 60
255 
255 by-60255 by:255<10 0255  
//    




















































 


  #1  

 

  
   
   Abstract 1000
   
     
 







             to  
        -to   
     to   
           






                   




















#1                    
                    *() to -0.2cm#1   
                    equation  
                     
                    #1           
                                            
                                                                                 


  
    #1 #1  
  
    [#1]#2 #2  
  
    #1  
                  
                           
           
           

























11in 
     -.3in   
   -.6in 















section 









A  
A  
  
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
G  
H  
I  
J  
K  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
Q  
R  
S  
T  
U  
V  
W  

C  
N  
P  
Q  
R  
Z  

 
 
e  
i  
  

i.e.  
e.g.  

2mm 1cm  #1  




 
 
 
 
 

  
() 
z  

  
y  

  
x  

  

  
W  
A  
D  
E  
L  
R  
  
  
  
d ^#1 #2 
 #1 
#1#1   #1    
tr _tw (-1)^F  
tr _un (-1)^F  
 
 

 
J  
J _coset  
K  
  
  
^  
^  
A ^  
V  ^2  
 ^un  
 ^us  
 ^tw  
 _ ^+  
 _ ^-  
 _ ^  

    #1 _#2    
height.#2pt  
 width.#2pt height#1pt #1pt
 width.#2pt height.#2pt    

  12 15  9 12  6.3 9  4.5 9    


  #1    ) 






height #1 width #1
#2 width #1  height #1 )  
to #1to #1)   
1.3pt 0.4pt 8pt)    

  
 
 
 
 
c.c.  
M 
N 
M 
C  
H  
M  
R  
X  
Z  
 
 
 
12  
#1  #2    
d#1  d#2    
_#1 d#2 2i   
Tr   
tr  
Re  
Im  
Ext  
adj  
even  
odd  
lcm  
diag  
 #1 
#1 
 #1 
#1 
 
 
#1  
#1  
/ D 
A  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  
T  
L  
M  
N  
O  
P  
Q  
S  
V  
W  
X  
^#1 (#2)  
t  
[#1] 
 
#1  
sgn   
 
I 
IA 
II  
 a 
 b 
TeV  
hyperkahler   
Hyperkahler   
A  

 
ZZ  ZZ  
.9ptZZ  
1.2ptZZ  ZZ  
IB  
   
ID  
IE  
IF  
  
  
IH  
II  
IK  
IP  


X  

height1.5ex width.4pt depth0pt 
 mod  
 
 
_A   
  
g g^-1  
at 7pt
IR  
  
_ (v, w)  
height 4.1pt depth -.3pt width .25pt   
im   
ker   
cok   
End   
Hom  
id  

r  
ch  
c  
Td  
A 
L 
e  
p  
 

 
Z  
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
1l   1l   1l   1l    

l_s 
m_s 
g_s 
l_P^10  
l_P^11  

m_brane   
v_brane   







  
  
  
  
 Z  
 P  
 RP   


 WP  
 special Lagrangian 
 ^n 
 ^n 


#1 
#1 



 SO 
 Sp 
 SU 

 W_tree  
 W_eff  

 ( 
   )   

#1  


Chiral Rings, 
Superpotentials and the Vacuum Structure of 
 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
 
                                              

CALT-68-2431 

USC-03-01 

TAUP-2722/03 

hep-th/0303001 

February 2003 

Andreas Brandhuber, Harald Ita, 
Harald Nieder, 
 Yaron Oz 
and Christian Romelsberger 

Department of Physics 

California Institute of Technology

Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 

  Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

School of Physics and Astronomy

Tel-Aviv University , Ramat-Aviv 69978, Israel

Department of Physics and Astronomy 

University of Southern California 

Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA 

 

We use the Konishi anomaly equations to construct the exact
effective superpotential of the glueball superfields in various
 supersymmetric gauge theories. 
We use the superpotentials to study in detail the structure of the
spaces of vacua of these theories.
We consider chiral and
non-chiral  models, the exceptional gauge group  and
models that break supersymmetry dynamically.
 

1.5cm 



Introduction 

The strong coupling dynamics of  supersymmetric gauge 
theories in four dimensions is clearly of much 
theoretical and maybe physical importance.
Recently Dijkgraaf and Vafa made a beautiful conjecture 
that the F-terms of a large
class of  supersymmetric gauge theories can be computed
exactly by a large  computation in a bosonic matrix model.
The assumption is that the relevant fields in the IR are the glueball
superfields  and the conjecture provides means of computing their 
exact effective superpotential.
This is done by evaluating the planar diagrams of the matrix model.
The generic glueball superpotential is a sum of 
Veneziano-Yankielowicz
logarithmic superpotential terms 
and an infinite perturbative sum in the .
Thus, even if the matrix model is not solvable, one can still compute
the superpotential to arbitrary power of  by evaluating matrix
model diagrams.

In it has been shown for a theory with adjoint matter 
that the loop equations for the matrix
model associated with the  gauge theory are equivalent to the generalized Konishi
anomaly equations. Besides being a nice observation by itself, the
loop equations can sometimes be powerful enough in order to solve 
the large  matrix model. Also, one can forget about the 
matrix model and study the Konishi anomaly equations by themselves.
This will be the approach that we will take in this paper.

The aim of this paper is to study various types of  
supersymmetric gauge theories and to compute the exact glueball effective 
superpotential by using the Konishi anomaly.

We analyze the vacuum structure of those theories.
This approach works for chiral and non-chiral theories as well as theories
with exceptional gauge groups. One can even study theories with
dynamical supersymmetry breaking.



The paper is organized as follows: 
In section  we discuss the general strategy and its 
limitations.
Limitations can be of different sorts. One could be that there are
not enough equations to solve for the superpotential.
Another requirement is the existence of a supersymmetric vacuum, which
limits the analysis of models that break supersymmetry.
In section  we analyze  gauge theory with matter in the
fundamental representation and a quartic superpotential.
We analyze the different classical and quantum vacua and compute
the exact quantum superpotentials. We show how motions in the
parameter space of the theory interpolate between different vacua.
In section  we analyze a gauge theory based on the exceptional
group  with matter in the fundamental representation. Again, we
compute the exact superpotential and discuss the vacuum structure.
In section  we discuss a chiral model and 
perform a similar analysis.
Results are in agreement with other methods.
In section  we analyze the IYIT model that breaks 
supersymmetry dynamically.





In the appendix we prove (under certain conditions)
the one-loop exactness of the (generalized) Konishi anomaly
equation. This result is used in the previous sections.




The Classical and Quantum Chiral Rings 



In this section we discuss some aspects of the classical and quantum
chiral rings of four-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theories.
The discussion parallels the one in.
 
We denote the four-dimensional Weyl spinor supersymmetry generators by 
 and .
Chiral operators are operators annihilated by
.
For instance, the lowest component  of a chiral superfield
 is a chiral operator. 
The OPE of two chiral operators is nonsingular and allows for the definition 
of the product of two chiral operators. The product of chiral operators is 
also a chiral operator. 
Furthermore, one can define a ring structure on the set of 
equivalence classes of chiral operators modulo operators of the form
,.

Consider a general  supersymmetric 
gauge theory with gauge group  and some matter supermultiplets.
Denote by  the vector superfield in the adjoint representation
of , by  chiral superfields in a representation 
 of  and by  their lowest component. 
The field strength (spinor) superfield is 
 and  is a chiral superfield.
Using products of  and  we construct chiral 
operators(In this paper we denote by  
the supersymmetric field strength as well as its lowest component, 
the gaugino.) .
They satisfy the relation 
W_^(r) ^(r) =0


modulo , terms, where we noted that  transforms in a 
representation  of the
gauge group .  with 
being the generators of the gauge group  in the representation .
The relation () implies in particular
W_^(r) ,W_^(r) =0  .
We will be interested in the sector of gauge invariant chiral operators. 
These can be constructed as gauge invariant composites of 
 and  taking the identity () into account.
We will call the chiral ring the ring of equivalence classes
of gauge invariant chiral operators modulo 
.
An important element of the chiral ring is the glueball superfield 
S=-1 32^2 W^2  .
  







The gauge invariant chiral operators made of the matter multiplets
parametrize the moduli space of
vacua of the supersymmetric gauge theory.
It is therefore of interest to find the relations among the
elements of the chiral ring which
constrain the structure of the moduli space. These relations can be 
different in the classical and in the quantum theory. 






The Classical Chiral Ring Relations 

Let us comment first on the relations in the classical chiral ring. 
There are two types of relations. The first are kinematic ones
which are associated with group theory and statistics and contain no 
dynamics of the classical theory. One such relation is
S^G+1 =0  ,
or an even stronger relation
chirrelb 
S^h^ =0  ,
where  is the dual Coxeter number of the group .
The last relation has been proven in for
 and in for gauge groups  and .
It has been  conjectured to hold for all simple groups.
Another example of a  kinematic relation is
^n=(,,^N)  ,
with  an adjoint field in a  gauge theory and .

The second type of relations in the classical ring are the
dynamical relations given by the variation of the tree level 
superpotential 
chirrelc 
  =0  .
These relations are not gauge invariant but can be implemented in a
gauge invariant way.
For instance by 
  =0  ,
with appropriate extraction of the gauge invariant parts of the equations.

For a generic tree level superpotential the relations ()
fix the moduli space of the theory up to a discrete choice. 
This means that we can solve these relations 
(possibly together with kinematic relations) 
and fix all the gauge invariant chiral operators made out of matter fields.

The Quantum Chiral Ring Relations 

The classical chiral ring relations have quantum deformations. 
In general it is hard to find the quantum deformations unless 
there are enough symmetries in the theory.
However the classical relations arising 
from () have a natural 
generalization as anomalous Ward identities of the quantized matter 
sector in a classical gauge(ino) background. 
If  transforms in a representation 
 of the gauge group , 
then the classical superpotential relation () 
transforms in the dual representation .
It has to be contracted with a chiral operator   in a
representation  
such that the decomposition of the
tensor product  contains a singlet
representation. This yields a classical chiral ring relation
 .
This relation can be interpreted as a classical Ward identity for the
Konishi current

D^2J= .
This Ward identity gets an anomalous contribution in the quantum
theory. In general  is a function of  and the generalized 
Konishi anomaly takes the form 
genkonishi 
D^2J=
_i +1 32^2 W_ _i ^j
W^ _j ^k_i  ,
where ,  and  are gauge indices and their contraction
is in the appropriate representation. 
This Ward identity has tree level and one loop contributions. 
In order to prove that there are no higher loop or nonperturbative 
corrections to this identity one has to use symmetry arguments 
and asymptotic behavior in the coupling constants 
(see the appendix for a proof under certain conditions).



Since the divergence  is -exact it vanishes in a 
supersymmetric vacuum. Taking the Wilsonian expectation value of 
() in a slowly varying gaugino background, we get
chirreld 
_i  _S
+1 32^2 W_ _i ^j
W^ _j ^k_i  _S
= 0  .
This relation will be our main tool to determine
the effective superpotential.




The Effective Superpotential 






We will be interested in determining the effective 
superpotential  for the glueball superfield 
 with the matter fields  being integrated out. 

The strategy we will use is as follows.
We first use the gradient equations for  in the tree level 
superpotential couplings. For a tree level superpotential 
g_I _I  ,
where   are gauge invariant chiral operators,  we get
gradeqn 
g_I =_I _S  .
The expectation values are taken in a slowly varying (classical)
gaugino background. 
We then use the chiral ring relations () to solve for the 
 in terms of the  and the coupling constants . 
In order to solve these relations we use the factorization property
_I_J _S=_I _S_J _S 
of expectation values of chiral operators in a supersymmetric vacuum.

We insert the solutions into the gradient equations () 
and determine the effective superpotential up to a function , 
which does not depend on the . 

We can determine this function by 
semi classical arguments in certain limits of the coupling constant space,

 where the low energy dynamics is described by pure SYM.


The strong IR gauge dynamics is then captured by a Veneziano-Yankielowicz 
type superpotential.
If there are several such limit points, there are consistency checks one 
can do. 



























 with Fundamental Matter 
In this section we will consider  supersymmetric gauge
theories with  gauge group and matter in the 
fundamental representation. We will use SQCD with one flavor
as a representative model to outline our technique.
Due to the small number of generators in the chiral ring
the usual Konishi anomaly suffices to obtain the effective superpotential.
Using the full effective superpotential we will
then analyze the vacuum structure of the model.
We discuss also various generalizations.   

 with One Flavor 

Let us start by considering SQCD with gauge group  and one flavor.
This theory was studied in the matrix model context in 
Seiberg:2002jq,Argurio:2002xv,McGreevy:2002yg,Suzuki:2002gp,
Bena:2002kw,
Demasure:2002sc,
Tachikawa:2002wk,Argurio:2002hk,Naculich:2002hr,Bena:2002ua,Feng:2002zb,
Feng:2002yf,Ookouchi:2002be,Ohta:2002rd,Bena:2002tn,Hofman:2002bi,
Roiban:2003uq,Feng:2002is,Demasure:2002jb,Suzuki:2002jc 
-.
The theory is 
non-chiral and has one fundamental matter multiplet  and one 
antifundamental matter multiplet . There are only two gauge 
invariant chiral operators one can build out of the fundamental
fields, the meson  and the 
gaugino bilinear . To begin with let us assume the tree level 
superpotential
 
Note we have chosen a rather simple superpotential to illustrate our
method but in principle we could take an arbitrary polynomial in the
meson field. The theory with ()
has two classical vacua at  and . 
In the first vacuum the gauge group is unbroken, whereas in the second 
vacuum the gauge group is broken to .

The Konishi variation  leads to the
relation
 





We also have the relations
 
If we use the factorization properties for the chiral operators 
we get a quadratic equation for 
 
Now we get two differential equations which control the 
dependence of the effective superpotential on the bare couplings 
 
 
By taking the classical limit  in the above equations we find that
the  sign corresponds to the classical vacuum  and the  sign
to .
These two equations can be integrated to give the following superpotential
 
where  is an  dependent integration constant.


 To determine  we proceed as follows. In the classical vacuum 
the matter fields have mass . If we take , where 
 is the dynamically generated mass scale we can integrate out
the matter fields in perturbation theory. 
Hence, we separate the pure gauge dynamics from the dynamics of the
matter fields. We will take care of the pure gauge dynamics in the strong
coupling regime by an appropriate Veneziano-Yankielowicz term.
We concentrate first on an 
effective action  for 
obtained by integrating out the matter fields in perturbation theory.
As explained in the terms of  
linear in  come from integrating out the matter fields at one loop.
Higher loops depend on the bare couplings in the tree level superpotential
and are thus already included in ().
The contribution  can thus be determined by an explicit one loop calculation.

Note that in general this requires that we have a classical vacuum where all the 
matter fields are massive around which we can do perturbation theory.
However, this method also works for vacua
where all the matter degrees of freedom are eaten up by the Higgs mechanism.
This will prove especially useful in the case of chiral models
where we cannot have mass terms for the matter fields.







Right now we consider perturbation theory around the classical vacuum .


The perturbative superpotential at an energy scale  is given by
 
where  is the UV cutoff. Substituting
 
amounts to replacing  by  in ().
Since we compare () to a one loop calculation around the vacuum 
we have to choose the branch with the  sign.
Matching then the contributions of  in () and 
() gives
 
We have to include the strong coupling dynamics by replacing
(This amounts to replacing .)  
 

Finally matching the scale  of the pure SYM according to
 
we find the full nonperturbative superpotential
 













Alternative Derivation of  

To gain confidence in this result, we can give an alternative 
derivation of () based upon the 
ILS linearity principle. 
If we consider the tree level superpotential as a perturbation to the low energy physics
we can first forget about the superpotential and consider  SYM with one massless
flavor. Along the flat direction parametrized by  the gauge group is generically broken
to .







We thus expect an appropriate effective description in terms of a pure 
SYM obtained by Higgsing the original  with one flavor.
The effective superpotential for the  theory is just
the Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential
 
We have to relate the scale  of the Higgsed theory 
to the scale  of the original theory. This is 
done at the scale set by the meson expectation value . We have
 
such that
 
Adding the tree level potential will localize the meson expectation value
at the quantum vacuum. This localization is equivalent to integrating out
 from the effective superpotential. However, the quantum expectation value of the
meson as a function of  is given by the Konishi relation ().
So if we add the tree level superpotential () to ()
and replace  by the quantum expectation value  
given by the Konishi relation as
 
we exactly reproduce the full nonperturbative superpotential
given in (). This gives us a nice consistency check.

Relation to the Vector Model 

The anomaly equation () can also be derived from the zero 
dimensional vector model
dQ dQ e^-1 g_s (Q Q)   .
The Ward identity for the variation  is
g_s N_VM = Q Q _VM =mM _VM +2
M^2 _VM   .
Making the identification , one reproduces the anomaly equation. 
In the planar limit  factorizes and we get the same result as 
before. 

The Vacuum Structure 

The expression for the effective superpotential has two branches for the two 
signs of the square root. These correspond to the two classical vacua. One 
can make an expansion for small  in both branches to 
recover  vacua in the one branch and  vacua in the other. This is 
the expected result from the semiclassical analysis since we expect the 
unbroken gauge symmetries to confine in the IR.

The quantum vacua are at the critical points of , i.e.  they satisfy
eq:qveq 
[  ^3N_c  S^N_c    
(1 2  1 2 
1+8 m^2 S )]  = 0  .   
This can be simplified to
eq:onflmod 
  S^2N_c-1 -S^N_c-1 -z=0 ,
S = S ^3  ,
z=^3 2 m^2  .
From this equation it is possible to understand the quantum parameter space. 
It is given as the complex surface, associated to the analytic continuation 
in  of the gaugino condensate 
.

Naturally, from the polynomial equation we expect  sheets. 
There is an order  branching point at  and 
an order  branching point at .  
The remaining  branching points are double points located at
the roots of the equation
 
At the double points two zeros of the polynomial () 
coincide, such that its first derivative vanishes. 
Since this is equivalent to the second derivative 
of the superpotential, we generally expect massless glueballs 
at these points. This implies that the mass gap disappears at those
points, unless the Kahler potential also gets singular.


plot01.eps  
Monodromy around  for : we follow the positions of the vacua in
the  plane as we take a small, not completely closed circle
around . 
The un-Higgsed vacua, corresponding to the smaller outer circles,
are not interchanged, whereas the big circle corresponds to
the four Higgsed vacua which get interchanged as we change the
phase of .
 

At the point  we expect to find a clear distinction 
of Higgsed and un-Higgsed quantum vacua. And actually for small z the above 
equation factorizes to  
(where we used ) 
and . These give  vacua for the 
Higgsed branch and  for the un-Higgsed one with the appropriate scales 
 and . 



plot02.eps  
Here we can see the motion of the vacua of the  theory
in the  plane as we vary the parameter  along a small 
circle around a root of (). 
The un-Higgsed vacua correspond to the smaller outer circles,
whereas the bigger, inner circles correspond to the Higgsed vacua.
Most interesting is the rightmost big circle in which we can see
the exchange of an un-Higgsed with a Higgsed vacuum.
 



Circling  corresponds to rotating the scale  
and thus changes from one quantum vacuum to the next in the Higgsed branch 
(see Fig. ). 
Circling the bulk branch points 
changes from quantum vacua in the Higgsed branch to the un-Higgsed one 
(see Fig. ). 
If we take  to be large, then the  vacua arrange themselves
symmetrically on a circle and the monodromy at infinity 
exchanges them in a  symmetric manner.
So at  both branches look similar, which seems natural, 
as the minima of  degenerate ( is like 
).  
The structure of the quantum parameter space for other models 

has been discussed recently
in.

The Massless Limit 

It is interesting to analyze the massless limit of our SQCD model. 
As stated above this corresponds to the limit  in the
quantum parameter space.
From the 
analysis of the quantum parameter space we expect that the 
two branches join to give the  vacua. 
Indeed, the effective superpotential () has a finite 
 limit on both branches
and we can recover the  vacua from either branch.
If we start on the un-Higgsed branch (the  branch of ())
and take the massless limit we obtain
 
Minimizing with respect to  gives the  vacua
 
We can compare this result with the Affleck-Dine-Seiberg analysis of the same
system. In this approach the exact effective superpotential(
The ADS superpotential can also be obtained from our 
glueball superpotential by a Legendre transform in  and subsequent
integrating out of .) 
in the massless case is given by
 
Looking for the mesonic vacua we find
 
As expected the vevs () and () satisfy the Konishi relation
 
obtained from () in the massless limit. We thus get a nice 
picture of the  vacua of the massless model if we think of them as 
obtained in the massless limit of a massive model.











 with  

We will now turn to a generalization of the above procedure to the case of
, with a simple tree level superpotential. The effective superpotential
can be derived again with the use of the Konishi relations. With the 
superpotential at hand, we investigate the vacuum structure 
of the model. Many of the classical vacua 
turn out to be connected in the quantum parameter space. 
  
The model we consider is  SQCD with  flavors and tree 
level superpotential,
 
with  the meson . This superpotential breaks 
the  flavor symmetry to a diagonal . The diagonally 
embedded  is responsible for the baryon number conservation.

The classical vacua can be understood in terms of the meson field . 
First, we rotate the meson matrix  to diagonal form by flavor 
rotations.

Then the tree level superpotential allows that  eigenvalues
sit at zero and  at the minimum . (With the condition
.) In total we have  choices to distribute 
the eigenvalues of the meson.

Starting from a classical vacuum  we have a clear expectation
 of the quantum theory for the parameter in the range 
 and .
That is, for energies much higher than the meson expectation values  and 
the squark masses , we expect to see  gauge dynamics with  
almost massless quarks. (We assume an appropriate UV-completion of the above 
tree level potential.) Lowering the scale below the squark masses 
and the meson expectation values, but still 
above , we expect to find pure  supersymmetric gauge dynamics
with scale .
Finally, for energies below  one finds confinement 
with  supersymmetric vacua. Starting from this well known vacuum 
structure we will extend the knowledge of the vacuum structure
to the case  and  
in the following.

To this end we have to use the Konishi relations. 
The flavor dependent Konishi anomaly 
variation  leads to
 
We can solve for the diagonal entries of the meson . 
Here we pick  eigenvalues to converge to the vacuum  and 
 eigenvalues to converge to  in the classical limit, . This amounts to 
choosing branches for each of the eigenvalues in (). The traces 
then have the vacuum expectation values
 
Note that this will break the diagonal  flavor symmetry to 
, leaving  massless Goldstone bosons.

In order to find the effective superpotential we can integrate 
the two gradient equations
 m =M _S, 
  =M^2 _S.
By matching the integration constant, such that the appropriate VY potential is 
reproduced in the limit  
and , we can determine the effective superpotential 
 
This effective superpotential does not depend on the massless Goldstone 
modes, since they are true moduli by symmetry. This is like integrating 
out the radial direction in a Mexican hat potential.

The scales in this model are the UV scale , the scale 
 for the theory with  massive quarks around 
, and the scale  for the theory with  
massive quarks around  and  Higgsing quarks,
 

The Vacuum Structure 

Let us understand this result better in the limit of small . One finds 
 vacua with the appropriate scale plugged in. By analytic
continuation in the parameter space,
we can change the sign of the square roots, i.e.  exchange the role of 
 and . Then for small  we find  vacua corresponding to  
Higgsing squarks. As in the case ,  these classical 
vacua are smoothly connected in the quantum parameter space.

The critical points of  are the supersymmetric ground states of
the theory. For a given branch of   
they are given by the following equation for ,
Nfbigger 
  [ 
 ^3N_c  S^N_c    (1 2  +1 2 
 1+8 m^2 S )^N_f^+ (1 2  -1 2 
 1+8 m^2 S )^N_f^- ]  = 0  .   
For  this has  solutions. However, we have to
take into account that the  and  branches can be distributed in
 
different ways on the  meson eigenvalues. 
Hence, the total number of vacua is
_r=0 ^N_f  (N_c-r) (     ) = (2 N_c - N_f) 2^N_f-1   .
The Case  

 We would like to discuss now the above results
for the special case . More specifically we consider the two branches:
 and .
In the first branch all meson vevs are zero
at the classical level, the gauge group is unbroken and confines in the IR 
giving rise to  vacua. In the second case all meson vevs are non-zero, 
the gauge group is broken to nothing and classically there is a unique 
ground state.

Now we look for the quantum vacua by analyzing (). It turns
out that the  case has  solutions and the vevs are given by
 
with .
In the limit of small  the gaugino 
condensate reduces to , the vacua of 
pure  gauge dynamics. There are  points 
, where the gluino condensate vanishes.

The other case with  is more subtle but a careful analysis of
() shows that there is an extremum at  under the 
condition that 
. These are no 
new solutions, but just the points with  from (). 
The fact that the gauge group is completely broken on the  branch
is consistent with the vanishing of the gluino condensate.




We see that the full parameter space has  sheets, where 
each of them has two 
distinguished points, one corresponding to a vacuum of pure  
gauge dynamics and the other to a fully Higgsed vacuum. We will 
find this structure useful when considering dynamical SUSY breaking.

We would like to close this section with the observation, that the 
expectation value of the meson  satisfies(Although we have discussed 
only the extremal cases  and  the quantum
constraint from () can be verified also for a generic eigenvalue 
distribution for .) 
  
all over the parameter space. On the other hand we can consider the 
generalized Konishi variation 

 which leads to
the relation
(mN_c+2M)B=0,
where  is the baryon. This implies . Similarly, we can show
that . This shows the validity of the relation
M-BB=^2N_c  .
More General  


Let us now illustrate how to implement more general tree level 
superpotentials
(M)=_j=1 ^ng_j j M^j  .
in SQCD with . In that case the Konishi constraint yields
_j=1 ^ng_jM _S^j=S  .
This equation has  solutions for . Inserting this into 
the gradient equations
 g_j =1 j M _S^j
one can solve for . To see that these gradient equations are 
integrable, we have to show, that there is no curl in the flow. First note
0= g_k (_jg_jM _S^j-S)=
(_jjg_jM _S^j-1 )M _S g_k +M _S^k  .
Using this we get
 g_k 1 j M _S^j=-M _S^j+k-1  
_llg_lM _S^l-1    .
This shows that the flow is integrable. The integral is again fixed up to a 
function only of , which has to be fixed by asymptotic behavior. Here we 
have  asymptotic regions. One asymptotic region has unbroken  
gauge group, i.e.   confining vacua. In each of the other asymptotic 
regions the gauge group is Higgsed down to , i.e.  there are  
 vacua, giving rise to a total of  vacua.  

The Massless Limit Revisited 

We can now use a more general tree level superpotential to calculate the
effective superpotential for the massless case. We use a technique
that will be crucial in dealing with dynamical supersymmetry breaking and
with chiral models where no mass term is possible.

Our aim is to calculate the effective superpotential for
a tree level superpotential
 
One possibility in this model is to add a mass term,
apply our technique and then send  as we have already
done in a previous section.
The other possibility which  is applicable also for chiral models, is
to add a tree level term which gives a classical vacuum
where the gauge group is Higgsed.
We will take
 
The classical vacua are then  and
.
If we solve the Konishi relations as usual we get (for the Higgsed branch)
 
On the Higgsed branch we can easily match it to the 

 Veneziano-Yankielowicz potential for , whereas on the un-Higgsed
branch a matching 

seems impossible
due to the massless flavors.

Introducing the strong gauge dynamics, we fix the full 
effective superpotential to
 
where the upper sign corresponds to the Higgsed branch
and the lower sign to the un-Higgsed one.

We want to recover the effective superpotential for the
case . This limit is not sensible
on the Higgsed branch since 

its vacua run off to infinity.
The crucial ingredient is that the full superpotential also
knows about the un-Higgsed branch, so we can just change the branch
and take the limit  there. 
If we do that we indeed recover the result ().
This approach will be used later for the chiral model and models
with dynamical supersymmetry breaking. 































































Gauge Group  with Three Flavors 

In this subsection we will study  SQCD with exceptional
gauge group .
We will concentrate on the case with three flavors in the real 
fundamental  representation. This case is instructive
because it requires the introduction of a baryon operator in
addition to mesons, it has an instanton generated superpotential
 and exhibits an interesting vacuum
structure.

The Effective Superpotential 
Using the primitive invariants of
 we can construct seven gauge invariant operators. 
Six of them correspond to mesons
 
where  is a symmetric matrix, 
and the seventh operator is the baryon
 
where 
 is the  invariant three-tensor which also 
appears in the multiplication table of imaginary octonions.
Note that capital letters, , denote flavor indices 
whereas small letters, , denote gauge indices.

For vanishing tree level superpotential the classical theory possesses
a  flavor symmetry.
For concreteness we will study the theory in the presence of
the tree level superpotential
 
By a flavor rotation we can always make the mass matrix
 diagonal, but as a further simplification we assume
that all masses are equal 
 
which leaves a  flavor symmetry unbroken. 
From here on we will, therefore, 
consider the  indices as  indices.

Let us now analyze the extrema of the model with this tree-level
superpotential at the classical level. The F-term constraints read
 
whereas the D-term constraints are
 
The  are generators of  in the fundamental representation.
They furnish a subset of the  generators and hence are
anti-symmetric in .  
There are two solutions to () and (): 
in the first
 and the gauge symmetry is unbroken, in the second
, after flavor and 
gauge transformations, which leaves an  gauge symmetry
unbroken. In the semi-classical regime the matter fields are all
heavy and can be integrated so that the total number of quantum
vacua is the sum of the Witten indices of  and 
SYM. This means that we expect six confining vacua with broken
chiral symmetry.

In order to construct the Konishi anomaly relations and its 
generalizations we have to consider two kinds of transformations: 
 
and
 
By contraction of the variations with  we
obtain the tree-level contributions to the Konishi anomaly which can
be expressed as classical constraints for the gauge invariant meson and 
baryon operators
 
and
 
In these variables the two vacuum solutions turn out to be
 
and
 

Taking into account the one-loop exact correction to the
Konishi anomaly we find(
Note that the 2 in front of the gluino operator  is due to the 
fact that the index of the fundamental  representation of  is 2,
whereas the fundamental of  has index 1.
) 
 
In particular the second line, which corresponds to a generalized
Konishi anomaly, does not receive quantum corrections in this particular
case. The two solution to these quantum relations are:
 
where the  corresponds to the classical vacuum with vanishing
vevs and  corresponds to the Higgsed vacuum with non-zero vevs.
Using 
 
we can solve for the perturbative part of the effective superpotential
 

Matching this in the UV to the  theory with three fundamental
chiral multiplets we can fix . We find
 
where . Looking at the leading  
terms for the two possible branches of the square roots in () 
we find  extrema, hence, there are six vacua
as expected.


The Vacuum Structure 


The quantum vacuum manifold is described by the extrema of
(). Combining both branches one is led to the
polynomial equation
 
The complex surface defined by equation () has six sheets
and there are branch points at  and 
at the roots of .



plot11.eps  
The trivial 
monodromy around  as seen in the  plane. The un-Higgsed
vacua, corresponding to the smaller outer circles, are not
interchanged, whereas the two circles in the middle correspond to the
two Higgsed vacua which move around each other but come back to
itself. 

In order to understand the physics near the critical points we study
the monodromies around them. The situation near  is depicted in
Fig. 3. More precisely we are taking a small loop around  and
see, contrary to the case of SQCD, that the monodromy is trivial. The
four un-Higgsed vacua of the unbroken  theory correspond to the
four outer vacua and stay where they are. The two vacua in the middle
of the picture, which correspond to the vacua where  is Higgsed
to 
(Generically this  theory confines and has two vacua,
but we call them Higgsed vacua here to distinguish them.) , loop around
each other but eventually return to their starting positions.  In the
limit  the gluino condensate 
 goes to zero, but this is not related to the 
appearance of a chirally symmetric vacuum. Actually, the two vacua show
run-away behavior as can be seen by inspecting the meson vevs and
 which both are driven to infinity in this limit.

More interesting are the critical points located at the roots of
. In Fig. 4 it can be seen that three of the un-Higgsed
 vacua (outer circles) and one of the Higgsed vacua (circle in
the center) remain at their original location. However, in the big
circle on the right hand side of the picture we see the exchange of
one Higgsed with one un-Higgsed vacuum.


plot12.eps  

Monodromy around  as seen in the  plane. The
un-Higgsed vacua correspond to the smaller outer circles, whereas the
bigger inner circle corresponds to a Higgsed vacuum.  Most interesting
is the rightmost big circle in which we can see the exchange of a
un-Higgsed with a Higgsed vacuum.   

Finally, we discuss the monodromy at . For large  the
six confining, chiral symmetry breaking vacua arrange themselves
symmetrically on a circle. However, the monodromy 
 does not exchange the vacua in a  symmetric fashion but
rather acts like a  rotation on two groups of three vacua, i.e.  vacua are simultaneously exchanged in the sequence 
 and . This behavior can also be
anticipated by the fact that the equation for the quantum parameter
space () factorizes. To summarize, the combined actions of
the monodromies permute the six vacua which are organized in two
groups of three but does not lead to exchanges between the two groups.







A Chiral  Model 
In this section we apply the developed methods to chiral theories.  We
will start with a model that has well-defined supersymmetric ground
states at the quantum level, and defer the study of the interesting
case of dynamical supersymmetry breaking to a later section.

For concreteness we consider the case of  with two
antifundamentals  and one antisymmetric tensor 
.  The relevant gauge
invariant operators are
 
and
 
where the capital  denote flavor indices and the small  denote 
color indices. We want to find the effective superpotential for
a theory with the following tree level superpotential 
 
The classical vacuum is given by . Since this is a chiral model
we cannot introduce mass terms for the matter fields. We thus cannot
separate the gauge dynamics from the dynamics of the light fields at a
perturbative level and the matching to a one loop calculation will in
general fail. Therefore, we try the technique we have already applied
successfully to the massless SQCD case in section
. A deformation of the tree level superpotential
will give a classical vacuum where the gauge group is Higgsed. If all
the light matter degrees of freedom are eaten up by the Higgs
mechanism we can reliably match the effective superpotential below the
Higgsing scale to a one loop calculation in the remaining gauge
group.

We will argue that the following deformation of the tree level
superpotential will give us a classical vacuum with the desired
properties
 
The classical vacua have to satisfy the F-flatness conditions
 
which have two solutions  and , 
.
In addition we have to satisfy the D-flatness conditions
 
where we have taken into account that the 
generators are traceless.
Using gauge and  flavor rotations we can parametrize the 
solution to these equations as follows:
 
where D-flatness requires .

From this we can see easily that the gauge group is broken to
. First the  break  and the subgroup
of  that leaves invariant the lower four-by-four block of 
is .  At the same time 25 out of the 27 matter fields are eaten
up by the Higgs mechanism. The two remaining matter fields are massive
singlets under the .  Hence, at low energies the theory becomes
pure glue.

The anomalous Konishi variations give
 
with  such that we have
 


The perturbative part of the effective superpotential can then again
be determined by using gradient equations, it turns out to be
gh 2 (-11+4 gh S )+
Sgh+2S(1+4 gh S )+C(S)
 .
As can be seen from () the upper  sign corresponds
to the un-Higgsed branch, whereas the lower  sign corresponds
to the Higgsed branch.

 To determine  we match the effective superpotential
to the Veneziano-Yankielowicz potential of the (classically) 
unbroken gauge group on the Higgsed branch.


We know that on the Higgsed branch below the Higgsing scale
the theory is described by pure  glue.
If we take for the purpose of matching the bare parameters
 then the unique Higgsing scale is 
. 






 The strong coupling dynamics
of  are described by
 
where the scale  of the  is related to the scale
 
of the  by the usual matching of scales at the Higgsing scale
 as
 
Demanding that the effective superpotential reproduce the 

potential () below  we fix the . 



We find the full effective superpotential
 
If we want to recover the superpotential for the theory with
 we have to go to the un-Higgsed branch which corresponds
to the upper  sign.  We emphasize again that we have used the
semiclassical region of the  Higgsed branch to determine the
integration "constant" , but once we have obtained the full
effective superpotential we can use its analytic structure and move
freely among the branches.

In the  limit on the un-Higgsed branch we thus
obtain
 
This effective superpotential precisely reproduces the 
5 vacua which were found  e.g. in 
 by instanton calculations
 




Dynamical SUSY Breaking 
We now want to see how the chiral ring and the Konishi anomaly can be used 
to understand theories with dynamical supersymmetry breaking. Naively,
we cannot apply the method we used in the previous sections, since 

there is no supersymmetric vacuum.

However, one can deform the original
tree level superpotential to get supersymmetric vacua in which we can make
a reliable calculation of the effective superpotential.
One can then analyze the behavior of the 
vacua when switching the deformation off again.

To be specific we discuss a variant of the 
Izawa-Yanagida-Intriligator-Thomas (IYIT) modelwhich features dynamical supersymmetry breaking (DSB). 
The model is  supersymmetric  gauge theory with 
 fundamental chiral multiplets , (
),
and a gauge singlet chiral multiplet , which is antisymmetric in the 
indices . The gauge invariant matter fields of this theory are the meson 
 and .
Note that we will denote both the gauge singlet and the
glueball superfield by . However, the former always carries flavor 
indices, so no confusion should arise.
We consider the above theory with a tree level potential given by
 
where  is the symplectic form.
This model has been studied in .
The effective superpotential is 
 
Integrating out the Lagrange multiplier field  and the gauge singlet
 we get(The Pfaffian of  is defined here as 

, 
such that .) 
 
From these equations it follows that the above superpotential has a 
minimum only when
 
This is the condition on the bare parameters for unbroken supersymmetry.

Massive Deformation 


We now turn to the problem to derive () without knowing
the superpotential ().  



In order to guarantee
the existence of a supersymmetric vacuum, we can deform the tree level
superpotential in such a way that there is a classical vacuum in which
all matter becomes massive.  This allows to implement the strong IR
dynamics and the full quantum theory has supersymmetric vacua. When
turning those deformations off, we will see, that all the vacua run
away, unless () is satisfied.

We deform the above theory by giving the gauge singlets  
a mass . The tree level superpotential is 
 
where . This potential has many vacua. 
Two of them will be important in the following. 
The vacuum with all squarks massless at  and . 
It exists also for . 
The other one is the massive vacuum, with  and .
Around the second classical vacuum we can integrate out the massive fields, such 
that in the IR we are left with pure gauge theory. 

To obtain the Konishi relations we consider the variations
, and 
. These give rise to the following 
respective relations
 

After straightforward algebra one can solve for the expectation values of 
the chiral operators,
 
where we used flavor rotations to bring  to diagonal form and
 denotes a choice of a vector with components . The
number of  entries in  will be denoted by .
 Note that  corresponds to the massive vacuum, as can be seen 
in the classical limit of  small.  corresponds to 
the classical vacuum, which exists also for .

The expectation values of the chiral composites then read,
 
Integrations with respect to the various parameters then 
gives the perturbative part 
of the effective superpotential . By matching 
 to the VY potential, which describes the pure 
gauge dynamics around the classical vacuum
 and , gives the following
effective superpotential,
 
The derivative  then leads to
 
For  this can be solved explicitly to give
 
In total we find  vacua for each point of the parameter space. 
The massive vacuum can be found in the limit of small . 
The classical vacuum which exists also for  corresponds
to the points .




















For generic points in the parameter space with 
 arbitrary the zero mass limit gives run-away vacua. 
Only for  and  
we find finite expectation values in the  limit.
The vacuum with  and 
 stays finite, whereas the 
other vacua still run away.
We recover the quantum constraint on the parameters ().

 As is by now familiar
we expect to recover
() directly if we calculate the effective superpotential
for the theory with  by switching branches and taking the limit
. The other branch corresponds to 
and sending  to zero gives
 
 It is interesting that  appears just as a Lagrange multiplier
for the constraint () in this superpotential.
A similar appearance of  in the effective superpotential
was observed in.

This method can be generalized to other models with dynamical 
supersymmetry breaking. A mass term will typically produce a supersymmetric 
quantum vacuum. In the limit of turning off the mass, one can 
see how the quantum vacua run away, except for some vacua, which might 
stay finite for certain choices of the other parameters.
We can see here the mechanism by which the Witten index jumps, when the 
highest couplings in the tree level superpotential are switched off.

An Alternative Derivation 

In this section we will derive () using the 
Konishi anomaly without using a mass deformation.
Our strategy will be to assume unbroken supersymmetry, so that
we can use the Konishi anomaly relations and derive an effective 
superpotential as a function of . 
Minimizing this effective superpotential with respect to 
 should lead to ().

To obtain the Konishi relations we consider the variations
, and 
.
These give rise to the following respective relations
 
The equations () contain a lot of valuable information. As usual,
they enable us to derive the dependence of  on the bare parameters.
Rewriting () as
 
we can solve for  to get
 
However, due to the factorization of the chiral vevs we can also 
rewrite the conditions in () as 
 
and solve for  and . We get
 
We have now gathered enough information to turn to the derivation of 
the full . First, we think of 
as a mass for the fundamental chiral multiplets and integrate them out.
This will give us an effective superpotential as a function of 
. 
Note that in this model the canonical mass term for the fundamentals
is  such that the canonical mass
is expressed as .
A perturbative evaluation then yields
 
Note that we have already taken into account the
contribution of the bare coupling  enabling us to replace the 
UV cutoff by the dynamically generated scale.
The part  will be determined by the requirements that 
(a) the extremal value of  satisfy the second 
equation of () and that (b) the superpotential 
obtained after integrating out  have the appropriate dependence 
on the bare parameters (). 
Both requirements uniquely fix the effective action to 
 
Indeed, after integrating out  and replacing the first part 
by the appropriate Veneziano-Yankielowicz term, we find
 
which has the appropriate dependence on the bare parameters.
After taking into account that  the effective superpotential 
simplifies to
 
This is the expected expression ().
Minimizing with respect to  gives the relation
 




 
The work of A.B. and C.R. is supported in part by funds  
provided by the DOE under grant number DE-FG03-84ER-40168.
The work of H.I, H.N. and Y.O. is supported in part by the US-Israel
BSF and the TMR network.
We have greatly benefited from discussions with Richard Corrado, 
Jaume Gomis, Nick Halmagyi, Vadim Kaplunovsky,
Kristian Kennaway,   
Krzysztof Pilch, Tadakatsu Sakai, Cobi Sonnenschein and Nicholas Warner.
Y.O. would like to thank the theory group in Caltech for hospitality
during the initial stages of the work. 



 

Proof of One Loop Exactness of the Konishi Anomaly 

In this appendix we want to show how the proof for the one loop exactness of the generalized Konishi anomaly works. We follow the idea of. We concentrate on the normal Konishi anomaly for SQCD with one flavor for concreteness. It is easy to generalize this proof to other cases.

There are two flavor symmetries  and  together with an R-symmetry . Those symmetries are broken by the tree level superpotential and by anomalies. By promoting the coupling constants to chiral superfields, which transform under those symmetries, we can restore those symmetries. The charges are summarized in the following table
 
We want to calculate the lowest component of the Konishi anomalies for
konsym 
QQ+Qand QQ+Q.
Let us concentrate on the first Konishi anomaly. We want to calculate the 
divergence of the supercurrent associated with the first transformation
in ()
D^2J=D^2Q^e^V Q= q q+(,)
in a slowly varying background gaugino field. The lowest component of this expression is a chiral operator. This chiral operator depends (modulo  exact operators) only on other chiral operators and it depends only holomorphically on the coupling constants. Furthermore we assume, a smooth weak coupling behavior, i.e.  the coupling constants can only appear with positive integer powers. The scale  can only appear in positive integer powers of , because the leading non-perturbative effects at weak coupling are due
regular instantons and, in particular, 
we do not expect fractional instantons to contribute. 
We also assume, that all fields can only appear with positive powers, i.e.  
that there is no singularity at the origin in field space.

The divergence  has the charges . Charge conservation then gives constraints on the powers in which all the fields and coupling constants can appear
eqn:chargecons 
n_Q1 0 2 3  
+n_Q 0 1 2 3  
+n_W_ 0 0 1 +n_m-1 -1 2 3  
+n_-2 -2 -2 3  
+n_^3N-1  1 1 6N-2 3  =
0 0 2 
The first two equations imply . Subtracting four times the first equation from the third equation, we get
n_W_ +2n_m+2n_+(2N-2)n_^3N-1  =2.
For  this implies, that , i.e.  there are no nonperturbative contributions. This, together with the first equation of the charge conservation, leaves us with three kinds of solutions
threecases 
 
We now need to determine, which kinds of diagrams can contribute in each of 
those three cases. To this end we need to look at the Feynman rules. Since 
we want to calculate correlators with only chiral fields as external legs, 
which depend holomorphically on the coupling constants, there are only three 
kinds of vertices, that can contribute.
 
The vertex of the current
   ,
The vertex due to the superpotential
^2  ^2  
The coupling to the gaugino
^W_^ .

The first two kinds of vertices come with a coupling constant, whereas the 
third kind corresponds to the insertion of background gaugino field. 
Therefore, the number of vertices in a diagram is given by
V=_j n_g_j +n_W_ ,
where the coupling constants are denoted by .
The number of propagators can be determined by counting the number of internal legs on those vertices
P=(_j n_g_j l_j+2n_W_ -n_),
where  is the number of legs (bosonic and fermionic) on the vertex .
We can combine those two results to get the number of loops  in a diagram(This is the number of momentum loops, not the number of index loops in a ribbon graph.) 
L=1+P-V=1+(_j n_g_j (l_j-2)-n_).
Inserting the previous results () into this formula we see, 
that there are only tree level and one loop diagrams contributing to the 
lowest component of the Konishi anomaly, i.e.  the anomaly is one loop exact 
and we can trust our expressions. This argument can easily be generalized to 
theories with different gauge groups and matter content, and also to the 
generalized Konishi anomaly. It is easy to see that a sufficient condition
for the one loop exactness of the generalized Konishi anomaly is
eqn:indexcond 
2C(adj)-_I 2C(r_I)>2,
where the sum is over all matter fields and  is the index of the
representation . This condition is satisfied in most of the cases we 
study. However, if () is not satisfied, 
one needs to study the full set of charge conservation equations, in 
analogy to ().
Sometimes the one loop exactness can fail, e.g. for too 
small gauge groups or for a 
sufficiently large number of external legs,  dependent terms can 
appear, which
correspond to non-perturbative corrections to Konishi anomalies. We have not
found an argument for the absence of such terms in general, but for the 
purpose of calculating superpotential such corrections do not appear in the
examples studied in this paper.


 [2]#2 thebibliography 10 

R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa, "Matrix models, topological strings, and
  supersymmetric gauge theories," Nucl. Phys.  B644  (2002) 3-20,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0206255 hep-th/0206255  .


R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa, "On geometry and matrix models," Nucl. Phys. 
  B644  (2002) 21-39,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207106 hep-th/0207106  .


R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa, "A perturbative window into non-perturbative
  physics,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0208048 hep-th/0208048  .


G. Veneziano and S. Yankielowicz, "An effective lagrangian for the pure N=1 
  supersymmetric YANG-MILLS  theory," Phys. Lett.  B113  (1982)
231.


F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg, and E. Witten, "Chiral rings and
  anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theory," JHEP  12  (2002) 071,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211170 hep-th/0211170  .


E. Witten, "Chiral ring of Sp(N) and SO(N) supersymmetric gauge theory in four
  dimensions,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0302194 hep-th/0302194  .


K. Konishi, "Anomalous supersymmetry transformation of some composite
  operators in SQCD ," Phys. Lett.  B135  (1984)
439.


K.-i. Konishi and K.-i. Shizuya, "Functional integral approach to chiral
  anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theories," Nuovo Cim.  A90 
  (1985)
111.


N. Seiberg, "Adding fundamental matter to 'Chiral rings and anomalies in
  supersymmetric gauge theory' ," JHEP  01  (2003) 061,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212225 hep-th/0212225  .


R. Argurio, V. L. Campos, G. Ferretti, and R. Heise, "Exact superpotentials
  for theories with flavors via a matrix integral,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0210291 hep-th/0210291  .


J. McGreevy, "Adding flavor to Dijkgraaf-Vafa ," JHEP  01  (2003)
  047,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211009 hep-th/0211009  .


H. Suzuki, "Perturbative derivation of exact superpotential for meson fields
  from matrix theories with one flavour,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211052 hep-th/0211052  .


I. Bena and R. Roiban, "Exact superpotentials in N = 1  theories with flavor
  and their matrix model formulation," Phys. Lett.  B555  (2003)
  117-125,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211075 hep-th/0211075  .


Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik, "Effective matter superpotentials from Wishart 
  random matrices," Phys. Lett.  B553  (2003) 105-108,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211082 hep-th/0211082  .


Y. Tachikawa, "Derivation of the konishi anomaly relation from
  Dijkgraaf-Vafa  with (bi-)fundamental matters,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211189 hep-th/0211189  .


R. Argurio, V. L. Campos, G. Ferretti, and R. Heise, "Baryonic corrections to
  superpotentials from perturbation theory," Phys. Lett.  B553 
  (2003) 332-336,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211249 hep-th/0211249  .


S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer, and N. Wyllard, "Matrix model approach to the
  N = 2  U(N)  gauge theory with matter in the fundamental representation,"
  JHEP  01  (2003) 015,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211254 hep-th/0211254  .


I. Bena, R. Roiban, and R. Tatar, "Baryons, boundaries and matrix models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211271 hep-th/0211271  .


B. Feng, "Seiberg duality in matrix model,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211202 hep-th/0211202  .


B. Feng and Y.-H. He, "Seiberg duality in matrix models. II ,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211234 hep-th/0211234  .


Y. Ookouchi, "N = 1  gauge theory with flavor from fluxes,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211287 hep-th/0211287  .


K. Ohta, "Exact mesonic vacua from matrix models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212025 hep-th/0212025  .


I. Bena, S. de Haro, and R. Roiban, "Generalized Yukawa  couplings and matrix
  models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212083 hep-th/0212083  .


C. Hofman, "Super Yang-Mills  with flavors from large N(f)  matrix models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212095 hep-th/0212095  .


R. Roiban, R. Tatar, and J. Walcher, "Massless flavor in geometry and matrix
  models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0301217 hep-th/0301217  .


B. Feng, "Note on matrix model with massless flavors,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212274 hep-th/0212274  .


Y. Demasure and R. A. Janik, "Explicit factorization of Seiberg-Witten 
  curves with matter from random matrix models,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212212 hep-th/0212212  .


H. Suzuki, "Mean-field approach to the derivation of baryon superpotential
  from matrix model,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0212121 hep-th/0212121  .


R. Dijkgraaf, M. T. Grisaru, C. S. Lam, C. Vafa and D. Zanon,
"Perturbative computation of glueball superpotentials,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211017 arXiv:hep-th/0211017  .


K. A. Intriligator, R. G. Leigh, and N. Seiberg, "Exact superpotentials in
  four-dimensions," Phys. Rev.  D50  (1994) 1092-1104,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9403198 hep-th/9403198  .


F. Ferrari, "Quantum parameter space and double scaling limits in N = 1 
  super Yang-Mills  theory,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211069 hep-th/0211069  .


F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg, and E. Witten, "Phases of N = 1  supersymmetric gauge
  theories and matrices,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0301006 hep-th/0301006  .


F. Ferrari, "Quantum parameter space in super Yang-Mills . II ,"
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0301157 hep-th/0301157  .


I. Pesando, "Exact results for the supersymmetric G(2)  gauge theories,"
  Mod. Phys. Lett.  A10  (1995) 1871-1886,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9506139 hep-th/9506139  .


S. B. Giddings and J. M. Pierre, "Some exact results in supersymmetric
  theories based on exceptional groups," Phys. Rev.  D52  (1995)
  6065-6073,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9506196 hep-th/9506196  .


A. V. Smilga, "6 + 1 vacua in supersymmetric QCD  with G(2)  gauge group,"
  Phys. Rev.  D58  (1998) 105014,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801078 hep-th/9801078  .


Y. Meurice and G. Veneziano, "SUSY  vacua versus chiral fermions,"   Phys. Lett.  B141  (1984)
69.


I. Affleck, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, "Calculable nonperturbative supersymmetry
  breaking," Phys. Rev. Lett.  52  (1984)
1677.


I. Affleck, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, "Dynamical supersymmetry breaking in
  chiral theories," Phys. Lett.  B137  (1984)
187.


D. Amati, K. Konishi, Y. Meurice, G. C. Rossi, and G. Veneziano,
  "Nonperturbative aspects in supersymmetric gauge theories," Phys.
  Rept.  162  (1988)
169-248.


K.-I. Izawa and T. Yanagida, "Dynamical Supersymmetry Breaking in Vector-like
  Gauge Theories ," Prog. Theor. Phys.  95  (1996) 829-830,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9602180 hep-th/9602180  .


K. A. Intriligator and S. Thomas, "Dynamical supersymmetry breaking on quantum
  moduli spaces," Nucl. Phys.  B473  (1996) 121-142,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9603158 hep-th/9603158  .


J. de Boer, K. Hori, H. Ooguri, and Y. Oz, "Branes and dynamical supersymmetry
  breaking," Nucl. Phys.  B522  (1998) 20-68,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801060 hep-th/9801060  .





















