










 
 
 

i
ao 
oes 
oe 
cao 
coes 
coe 
a 
ae 

AO  
OE  
OES  
AE  
C AO  
C OE  
C OES  








equation section 


 
 
 

i
ao 
oes 
oe 
cao 
coes 
coe 
a 
ae 
  
AO  
OE  
OES  
AE  
C AO  
C OE  
C OES  

Le 
janvierfevriermarsavrilmai
juinjuilletaoutseptembreoctobre
novembre decembre       

de
janeirofevereiromarc oabrilmaio
junhojulhoagostosetembrooutubro
novembro dezembrode       

Den . 
JanuarFebruarMarzAprilMai
JuniJuliAugustSeptemberOktober
November Dezember       

JanuaryFebruaryMarchAprilMay
JuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctober
November December,
                                               




                    
                               
           
           


        




 
 
(  
)  
(  
)  



   




 











  
  








    
   

 
Topological Yang-Mills Theories and Their Observables: a Superspace Approach(Talk presented by Olivier Piguet at
the 2nd International Londrina Winter School Mathematical Methods in
Physics, 2002, Londrina, Brazil.)  



 
Jose Luis Boldo,
Clisthenis P. Constantinidis, Francois Gieres,
Matthieu Lefrancois
and Olivier Piguet
 

 Universidade Federal do Espirito Santo 
(UFES), 
CCE, Departamento de Fisica, Campus Universitario
de Goiabeiras, BR-29060-900 - Vitoria - ES (Brasil) 


 The Abdus Salam ICTP, Strada Costiera 11, 
I - 34014 - Trieste (Italy) 


 
Institut de Physique Nucleaire,
Universite Claude Bernard (Lyon 1), 

43, boulevard du 11 novembre 1918,
      F - 69622 - Villeurbanne (France) 



E-mails: jboldo@cce.ufes.br,
clisthen@cce.ufes.br, 

gieres@ipnl.in2p3.fr, 
lefrancois@ipnl.in2p3.fr, piguet@cce.ufes.br 








 
Witten's observables of topological Yang-Mills theory,
defined as classes of an equivariant cohomology, are re-obtained 
as the
BRST cohomology classes of a superspace version of the theory.


Introduction 
Observables in topological theories are global, such as knot invariants in
Chern-Simons theory, Wilson loops, etc. The problem of finding all of
them is a problem of "equivariant cohomology", as already pointed out 
by Witten in 1988 in the framework of 4-dimensional topological 
Yang-Mills theory. 
In the latter case, there exists an equivalent 
approach based on a superspace formalism  introduced  soon thereafter 
by Horne, 
which reduces the problem to that of looking for 
the BRST cohomology in a supersymmetric context. Our aim is to 
present and develop this formalism, as well as to generalize it 
to other models, such as topological gravity for instance.

This talk is the summary of a more extended work in 
preparation.



4-Dimensional Topological Yang-Mills Theory  

The gauge connection is given by the matrix valued 1-form
, where the matrices  form a basis 
of the gauge Lie algebra, with
[T_a,T_b] = f_ab  ^c T_c ,(T_aT_b)= _ab   .
Lie-alg 

Topological Yang-Mills theory is characterized,
beyond the
usual Yang-Mills gauge invariance, by the "shift supersymmetry" 
defined by the
infinitesimal transformations
a =  ,= -d- [a,] ,,
tilde-Q 
where the components of the 1-form  are fermions and  is a
bosonic 0-form. 

The infinitesimal gauge transformations 
parametrized by  read as 




One checks that the square of the supersymmetry operator  is equal
to an infinitesimal gauge transformation, with parameter  
substituted by the field .
Thus  is nilpotent on gauge invariant quantities. This led Witten
to define the observables  of the theory as the cohomology classes of
 in the space of the gauge invariant operators, which is a problem of
equivariant cohomology : a gauge invariant operator
 belongs to the equivariant cohomology of  if








One can also interpret this formalism as
the gauge fixing of the shift supersymmetry considered as a local
"gauge"
invariance, with a Yang-Mills-invariant gauge fixing condition of the type 
, or , where  is the Hodge operator. 
Then,  is the ghost and  its ghost of ghost,  being the 
corresponding BRST operator.





Superspace Formalism 

Enlarging the -dimensional spacetime, of coordinates 
, with one fermionic dimension described by a 
Grassmann (i.e. anticommuting) coordinate , with ,
we define a superfield  as a superspace function 



which transforms under a supersymmetry (SUSY) transformation as 
QF=For, in components: Qf=f' ,Qf'=0 .
SUSY-tr 
By construction the SUSY operator is strictly 
nilpotent:
.
Introducing the differential  - a commuting quantity - 
we may define -superforms ,



where  is a
-form in -space with superfield coefficients, as well as
the exterior superderivative: 
= d+d
= dx^_+d ,with ^2=0 .
s-der 
A supergauge theory will be based on a superconnection , the
1-superform(All forms and superforms in this paper are Lie algebra valued: 
, see Lie-alg .) 




a  Faddeev-Popov ghost 0-superform



and the corresponding BRST transformations 




The latter read, in components:
lll 
a =  -Dc   ,&= - [c,]  -Dc'   ,                        &   =   - [c,] - c' ,

= - [c,] - [,c']  ,&c  =  -c^2 ,  &  c' =  -[c,c']  .
BRST-comp 




The Wess-Zumino gauge: 



One observes that the component field 
 is a pure gauge degree of freedom w.r.t. to
the -transformation in BRST-comp . The gauge
invariance corresponding to the ghost 
can be fixed by the "Wess-Zumino gauge" condition
.
This condition, which is not preserved by the SUSY transformations 
SUSY-tr , is however stable with respect to 
the modified 
transformations

obtained by adding to the SUSY operator  a 
field dependent supergauge transformation. It is easy to check that this
new SUSY transformation reproduces,
for the "physical" fields ,  and ,  the original 
transformations given by
tilde-Q .


Cohomology of the SUSY operator : 



According to SUSY-tr , the component fields are grouped in doublet 
representations of the nilpotent superspace SUSY operator .
It follows that 
the cohomology of  is trivial :
every form or superform which is -invariant is the -variation of
another form or superform. This obviously distinguishes  from its
Wess-Zumino gauge version  which is nilpotent only when applied
to gauge invariant quantities, and moreover has a nontrivial
equivariant cohomology.





Observables in the superspace formalism 

The equivalence of the superspace theory with the one originally 
proposed by Witten, the latter being a Wess-Zumino gauge fixed version
of the former, suggests to define an observable  in superspace as
a BRST cohomology class:
= 0 ,but  ,
s-cohom 
where  and  are both -dimensional(The space-time
dimension will not be fixed a priori.
The space-time integrals are performed over 
an arbitrary -manifold or submanifold .) 
space-time integrals:



with the conditions:
   Q,Q.
SUSY-cond 
The latter condition and 
the triviality of the cohomology of  implies now that, up to a possible
total derivative which can be discarded without loss of generality, the
integrand of  - the form  - is -exact:




which is the superspace integral of a "superfield form", i.e. of a
space-time form whose coefficients are superfields.




General solution 

The general solution of the BRST cohomology problem s-cohom  with the 
SUSY invariance condition SUSY-cond  consists of the two 
classes described below. For a proof that there are no other solutions, see
Reference.


Equivariantly Trivial Solutions  
The first class of solutions is of the general form
^D-p+1 _(p)  = 
_M_p  Q ^D-p _p(F_A,,,D_A ,D_A ) ,
triv-obs 
where  is a gauge invariant function of 
the superfield forms ,  and  and their covariant
derivatives  =  and  .
These superfield forms are the components of the supercurvature
,  
= F_A  +  d+  (d)^2  , 
s-curvature 
with 







Their BRST transformations read as 



 
The solutions triv-obs , although 
nontrivial in the sense of the
BRST cohomology, are trivial in the sense of the equivariant
cohomology. Indeed, 
in the Wess-Zumino gauge, they conserve the same form as in
triv-obs , but with , ,  and  replaced by
, ,  and , and the operator  replaced by :
the result is then explicitly given by the -variation of a gauge
invariant integral.



Equivariantly Nontrivial Solutions  

The solutions of the BRST cohomology 
problem s-cohom  
which are nontrivial in the sense of the equivariant cohomology are
given in terms of superforms by the following superspace algorithm.



1.  Consider all the superforms  
(of ghost number 0 and superform degree ) which are
nontrivial solutions of 
the cohomology 
of  modulo  in the space of the superforms made
of polynomials 
of the basic superforms , , 
 and . Nontriviality in the sense of
the cohomology  for a superform  means




These  are nontrivial solutions of sets of "superdescent equations"
l 
_D + _D-1 ^1=0 ,_D-1 ^1 + _D-2 ^2=0 ,
 ,_0 ^D =0  .
s-descent 
Here the exponent  of the superform 
 denotes its ghost number, i.e.
its degree in the superfield ghost  or its components. The index 
denotes its degree as a superform.





2.  Expand  according to the space-time 
form degree :



The space-time forms  are our solutions:




This follows from the identity ,
which is a direct consequence of the definition s-der .

We thus obtain, for a fixed maximum degree , 
a set of observables



where the space-time forms  are the 
coefficients of the superform
, where  represents a nontrivial 
solution of the superdescent equations s-descent .


Solution of the Superdescent Equation 

The nontrivial observables are thus completely determined from the
general solution of the superdescent equations s-descent . The
latter is given by the generalization to the present superspace
formalism of standard results of BRST cohomology. The
result is:

_D  = ^CS _r_1 () 
f_r_2 ()f_r_L () , 
with D= 2  i=1 L   m_r_i  -1 
 , L 1  ,

3.xx 
where  is the supercurvature invariant of degree  in 
 corresponding to the gauge group Casimir operator of degree
, and  is the associated Chern-Simons
form: 



We note that the superform degree of the solution 3.xx  is odd.

One finally checks that, upon 
reducing the result to the Wess-Zumino gauge, one
recovers the observables originally given by Witten.



Example 

We consider the case of maximum degree . The superdescent equations
read as






The unique nontrivial solution is 






Note that  is the Chern-Simons superform:
.



The observables are then given by the expansion



with








In the Wess-Zumino gauge ():







which corresponds to Witten's result up to total derivatives.


Conclusion 

The superspace
BRST cohomology which we have advocated  as an alternative  definition 
of the observables of 
a topological theory of the Yang-Mills type, reproduces 
Witten's original result
using a rather straightforward extension 
to superspace of standard results on BRST cohomology.
However it
is also realized that another 
type of solutions exists, which are finally 
proved to be trivial in the sense of equivariant cohomology. 
The main difficulty 
which had to be overcome was to showthat there are no other solutions 
to the problem of the superspace
BRST cohomology. These results lead us to wonder about the applicability 
of such an approach to
the construction of observables in more 
complex systems, for example
topological gravity and Yang-Mills theories 
with more than one supersymmetry generator. These are problems
under current investigation, and we hope to 
provide answers to these 
questions soon.





Acknowledgments 

J.L.B., C.P.C. and O.P. thank the Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq - Brazil) for
financial support.

C.P.C. also thanks the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de 
Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES - Brazil) for financial support,
and the Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics
(ICTP - Italy) for hospitality during a three months stay
under its Associate Program.

O.P. acknowledges
the Institut de Physique Nucleaire,
Universite Claude Bernard (Lyon 1) for its 
kind hospitality during a
one month's stay as Professeur Invite.






 0 

 E. Witten, 
Int.J.Mod.Phys. A6  (1991) 2775;

Commun.Math.Phys. 117  (1988) 353.

 
P. van Baal, S. Ouvry and R. Stora, 


Phys.Lett. B220  (1989) 159.

 
L. Baulieu and I.M. Singer, 

Nucl.Phys.(Proc.Suppl.) B5  (1988) 12.


 A. Blasi and R. Collina, 

Phys.Lett. B222  (1989) 419.


R. Stora, F. Thuillier and J. C. Wallet,
"Algebraic structure of cohomological field theory models and
equivariant cohomology" ,
Lectures at the Caribbean Spring School of Mathematics 
and Theoretical Physics, St. Francois, Guadeloupe, May 30 - June 13, 1993, 
preprint ENSLAPP-A-481-94, 


F. Delduc, N. Maggiore, O. Piguet and S. Wolf, 

Phys.Lett. B385  (1996) 132.
[hep-th/9605158] .

  J.H. Horne, 

Nucl.Phys. B318  (1989) 22.

 
C. Aragao de Carvalho and L. Baulieu,


Phys.Lett. B275  (1992) 323.

 J.L. Boldo, C.P. Constantinidis, F. Gieres, 
M. Lefrancois and O. Piguet, "Observables in topological 
Yang-Mills theories" , work in preparation 
(now available as: [hep-th/0303053] ).

 M. Blau and G. Thompson, 


Commun.Math.Phys. 152  (1993) 41, 

[hep-th/9112012] ;



Nucl.Phys. B492  (1997) 545, [hep-th/9612143] .

 O. Piguet and S.P. Sorella, 
"Algebraic Renormalization" , 
Lecture Notes in Physics m28, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1995).

 G. Barnich, F. Brandt and M. Henneaux,

Phys.Rep. 338  (2000) 439.

 J.L. Boldo, C.P. Constantinidis, F. Gieres, 
M. Lefrancois, J.A. Nogueira and O. Piguet, work in progress.




