













16.0cm 21.9cm
theorem Theorem 
acknowledgment [theorem]Acknowledgment 
algorithm [theorem]Algorithm 
axiom [theorem]Axiom 
case [theorem]Case 
claim [theorem]Claim 
conclusion [theorem]Conclusion 
condition [theorem]Condition 
conjecture [theorem]Conjecture 
corollary [theorem]Corollary 
criterion [theorem]Criterion 
definition [theorem]Definition 
example [theorem]Example 
exercise [theorem]Exercise 
lemma [theorem]Lemma 
notation [theorem]Notation 
problem [theorem]Problem 
proposition [theorem]Proposition 
remark [theorem]Remark 
solution [theorem]Solution 
summary [theorem]Summary 
 

  

0.8truecm

A VARIATIONAL CALCULATION OF POSITRONIUM  

0.3truecm IN QED  

0.6truecm Andrei G. Terekidi and Jurij W. Darewych 

0.5truecm 
Department of Physics and
Astronomy, York University, Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3, Canada  

0.6truecm



Abstract  We consider a reformulation of QED in which
covariant Green functions are used to solve for the electromagnetic field in
terms of the fermion fields. The resulting modified Hamiltonian contains the
photon propagator directly. A simple Fock-state variational trial function
is used to derive relativistic fermion-antifermion equations variationally
from the expectation value of the Hamiltonian of the field theory. The
interaction kernel of the equations are shown to involve the 
lowest order invariant matrices. The two-body eigenenergies are
shown to agree with known result for positronium-like systems to order 
 in the coupling constant. 

0.8truecm Introduction    

0.4truecm  


 It has been pointed out in previous publications that various models in
Quantum Field Theory (QFT), including QED, can be reformulated, using
mediating-field Green functions, into a form that is particularly convenient
for variational calculations of relativistic few-body bound states [1,2].
This approach was applied recently to the study of relativistic two-body
eigenstates in the scalar Yukawa (Wick-Cutkosky) theory [3,4,5]. We shall
implement such an approach to two-fermion states in QED in this paper, in
order to demonstrate its utility in the case of a well studied theory.

The Lagrangian of QED is 
 
The corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations of motion are the coupled
Dirac-Maxwell equations, 
 
and 
 
where 
 
The equations (2)-(3) can be decoupled in part by using the well-known
formal solution [6,7] of the Maxwell equation (3), namely 
 
where  is a Green function (or photon
propagator in QFT terminology), defined by 
 
and  is a solution of the homogeneous (or "free field")
equation (3) with 

We recall, in passing, that equation (6) does not define the covariant Green
function  uniquely. For one thing, one can
always add a solution of the homogeneous equation (eq. (6) with 
). This allows for a certain freedom in the choice of 
, as is discussed in standard texts (e.g. ref. [6,7]). In practice,
the solution of eq. (6), like that of eq. (3), requires a choice of gauge.
However, we do not need to specify one at this stage.

Substitution of the formal solution (5) into equation (2) yields the
"partly reduced" equations,

 
which is a nonlinear Dirac equation. To our knowledge no exact (analytic or
numeric) solution of equation (7) for classical fields have been reported in
the literature. However, approximate solutions have been discussed by
various authors, particularly Barut and his co-workers (see ref. [8,9] and
citations therein). In any case, our interest here is in the quantized 
field theory.

The partially reduced equation (7) is derivable from the stationary action
principle 
 
with the Lagrangian density 
 
provided that the Green function is symmetric in the sense that 
 

One can proceed to do conventional covariant perturbation theory using the
reformulated QED Lagrangian (9). The interaction part of (9) has a somewhat
modified structure from that of the usual formulation of QED. Thus, there
are two interaction terms. The last term of (9) is a "current-current"
interaction which contains the photon propagator sandwiched between the
fermionic currents. As such, it corresponds to Feynman diagrams without
external photon lines. The term containing  corresponds to
diagrams that cannot be generated by the term containing ,
particularly diagrams involving external photon lines (care would have to be
taken not to double count physical effects). However, we shall not pursue
covariant perturbation theory in this work. Rather, we shall consider a
variational approach that allows one to derive relativistic few-fermion
equations, and to study their bound and scattering solutions.



0.8truecm 
Hamiltonian in the
canonical, equal-time formalism    

0.4truecm  


 We consider this theory in the canonical, equal-time formalism. To this end
we write down the Hamiltonian density corresponding to the Lagrangian (9),
with the terms for the free  field suppressed since it will
not contribute to the results presented in this paper. The relevant
expression is: 
 
where

 

Equal-time quantization corresponds to the imposition of anticommutation
rules for the fermion fields, namely 
 
and all other vanish. In addition, if  there are the
usual commutation rules for the  field, and commutation of the 
 field operators with the  field operators.

To specify our notation, we quote the usual Fourier decomposition of the
field operators, namely 
 
with , and 
. The mass- free-particle Dirac spinors 
and , where 
, 
, are normalized such that 
 

The creation and annihilation operators ,  of the (free)
fermions of mass , and ,  for the corresponding
antifermions, satisfy the usual anticommutation relations. The
non-vanishing ones are 
 



0.8truecm 
Variational
principle and fermion-antifermion trial states    

0.4truecm  



 Unfortunately we do not know how to obtain exact eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian (11). Therefore we shall resort to a variational approximation,
based on the variational principle 
 
For a system like , the simplest Fock-space trial state that can
be written down in the rest frame is

 
where  are four adjustable functions. We use this trial
state to evaluate the matrix elements needed to implement the variational
principle (19), namely 
 
and

* 

 
where , 
, with 
 (i.e.  ) in the rest frame, and  
 
We have normal-order the entire Hamiltonian, since this circumvents the need
for mass renormalization which would otherwise arise. Not that there is a
difficulty with handling mass renormalization in the present formalism (as
shown in various earlier papers; see, for example, ref. [10] and citations
therein). It is simply that we are not interested in mass renormalization
here, since it has no effect on the two-body bound state energies that we
obtain in this paper. Furthermore, the approximate trial state (20), which
we use in this work, is incapable of sampling loop effects. Thus, the
normal-ordering of the entire Hamiltonian does not "sweep under the
carpet" loop effects, since none arise at the present level of
approximation, that is with the trial state  
specified in eq. (20) .

The variational principle (19) leads to the following equation 
 
where 
 is an invariant "matrix element", which contains two terms:
 
where
 
 
correspond to the usual one-photon exchange and virtual annihilation Feynman diagrams. 

We stress that these -matrices appear naturally in this formalism, that
is the 's are not put in by hand, nor does their 
derivation require
additional Fock-space terms in the variational trial state (20), as is the
case in traditional formulations (e.g. [11]-[13]).

In the non-relativistic limit, the functions  can be written
as 
 
where the non-zero elements of  for total spin singlet (
) states are , while for
the spin triplet () states the non-zero elements are 
for   for 
, and  for . We use the notation that
the subscripts  and 2 of  correspond to  and 
 (or  and ) respectively. Substituting
(28) into (24), the variational procedure, after multiplying the result by 
 and summing over  and , gives the
equation 
 
where 
 
To lowest-order in  (i.e. in the non-relativistic limit), the kernel
(30) reduces to , and so (29)
reduces to the (momentum-space) Schro dinger equation 
 
where  and . This verifies that the
relativistic two-fermion equation (24) has the expected non-relativistic
limit.

In the relativistic case we do not complete the variational procedure in
(24) at this stage to get equations for the four adjustable functions 
, because they are not independent in general. Indeed we
require that the trial state be an eigenstate of the total angular momentum
operator (in relativistic form), its projection, parity and charge
conjugation, namely that 
 
where  as usual.
Explicit forms for the operators , 
are given in Appendix A. 
The functions  can be
written in the general form 
 
where  are
the usual spherical harmonics. Here and henceforth we will use the notation 
 etc. (four-vectors will be written as 
). The orbital indexes and  depend on
the spin indexes  and  and are specified by equations (32).
The radial coefficients 
 in the expansion (33)  also depend on the spin variables. 
Substitution of (33) into (20) and then into (32) leads to two
categories of relations among the adjustable functions, as shown 
in Appendices A and B. It follows from
this solution that the total spin of the system is a good quantum number, and the
states of the system separate into singlet states with the total spin 
(parastates) and into triplet states with  (orthostates). We should point out that this phenomenon is characteristic of the fermion antifermion systems, which are charge conjugation eigenstates, and does not arise for systems like .

The singlet states 

In this case and
. The nonzero components of 
 are 
 and have
the form 
 
where the relations between  and
 involve the Clebsch-Gordan (C-G)
coefficients , that is 
 
as it shown in Appendix A. We see that the spin and radial variables
separate for the singlet states in the sense that the factors  have a
common radial function . Thus, for the singlet states we obtain 
 
The C-G coefficients  have
a simple form: 
, 
 (see Appendix A).
Therefore for the singlet states we can write expression (20) in the
explicit form 
 
These states are characterized by the quantum numbers  parity 
 and charge conjugation . As we can
see, the quantum numbers  (orbital angular momentum), and total spin 
 are good quantum numbers for the singlet states as well. The
spectroscopical notation is .

The triplet states 

The solution of the system (32) for   leads to two cases (Appendix A), namely
, for which

 
and , for which

 
where 
 
The expressions for  in both cases involve the
C-G coefficients  for  listed
in Appendix A, that is 
 
where the index  is defined as 
 
Thus, for the triplet states with 
 
These functions correspond to states, which can be characterized by the 
quantum numbers , parity  and charge conjugation 
. The orbital angular momentum , as well as the 
 total spin , are good quantum numbers in this case. 
The spectroscopic notation for these states is .
For the triplet states with  we obtain the result 
 
which involves two radial functions  and 
corresponding to  and . This means that  is not
a good quantum number. Such states are characterized by quantum numbers 
 , charge conjugation  and spin 
. In spectroscopic notation, these states are a mixture of 
 and  states.
The requirement that the states be charge conjugation eigenstates 
(the last equation of (32)) is intimately tied to the conservation of total spin.
 Indeed, a linear combination of singlet and triplet states like 
 
satisfies the first tree equations of (32). However, it is unacceptable for 
describing a fermion-antifermion system  because
the first and the second terms in (45) have different charge conjugation.
For a system of two particles of different mass (such as ) charge 
conjugation is not
applicable, so that the total spin would not be  conserved. 



0.8truecm 
The relativistic
radial equations for positronium-like systems    

0.4truecm  



 We return to equation (24) and replace the functions 
 by the expression (36) for singlet states and by (43) and (44)
for triplet states. The variational procedure then leads to the following results:

For the singlet states , , , the radial
equations are

 
where the kernel 
 
is defined by the invariant -matrix and the coefficients 
 
Here we have summed over , because of the -fold energy degeneracy.

For the triplet states, we obtain different equations for the 
, and  cases.
Thus for the states with , ,  the
result is
 
where the kernel  is formally like that of
(47), namely,

 
However it involves different C-G coefficients, namely

 

For the triplet states with , we have two independent radial
functions and. Thus the variational equation
(24) leads to a system of coupled equations for and
. It is convenient to write them in matrix form,

 
where 
 
and 
 
The kernels  are similar in form to (47) and (50), that is 
 
However the coefficients 
are defined by expression

 
where  and  is as defined in Eq. (42).
 The system (52) reduses to a single
equation for  since  in that case.

To our knowledge, it is not possible to obtain analytic solution of the
relativistic radial momentum-space equations (46), (49) and (52). Thus one
must resort to numerical or other approximation methods. Numerical solutions
of such equations are discussed, for example, in [10], while a variational
approximation has been employed in [5]. However, in this paper we shall
resort to perturbative approximations, in order to verify that our equations
agree with known result for positronium to . We expect that
this must be so given that the interaction kernels (i.e. momentum-space
potentials) of our equations involve both "tree-level" Feynman diagrams.

 Our equations will yield energies which are evidently incomplete 
beyond . One could,
of course, augment them by the addition of invariant matrix elements
corresponding to higher-order Feynman diagrams to the existing 
-matrices in the kernels of our equations (as is done in the Bethe-Salpeter formalism).
 Indeed, such an approach has been
used in a similar, though not variational, 
treatment of positronium by Zhang
and Koniuk [14]. These authors show that the inclusion of invariant 
matrix elements corresponding to single-loop
diagrams yields positronium energy eigenstates which are accurate to 
. However such ad-hoc
augmentation of the kernels would be contrary to the spirit of the present
variational treatment, and we shall not pursue it in this work.



0.8truecm 
Semi-relativistic
expansions and the non-relativistic limit    

0.4truecm  

For perturbative solutions of our radial equations, it is necessary to work
out expansions of the relevant expressions to first order beyond the
non-relativistic limit. This shall be summarized in the present section. We
perform the calculation in the Coulomb gauge, in which the photon
propagator has the form [15] 
 
where .

To expand the amplitudes  of (26) and (27)  to 
one order of  beyond the non-relativistic 
limit, we take the free-particle spinors to be 
 
as discussed in Appendix C. In this approximation the photon 
propagator takes on the form 

 
Corresponding calculations give for the orbital part of -matrix 
 
The  terms of the expansion linear in spin correspond to the spin-orbital
interaction 
 
Here  and 
 are positron and
electron spin matrices respectively, defined as follow:
 

, 


. The quadratic spin terms or
spin-spin interaction terms are 
 
Lastly, the virtual annihilation contribution is given by

 

We have used these expressions to obtain the corresponding radial kernels.
Details of calculations can be found in Appendix D. We use the
notation: , and   is
the Legendre function of the second kind [16]. The contributions of the
various terms to the kernel are as follows:

The singlet states  
:

Orbital term  
 

Spin-orbital interaction 

 

Spin-spin interaction 

 

The triplet states with    
:

Orbital term 

 

Spin-Orbital interaction 

 

Spin-Spin interaction 

 

The triplet states with  
:

The off-diagonal elements of the kernel matrix (cf. Eqs.. (52)-(54)),
   and 
 which are responsible for mixing of states with  and ,
get a non-zero contribution from the spin-spin interactions only: 
 
The contributions to the diagonal elements of the kernel matrix are the following:
Orbital terms  
 
 

Spin-orbital interaction  
 
 

Spin-spin interaction  
 
 

Annihilation term   
 

We note that in the non-relativistic limit only the first terms of orbital
part of the kernels survive. They have the common form 
, hence all radial equations reduce to the form 
 
Recalling, also, that
 
we obtain, in the 
non relativistic limit, 
 the momentum-space Schro dinger radial equations 
 
where , , .



0.8truecm 
Energy levels and
fine structure    

0.4truecm  


 

The relativistic energy eigenvalues  can be calculated 
from the expression 
 
for the singlet and  triplet states.
For the  triplet states the corresponding result is

 

To obtain results for  to  we use the forms
of the kernels expanded to  (eqns. 
(64)-(77)) and replace  by their non-relativistic
(Schro dinger) form  (see (146), Appendix D). The most important integrals that
we used for calculating (81) and (82), are given in Appendix D. In Appendix
E we show that the contribution of kernels  
and  in (82),  is
zero at . Thus, the energy
corrections for the triplet states with  and  can be
calculated independently. 
The results will be presented in the form 
.

Singlet states  

The kinetic energy corrections:
 
The potential energy corrections:

 

 

 
The total energy corrections: 
 

Triplet states  

The kinetic energy corrections:

 
The potential energy corrections:

 
 
 
The total energy corrections:

 

Triplet states  

The kinetic energy corrections:

 
The potential energy corrections: 
 
 
 

 

The total energy corrections:

 

Triplet states  

The kinetic energy corrections: 
 
The potential energy corrections: 
 
) 
 
The total energy corrections: 
 

These results are in agreement with the well-known positronium fine
structure results [17], [18].

0.8truecm Concluding remarks)  
 



0.4truecm  


We have considered a reformulation of QED, in which covariant Green functions are used to solve the QED field equations for the mediating electromagnetic field  in terms of the fermion field. 
This leads to a reformulated Hamiltonian with an interaction term 
in which the photon propagator appears sandwiched between fermionic 
currents.  
The variational method within the Hamiltonian formalism of
quantum field theory is used to determine approximate eigensolutions of 
bound relativistic fermion-antifermion states. The reformulation enables us to use the simplest possible trial state to derive a relativistic 
momentum-space Salpeter-like equation for a positronium-like system.
The invariant  matrices corresponding to one-photon exchange and virtual annihilation Feynman diagrams arise directly in the interaction kernel of this equation.
The trial
states are chosen to be eigenstates of the total angular momentum operator  and  of QED, along with parity
and charge conjugation. A general relativistic reduction of the wave
equations to radial form is given. For given  there is a single radial
equation for total spin zero singlet states , but for spin triplet states
there are, in general coupled equations. We show how the classification of
 states follows naturally from the system of eigenvalue equations obtained 
with our trial state. 
We have solved the integral equations perturbatively
to obtain the relativistic two-particle binding energy corrections 
to order . The results agree with well known results for
positronium, obtained on the basis of the Bethe-Salpeter equation [18].
It would be of interest to consider more elaborate variational calculations 
within this formalism, using trial states that accommodate virtual pairs.
The financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada for this work is gratefully acknowledged.






Appendix A:
Total angular momentum operator in relativistic
form )   

0.4truecm  




 

The total angular momentum operator is defined by expression 
 
where 
and 
 are the orbital angular momentum and spin operators. We use the
standard representation for the Pauli matrices 
 
 
Using the field operator  in the form (15), after
tedious calculations we obtain 
* 
 
* 
Here  is the orbital angular momentum operator in
momentum representation:

 
Note that these expressions are valid for any , since the time-dependent
phase factors of the form  cancel out.

For the operator 
 we have 
 
where 
 

The requirement that the trial state (20) be an eigenstate of 
 and  leads to the system of equations

 

 
Substitution of the expressions (33) for  and use 
of eq. (112) gives 
 
 
and 
 

The singlet states correspond to the solution 
, 
 of this system with  .

For the triplet states the solutions are 
, and, 

for  : 
 
for :
 
Equations (116)-(119) make since only for 

for :
 

It is convenient to introduce the table of coefficients 
 :
* 
These coefficients coincide with the usual Clebsch-Gordan 
coefficients for  except for a factor  in the denominator, 
which we absorb into the  normalization constant.



0.8truecm 
Appendix B: Parity
and charge conjugation    

0.4truecm  


 

We consider the application of the parity operator to the trial state (20): 
 
Making use of the properties 
 
where  is the intrinsic parity (
), it follows that 
* 
 
where the parity eigenvalue  depends on the symmetry of 
 in different states:
 For the singlet states  
 we get from (36) 
, so that 
.
For the triplet states with   we get from (38) 

, hence .
For the triplet states with  
 we get from (39) 
, therefore .

Charge conjugation is associated with the interchange of the particle and
antiparticle. Applying the charge conjugation operator to the trial state
(20) we get 
 
Using the relations 
 
where , we obtain 
* 
 
where the charge conjugation quantum number  depends on the symmetry of 
 in different states:
For the singlet states   we get from (36) 

, hence .
For the triplet states with   we get from (38) 

, therefore .
For the triplet states with   we get from (39) 

, so that .




0.8truecm 
Appendix C:
Expansion of the spinors    

0.4truecm  


 

We recall the form of the particle spinors: 
 
where 
 
The antiparticle or "positron" representation for the 
spinors has the form

 
where 
 
The normalization is 
 
Expanding in powers of  and keeping the lowest non-trivial order terms,

 
 
we obtain the result 
 
 




0.8truecm 
Appendix D: Some
useful identities and integrals    

0.4truecm  


 

The following identity is useful for evaluating the  matrices: 
 

The angular integration in (47), (50), (55) involves the following integrals

 

 

 
where 
is an arbitrary function of 
,  is the Legendre polynomial, and  is the
Legendre function of the second kind of order .

The following integrals are needed for the calculation of the relativistic
energy corrections. 
 
 
 
 
 
Here  is the nonrelativistic hydrogen-like radial wave function in
momentum space [18]

 
where  are Gegenbauer functions.




0.8truecm 
Appendix E:
,  kernels for   states    

0.4truecm  



 

The contribution  of the kernel  
to the energy correction is 
 
where

 
This requires the following integral 
 
We calculate this form in coordinate space. The Fourier transform of 

is

 
where the 
 matrix  is a local operator in general [18], 
that is 
 
We apply this transformation to the  

 
 matrix (see eq. (62)).
Because of the angular integration in (129), only the first term in (62)
survives. The Fourier transformation of that term is 
 
Furthermore,

 
 
where 
 
The associated Laguerre function   
  is related to the confluent hypergeometric function by 
 
The generating function for the Laguerre function is 
 
hence 
 
It follows that
 
but 
 
The last expression can be proved in the following way. Let us consider the
more general case 
 
The generating function for  is

 
Then we consider the expression
 
It is well known that 
 
therefore 
 
and 
 
We expand this expression in a series, 
 
It is not difficult to show [19], that the coefficient 
 represents the integral 
 
Simple but tedious calculations show that this coefficient is zero for 
, , . Thus the kernel 
does not contribute to the energy corrections to 
. The same result is obtained for the kernel .



0.8truecm References    

0.4truecm  



 

1. J. W. Darewych, Annales Fond. L. de Broglie (Paris) 23 , 15
(1998).

2. J. W. Darewych, in Causality and Locality in Modern Physics , G
Hunter et al. (eds.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998, pp. 333-244.

3. J. W. Darewych, Can. J. Phys. 76 , 523 (1998).

4. M. Barham and J. W. Darewych, J. Phys. A 31 , 3481 (1998).

5. B. Ding and J. Darewych, J. Phys. G 26 , 907 (2000).

6. J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics  (John Wiley, New York,
1975).

7. A. O. Barut, Electrodynamics and Classical Theory of Fields and Particles
(Dover, new York, 1980).

8. W. T. Grandy, Jr., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of Leptons and Fields
(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1991).

9. A. O. Barut, "The Schro dinger and Dirac Equation - Linear, Nonlinear
and Intergrodifferential" in Geometrical and Algebraic Aspects of
Nonlinear Field Theory . S. De Filippo, M. Marinaro, G. Marmo and G. Vilasi,
eds. Elsevier (North Holland), 1989, pp. 37-51.

10 J. W. Darewych and L. Di Leo, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29 , 6817
(1996).

11. J. W. Darewych and M. Horbatsch, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. 22 
,973 (1989); 2 3, 337 (1990).

12. W. Dykshoorn and R. Koniuk, Phys. Rev. A 41 , 64 (1990).

13. T. Zhang and R. Koniuk, Can. J. Phys. 70 , 683 (1992).

14. T. Zhang and R. Koniuk, Can. J. Phys. 70 , 670 (1992).

15. V. B. Berestetski, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevski, Quantum
Electrodynamics  (Pergamon, New York, 1982).

16. G. Arfken and H. Weber Mathematical methods for physicists 
(2001), Academic Press.

17. M. A. Stroscio Positronium: A Review Of The Theory, Physics Reports C 22,
5, 215-277 (1975).

18. H. A. Bethe and E.E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One and
Two-Electron Atoms (Springer-Verlag/Academic, New York, 1957). 

19. M. Mizushima Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra and Atomic
Structure  (W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1970).

