


















  2pc
   
1pc 

















plain 


defn Definition 
thm Theorem 
cor Corollary 
lem Lemma 
prop Proposition 
conj Conjecture 
ex Example 
ax Axiom 


remark 
rem Remark 

notation Notation 
  


equation section 










1l   










   height#2
         
               width#2
               #1
               
                     #1 
                     #3 
                     #1
                     
               #1
               width#2
               
         height#2
          














#2 

















hep-th/0303085 
2truecm 
A Note on Exotic Fractions of Supersymmetries 
.5truecm 


1.5truecm 
Andre MiemiecInstitut  
                and 
                Igor SchnakenburgInstitut  
            



  Department of Theoretical Physics 
                           University of Turin 
                           10125 Torino 
                           Italia 
                           miemiec@to.infn.it 
 
   Racah Institute of Physics 
                           The Hebrew University  
                           Jerusalem 91904  
                           Israel 
                           igorsc@phys.huji.ac.il 
 
 

.4truecm 


1.0truecm 




 
  In this note we study supersymmetric solutions of 11 dimensional 
 SUGRA. Amongst others, we find a new solution which preserves 3/8 
 of the original supersymmetry. 
















Introduction 

Solutions of supergravity theories which preserve 1/2 of the original 
supersymmetry typically occur in the description of brane solutions.
Using the techniques of intersecting brane solutions one can reduce 
this number quite generically to any fraction 1/, with  
an integer. Other fractions are less simple to understand and are called 
exotic.
In the authors discovered a new solution of 
 11 dimensional supergravity, which preserved a fraction of  
supersymmetries. In a following paper it was 
shown that this solution fits into a whole class of solutions and the 
questions was raised if further solutions with exotic fractions of 
preserved supersymmetry can be found within this class. This note 
confirms in a case by case study that this actually is the case
  After finishing our work, we became aware of the nice work 
  of. In this paper plenty of similar 
  solutions with exotic supersymmetry are constructed. 
 .





The class of solutions proposed in are 
 
with  defined in terms of complex coordinates 
 of 
,
 
and .


The Einstein equation and the equation of motion for the 4-form field 
strength read
  
while the Killing spinor equation is given by
 

Examples 

First Example 

The holomorphic two form  we have chosen is 
 
which leads to 
 


The equations of motion () and () are both 
satisfied. The Ricci tensor in a tangent frame is diagonal and given 
by  
while the contractions of the field strength are:
 
Obviously eq. () is satisfied. 
The second term in the equation of motion for the 4-form field strength 
() reduces to 
* 
and comparing this with  one finds that both add up to zero.
 


The Killing spinor equation () can be written more 
symbolically as
 
By just solving this equation for the present ansatz one obtains 
12 constant Killing spinors. These 12 solutions exhaust the whole set 
of solutions. 
Now we give the argument from which we draw this conclusion.


As a preparation we would like to shed some light onto the terms which we
gathered in
 
The components of the field strength  are 
constant and those involving the time direction vanish. Also, Gamma matrices 
with upper spatial indices are identical to the tangent frame 
Gamma matrices.  We conclude that the expressions (1) and (2) are constant. 
The spin connection in (3) turns out to be constant too. So the only source of 
coordinate dependence comes from contraction with the vielbein in the last 
term. 
Since the field strength components which include a time direction vanish, 
the only remaining source for a coordinate dependence is set to zero.
   




This example gives a simple necessary condition, which each solution 
must satisfy
 
where   and
. In deriving 
eq. () we used the fact that in the present case all 
 are constant. Since the only nonvanishing components 
of  are
 
equation () evaluated for  just reduces
to 
 
the kernel of which is just the span of the 12 Killing spinors mentioned 
above. So we already found all solutions. 


Second Example 

We now take the following ansatz for 
 
In this case the Ricci tensor in the tangent frame is no longer diagonal. 
Nevertheless the equations of motion are satisfied both for the metric 
and the four form field strength.  

























One finds 16 constant Killing spinors  generating the 
16 dimensional kernels of  to . 
They are contained in the 20 dimensional kernels of  and 
 to . The form of 
the Killing spinors can be calculated explicitly and is given for 
convenience in appendix . The kernels of  and 
 to  are all equal and the additional 
four dimensions are spanned by , which satisfies
* 
and so we can apply the same trick used in to
construct a further Killing spinor by setting
* 
Finally we obtain 20 Killing spinors, i.e.  of the original supersymmetries are preserved.



Conclusion 


 
In the above we have presented two solutions, which preserve two different 
fractions of supersymmetry. The first example preserves , the later 
. The first example preserves a different exotic fraction of 
supersymmetry than the example already discovered in.
We have also tried different ansatze for . Their precise form and 
the amount of supersymmetry they preserve can be found in the table below.
 
 



( This is actually the case considered in) 


In particular, we have only found solutions which preserve either  
or  of the original supersymmetry. It would be interesting to see 
whether this ansatz could also produce solutions with other numbers of 
preserved supersymmetries.

 

Clifford Algebra 

The 11 dimensional Clifford Algebra with signature 
 satisfies
  
A representation by real matrices  can be obtained by 
taking appropriate tensor products of the Pauli matrices 
* 
A particular choice is ():
* 


Explicite Killing spinors 

* 








 99  



J. P .G auntlett, J. B .G utowski, C. M . H ull, S. P akis, and H . S . R eall, "All
  supersymmetric solutions of minimal supergravity in five dimensions,"
  http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0209114 hep-th/0209114  .

J. P. Gauntlett and S. Pakis, "The Geometry of D = 11 Killing Spinors,"
  http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0212008 hep-th/0212008  .

T. Harmark and T. Takayanagi, "Supersymmetric Goedel universes in string
  theory," http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0301206   hep-th/0301206  .





         





















