Physics Letter B 
 
Cosmic Strings and Quintessence 
[lu]Yi-Shi Duan ,
[lu]Ji-Rong Rencor   and  [cor]Corresponding author  renjr@lzu.edu.cn 
[lu]Jie Yang 
[lu]The Institute of Theoretic Physics, Lanzhou University 730000, P.R.China 

 
We present a new Lorentz gauge invariant
 topological field theory in Riemann-Cartan spacetime
manifold . By virtue of the decomposition theory of 
gauge potential and the -mapping topological current
theory, it is proved that the  complex scalar field 
 can be looked upon as the order parameter field in our
Universe, and the set of zero points of  create the
cosmic strings as the spacetime defects in the early Universe. In
the standard cosmology this complex scalar order parameter field
possesses negative pressure, provides an accelerating expansion of
Universe and be able to explain the inflation in the early
Universe. Therefore this complex scalar field is not only the
order parameter field created the cosmic strings, but also
reasonably behaves as the quintessence, the dark energy.
 
Cosmic Strings Quintessence Gauge Field Theories Topology Defects, Cosmology 11.27.+d 02.40.-k 11.15.-q 98.80.Cq
-0mm
Introduction 
The topological spacetime defects such as
cosmic strings may have been found at phase transitions in the
early Universe, analogous to those examples found in some
condensed matter systems-vortex line in liquid helium, flux
tubes in type-II superconductors, or disclination lines in liquid
crystals. Such phase transitions in the early
Universe are usually viewed as being caused by the breaking of the
symmetry of a Higgs field occurring in a spacetime whose geometry
is Riemannian. However the Einstein-Cartan theory,
which is formulated in a Riemann-Cartan spacetime manifold ,
represents a viable gravity theory with torsion. So it is still an
open debate if the spacetime manifold is Riemann-Cartan or not.
Furthermore, the viewpoint that the early Universe is
Riemann-Cartan spacetime in which cosmic strings are treated as
line defects created directly from torsion, is very
attractive, but it is not very perfect.
At the same time the order parameter of the Universe is not very
clear yet. In this letter, by virtue of constructing a new Lorentz
gauge invariant  topological field from torsion, we present
a theory of creating cosmic strings. Further this theory
rigorously unites the geometry and topology of gauge theories of
spacetime defects and is independent of concrete spacetime
manifold. It's also important to show that the order parameter
field  which creating cosmic strings,
possesses negative pressure. Therefore the complex scalar order
parameter field has the property of quintessence, the dark energy.
The
theoretical framework in the present letter includes three basic
aspects. In section 2, we present a new Lorentz gauge invariant 
 topological field theory in . This general theory is
still valid in both special cases: the Riemann manifold and the
Weitzenbck manifold. In section 3, by virtue of the
decomposition theory of gauge potential and the -mapping
topological current theory, the cosmic
strings as the spacetime defects are created naturally from the
zero points set of the order parameter  and the length of
these strings are topologically quantized by winding number of
-mapping with Planck length (
). In section 4, The nonzero part of the complex scalar
order parameter field  is shown as quintessence which
possesses negative pressure and cause inflation of the early
Universe.

 A New Topological Invariant in Riemann-Cartan Manifold 

It is well known that in a 4-dimensional
Riemann-Cartan spacetime manifold , the torsion -form is
defined by
 
where  is the vierbein -form with Lorentz group index 
and
 
The vierbein  is related with the metric tensor by
 
 is the covariant differential in Lorentz gauge theory
 
 
where  is the spin connection and  is
the generator of lorentz group . The torsion -form can
be expressed explicitly by
 
in which the torsion tensor is
 
As in ref., by analogy with the 't
Hooft's viewpoint of  gauge theory of
monopole, using vierbein -form and torsion
-form, we define a Lorentz gauge invariant antisymmetrical
-form 
 
where  is a  unit vector field. It's easy to see
that  can be expressed explicitly as
 
and  is an antisymmetric tensor
 
Substituting torsion tensor formula
() into (), we can find a simplified form for

 
which shows that the dimensionless vector  in
() can be looked upon as a  gauge potential. Since
the usual  gauge potential  in covariant
derivative  must
has dimension , we can define a  gauge
potential
 
where  is the Plank length introduced to satisfy the
dimension of  gauge potential. The antisymmetric tensor
 exactly behaves as a  gauge field tensor
 
And the  gauge transformation of  is
 
where  is an arbitrary scalar function.
Since for a given Riemann-Cartan manifold the vierbein 
is fixed, then the above  gauge transformation ()
can be only explained as the change of the unit vector
, therefore
 
which gives
 
where  is the inverse vierbein
 
It must be pointed out that the 
gauge invariant antisymmetry tensor  can also be
defined as 
with a parallel  unit vector field  satisfied
 
Therefore we have presented a new Lorentz
() gauge invariant  field theory in . In this
new  gauge theory the corresponding first Chern class in
 is a topological invariant with dimension  and is
expressed as
 
where  is an arbitrary 2-dimension surface in .
Substituting ( ) and () into (), it is
easy to see that the complete expression for our new 
topological invariant in  is
 
In the last years, it is still an open debate
whether the spacetime of the early Universe is Riemann-Cartan
manifold or not. Here we should point out that in torsion free
case
 
and from () we can find that the formula () and
( ) still holds true. Therefore the theory mentioned
above may be considered as a universal  topological
invariant theory in Riemann-Cartan spacetime manifold  and
Riemann spacetime manifold .

Cosmic Strings 

In order to introduce the decomposition theory
of 
 gauge potential in , let the complex scalar
 
be an ordered parameter field in our Universe and its covariant
derivative corresponding gauge potentials  ()
 
By means of the decomposition theory of U(1) gauge potential
proposed by one of authors (Duan), the gauge
potential () can be decomposed as
following
 
where  () is 2-dimensional unit vector fields
 
 Substituting () into (), we have
 
and the corresponding new topological invariant () is
denoted by
 
By making use of the -mapping topological current
theory and the Green function equation in 
-space
 
we can find
 
where  
 is the Jacobian
tensor. The 2-dimension surface  can be parameterized by
 
and the integral  () is expressed as
 
It is obviously that the above integral  () is non-zero
only when
 
Suppose that the order parameter field  ()
possesses  zeroes, according to the implicit function
theorem, when the zeroes are regular points of
-mapping at which the rank of Jacobian matrix 
 is 2, the -th solution of 
  () can be expressed by
 
We see that each solution of () is a world sheet of a
string with string parameter  and time .
Using the expanding formula of 
 in the -mapping topological current
theory we have
 
where  are the intersection points of
strings 
 with surface  and  is winding number of  (
) around string  on  at . Then we have
 
This is our -mapping topological
current theory of cosmic strings in  and , which shows
that the cosmic strings are created from the zeros of complex
scalar ordered parameter field  () and the
length  of each string is topologically quantized by winding
numbers with Planck length  .

Complex Scalar Quintessence 

Recent observation of type Ia supernova(SNe
Ia) revealed that the expansion of the Universe is
accelerating. This means the pressure of Universe
is negative. The result of BOOMERanG supports a flat Universe
() which leads to that the total density of the Universe is
equal to the so-called critical density. The
properties of these observed have important implication for
cosmology that the Universe consists of 1/200th bright stars,
 dark matter and  "dark energy" with a negative
pressure as . The latest
observations of distant quasars distorted by massive invisible
objects have provided fresh evidence that the Universe is mostly
made up of mysterious "dark energy". In the light of
these observations, some cosmologists called the exotic dark
energy as quintessence, a slowly evolving scalar or complex
scalar. The main goal of this section is to show
that the complex scalar field acting as the order parameter which
creates the cosmic strings can also lead to both negative pressure
and acceleration of Universe. Therefore the complex scalar order
parameter field introduced in the last section can play an
important role of quintessence, so-called dark energy.
In the standard cosmology our Universe is
described by the Friedman-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric:
 
here  is the cosmic scale factor,  is the signature of
curvature. The cosmology dynamic equations are well-known as
following
 
 
The eq.() leads to
 
where  is the critical density which is related to the
hubble constant.
Suppose that the
Lagrangian density for the complex scalar order parameter field is
 
where   are real and imaginary parts of the
complex scalar order parameter field  and
 is a potential function of 
. In the last section, using the -mapping theory we have
shown that the singularities of  can create the
cosmic strings. As in the case of scalar
field, the perfect fluid model
in standard cosmology for Lagrangian () gives
 
 
As we know the scale factor  is very large in the present
Universe, and the above two equations become
 
 
As usual   is considered as
slowly evolving, i.e. approximately static
 
then we have
 
and
 
Thus, the complex scalar order parameter possesses a negative
pressure  which leads to an
accelerating expansion Universe by eq.().
The observations of the power spectrum of
cosmic microwave background (CMB) indicate that the Universe is a
spatially flat Universe( ) and from () we have
 
i.e. total density of the Universe is equal to the critical
density . As mentioned in the beginning of this section
the recent observations implicate that the quintessence is enough
to explain the unknown  of critical density. Therefore the
complex scalar order parameter field with both negative pressure
and creating the cosmic strings is a reasonable candidate for the
quintessence(dark energy).
It must be
pointed out that from () and the equation of motion of the
perfect fluid with FRW metric, we can find a inflation solution of
the Universe
 
where
 
This shows that in a very small time interval
 
the Universe should be expanded  times,
i.e.
 
Therefore our complex scalar quintessence can also give an
explanation of the inflation in the early Universe.

Conclusion 

We present a new Lorentz gauge invariant
topological  field theory. By virtue of the decomposition
theory of gauge potential and the -mapping topological
current theory, we prove that from the viewpoint of spacetime
defects the set of zero points of 
  create cosmic strings. When  , the complex scalar order parameter field which has the
property of negative pressure can reasonably play a role of
quintessence i.e. so-called dark energy. We also want to point out
that for the spacetime defects theory of cosmic strings it need
naturally introduce the order parameter field that just behave as
the quintessence of our Universe. We think that the further
investigation of creating quarks and leptons from cosmic strings
or quintessence is important.


Acknowledgments 


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China and the Doctoral Foundation of People's Republic of
China.


 99    Y. S. Duan and Z. P. Duan, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 24 , (1986) 513
;
Y. S. Duan and S. L. Zhang 29 , (1991) 153 ; 30 , (1992) 153;
Yi-shi Duan, Sheng-Li Zhang, Sze-Shiang Feng, J. Math. Phys.
35 , (9), (1994), 1-6;
Y. S. Duan, G. H. Yang and Y. Jiang, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. A13 ,(1998) 2001; ibid. Gen. Rel. Grav. 29 ,
(1997) 715.
Y. S. Duan and Y. Jiang, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 ,
(1999) 563;
  Y.S.Duan and S.L.Zhang, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 28 , (1990) 689
  William M. Baker, Baxter Rogers, Douglas Irving, Torsion
Fields Which Produce Cosmic Strings, CB.02, The 63nd  Meeting
of SESAPS ,1996
  V. De Sabbata, IL Nuovo Cimemto. 107 A , (1994) 363 .
  Y. S. Duan, In Proc.Symposium on Yang-Mills gauge theories
(Beijing)(1984);
  Duan, Y; Fu, L; Zhang, H , Mod. Phys. Lett., A: 14  (1999) no.29, 2011-2023
  Y.S. Duan and X.H. Meng, J. Math. Phys. 34 , (1993) 1549;
Yishi Duan, Hong Zhang and Sheng Li, Phys. Rev. B 58 , (1998) 125 ;
Yishi Duan and Hong Zhang, Phys. Rev. E 60 , (1999) 2568 ;
Yi-shi Duan, Xin liu and Pengming Zhang, J. Phys.:Condens. Matter 14  (2002) 7941-7947

  't Hooft, G. Nucl. Phys. B 79 , (1974) 276
  Ying Jiang, Yishi Duan, J. Math. Phys. 24  (2000) 6463
  E . Goursat,  A Course in Mathematical Analysis Vol. I, translated by Earle Raymond Hedrick, 1904
  Li-Bin Fu, Yi-Shi Duan, Hong Zhang,Phys. Rev. D 61  (2000) 045004
  S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. 517, (1999) 565;
A. G. Riess et al., Astron. J. 116 , (1998) 1009.
  de Bernardis, P. et al. Nature 404 , (2000) 955-959.
  Michael S. Turner, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17  (2002) 3446-3458
  K.-H. Chae,1 A. D. Biggs etc. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 , (2002) 151301
  Je-An Gu and W. -Y. P. Hwang, Phys. Lett. B 517  (2001) 1-6
  B. Ratra and P. J. E. Peebles, Phys. Rev. D 37  (1988) 3406.
  C. Wetterich, Astron.  Astrophys. 301  (1995) 321.
  K. Coble, S. Dodelson and J. Frieman, Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 1851.
  M. S. Turner and M. White, Phys. Rev. D 56  (1997) 4439.
  Caldwell R., Dave R. and Steinhardt P. J., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 80  (1998) 1582.

