






  
  
  









 






 
    A Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz string with one end fixed



 

 
 Physics Department, Bogazici University, 80815 Bebek,
Istanbul, Turkey

 Feza Gursey Institute, TUBITAK-Bogazici University,
81220,
Istanbul, Turkey  





 

 We study an RNS string with one end fixed on a -brane and
the other end free as a qualitative guide to the spectrum of
hadrons containig one very heavy quark. The mixed boundary
conditions break half of the world-sheet supersymmetry.
Boson-fermion masses can still be matched if space-time is 9
dimensional; thus  triality still plays a role in the
spectrum, although full space-time supersymmetry does not survive.
We quantize the system in a temporal-like gauge where 
.  Only odd  and even  R modes remain, while the
NS oscillators  become odd-integer moded.  Although the gauge
choice eliminates negative-norm states at the outset, there are
still even-moded Virasoro and even(odd) moded super-Virasoro
constraints to be imposed in the NS(R) sectors. The Casimir energy
is now positive for R states, but vanishes for NS; there are no
tachyons. States for  are explicitly
constructed and found to be organized into  irreps by
(super)constraints, which include a novel "" operator
in the NS and  in the R sectors. GSO projections
are not allowed.  The distinctive physical signatures of the
system are (i) a slope twice that of the open string, (ii) absence
of all but leading trajectories, yielding an asympotic level
density  instead of . When
both ends are fixed, all leading and subleading trajectories are
eliminated instead, resulting in a spectrum qualitatively similar
to the  and  particles.






Introduction 


Bosonic String theory was originally discovered 
 while trying to account for observed properties of
hadron dynamics, and it was indeed qualitatively successful in
reproducing features of hadron physics such as linear Regge
trajectories for mesons, amplitudes with Dolen-Horn-Schmid duality
 and desired high- and  behaviors and poles
. The nearly-massless up and down quarks and antiquarks
were incorporated into the string picture by being placed at open
string endpoints, where Neumann boundary conditions ensured their
moving at the speed of light.  Harari-Rosner diagrams
 were useful for keeping track of internal quantum
numbers and visualising duality between Regge pole exchanges and
resonances in the -channel.

There was an obvious need to find an extension of the string model
that could encompass baryons, which had masses similar to those of
the mesons (except for the very light pion), and also lay
on Regge trajectories with approximately the same slope.  These
similarities suggested a new kind of symmetry (albeit partially
broken, in view of the non-vanishing mass differences) between
bosons and fermions, and string models featuring such a symmetry
were constructed by Ramond and Neveu and Schwarz
.  It gradually became clear, however, that
hadron dynamics was governed by a gauge theory, and
superstring theory was elevated to the status of a promising candidate
for describing quantum gravity and other fundamental physical phenomena at
distances of  m.  The partial success of strings in modelling
hadrons was attributed to gluons forming string-like flux tubes between
quarks.

It may be instructive to return to this oldest use
of string theory as a phenomenological guide for the study of new
generations of baryons and mesons containing at least one heavy
(of the top, bottom or charmed variety) and one light quark. In an
earlier work we modeled such mesons as excitations of an
open string with one end fixed on a -brane and the other end free.
This gave rise to testable predictions such as a restriction to
odd oscillator modes and a doubled Regge slope.  Whether the
description is of any merit will become apparent when higher
spin excitations
of heavy quark bearing mesons are found and studied.  Strings with mixed
boundary conditions have also been considered in
.

In this note, we examine the Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz (RNS) version of
.  Our  main motivation and hope is that this may
provide qualitative hints about the spectrum of baryons and mesons
with a single  or a  quark, although we of course do not expect
it to provide a heavy-hadron  model that is realistic in all its details.
Apart from its possible phenomenological usefulness, the system is
also of some intrinsic string-theoretic interest in a number of respects.
One of
these is that its most natural treatment requires a gauge halfway
between the light-cone and the old covariant treatments.  The old
covariant method of quantization of even the standard RNS string
is described only very sketchily in standard reference works such
as; the detailed implementation of the constraints
peculiar to our problem  and the subsequent emergence of the physical
spectrum turns out to be surprisingly intricate.  Another
interesting feature is the partial breaking of world-sheet
supersymmetry through mixed boundary conditions and the way this
is manifested in the space-time picture.

The plan of the paper is as follows: In section 2 we obtain the
mode expansions and the restricted SUSY transformations allowed by
our novel boundary conditions.  We then impose a gauge we might
call "the rest-frame gauge". Section 3 is devoted to the Virasoro
and super-Virasoro constraints in the NS and R sectors.  Some of
the new features that emerge include the limitation of the
Virasoro algebra to even modes, while the modes of the R and NS
constraints can only be odd and even respectively. The
Virasoro and super-Virasoro algebras turn out to have
non-vanishing anomalies in all dimensions for reasons we will
discuss.  In section 4, we work out the low-lying members of the
NS and R spectra.  The organization and projection of physical
states into specific  irreps via the constraints involves
novelties such as an NS constraint that may be regarded as "a
bosonic-sector square root of " and an R constraint which is a
truncated form of the usual Ramond-Dirac operator .  The
spectrum does not exhibit full space-time supersymmetry, but it is
at least possible to match the masses of bosons and fermions if
, which means aspects of  triality are still
reflected in the states. Because of changes in the modes, the NS
Casimir energy now vanishes, while the R ground state becomes massive.
For higher states, the principal feature
of the model distinguishing it from the ordinary RNS one  is the absence of
daughter trajectories.  This leads to a  behavior in the
multiplicity of states (at mass level )  instead of
the usual . The paper ends with concluding remarks in
section 5.



The classical RNS string with one end fixed 
Equation of motion: 

We start with standard material to set our notation and
conventions.  In the superconformal gauge the action reads
 
where  represents the two dimensional Dirac
matrices and a convenient basis satisfying

is
 





, 




.
We will denote the upper and lower components of  as
 and , respectively.  We should note that the
Dirac operator, , is real in this
representation; thus, the components of the Majorana world sheet
spinor may be taken as real. In this paper, our focus will be on
these spinor degrees of freedom since the bosonic fields have
already been treated in.

The fermion equation of motion derived from (1) is simply the two
dimensional Dirac equation and in the chosen basis it splits up
into the following equations:
 
The equation of motion for the bosonic field in the same basis is
 
Boundary conditions and mode expansions: 

The boundary conditions for the the bosonic fields are as in
: We locate the infinitely massive "quark" at the
 end and identify this point with the origin of target
space coordinates through the Dirichlet boundary condition
 
while we adopt the Neumann boundary condition
 
for the massless end.  If we use the usual integrally moded
oscillators to expand , these two conditions lead to the
requirement that  for even n and
 (another option, adopted in among others,
is to maintain the usual range  for , in which case the
 oscillators become half-integrally moded; our
choice is to work with the odd-numbered subset of the original
integral modes rather than to introduce an entirely new set of
oscillators). As mentioned in, the disappearance of the
even modes is quite similar to the same phenomenon in the
elementary quantum mechanics problem of a half-oscillator
potential  for ,  for 
. As in the usual RNS string, vanishing of the surface term
requires  at each end, and
without loss of generality, we set 
 for  and then consider the
two cases depending on the relative sign at .
Leaving the question of how to reconcile the choice at 
with world-sheet supersymmetry to the next section, the two cases
arising from the sign choices are the following:

(i) The Ramond (R) boundary condition
 
leads to the exclusively even-moded expansion
 

(ii) The Neveu-Schwarz (NS) boundary condition
 
results in the odd-integer modes
 
We note that while the boundary conditions merely restrict the
Ramond oscillators  to even and the  to
odd modes, the Neveu-Schwarz sector actually changes from
half-integral to odd integral oscillators.  This will lead to a
massless NS and a massive R ground state, reversing the usual RNS
results.

Broken global world-sheet SUSY: 
The action is invariant under the infinitesimal world-sheet
supersymmetry transformations
 
 
with  a constant anticommuting spinor. Let us examine
the space components of (13) and (14) first. For fermionic fields
(13) combined with (5) gives
 
This would normally be satisfied either by

(i)
 
and
 
or by

(ii)
 
and
 
However, having ruled out (ii) by our choice of boundary
conditions in the previous subsection, we are restricted to (i),
which eliminates half of the world-sheet supersymmetry.  We could
have reversed the fermion boundary conditions at the two ends and
consequently chosen (ii), but the obvious conclusion is that our
mixed Dirichlet-Neumann conditions are compatible with only half
of the usual supersymmetry transformations.  This breaking of
worldsheet SUSY will have to manifest itself in the space-time
spectrum, as we will see later.  Since Poincare  invariance has
been explicitly broken, we do not expect spacetime supersymmetry
operators, which are essentially square-roots of the Poincare 
generators, to be effective.

Gauge Choice: 

For the bosonic string with one end fixed at the origin, it was
natural to choose the gauge condition

 
just as the light-cone gauge  is suited to a string
with both ends moving at the speed of light.  Indeed, the first
excited state of such a free open string is a massless vector
boson with  polarizations, which is the number of transverse
oscillators used in the light-cone gauge. Our problem, in
contrast, leads to a massive vector with  polarization
states, which is in accord with (20). Combining this gauge choice
with (13), we get

 

This is similar to setting all the  and 
oscillators to zero in the light-cone gauge treatment of the usual
RNS string.  The condition (21) kills all the  modes of
the NS-sector.  On the other hand, for the R-sector, all
 modes are zero except . To see why this mode
survives, consider the explicit form of (21) with the  in
(15) replaced with  and .  This
is only compatible with  being non-zero.  This is just
as well, since we would not want to lose an element of the
Clifford algebra in .

Quantization 

With the "rest-frame gauge" chosen above,  the 
modes and their associated negative norm  states are
discarded at the outset.  However, unlike the situation in the
light-cone gauge, this does not mean that all the states obtained
by hitting the ground state with the spacelike oscillators are
automatically physical. In the light-cone gauge, the constraints
are implemented at the operatorial level, allowing one to solve
for the  in terms of transverse oscillators.  Our
gauge choice does not involve an off-diagonal space-time
metric and does not offer a similar possibility.  There are still
constraints which must be imposed on all possible states, and only
the states annihilated by these constraints are the final physical
ones. This is similar to non-covariant treatments of gauge
theories where one first sets , but then also imposes
 to isolate the physical degrees of freedom.


Canonical Quantization: 

We will follow the conventional canonical quantization procedure.
The canonical anticommutation relations for the fermionic fields
are

 

Substituting the known mode expansions, we obtain anticommutation
relations for the modes.  These are

 
for the NS-sector, and

 
for the R-sector. Finally, the  mode obeys

 

As in the ordinary RNS string, the  and  are
proportional to the Dirac gamma matrices with 
 in  dimensional Minkowski space.

Super-Virasoro constraints 

The unphysical modes are eliminated by imposing
 and
 on the states, where
 and  are the
positive-frequency components of the energy-momentum tensor and
the supercurrent, respectively.

The energy-momentum tensor for the fermionic part is
 
and, in the chosen gauge, its components in conformal coordinates
are
 
The supercurrent is
 
The nonzero components of the supercurrent, again in conformal
coordinates, are
 
The conservation law of the supercurrent yields
 
We now examine the implications of these constraints in the
Neveu-Schwarz and Ramond sectors.

Neveu-Schwarz constraints 

The super-Virasoro operators are the Fourier coefficients of the
energy-momentum tensor and supercurrent. To obtain these
coefficients we use the fact that 
and the "doubling trick" of Polchinski, extending the
region of integration to .  We can
then write
 

Substituting the mode expansions, we get

 
where  is seen to be necessarily even.  The  thus
complement the  which are also even.  This is an
indication of the consistency of the mode elimination scheme
imposed by our mixed boundary conditions.

The fermionic generators of this sector are obtained similarly
using , which results in

 
In terms of the mode expansions one finds
 
where  is again forced to be even .

The super-Virasoro algebra for this sector is

 
where  and

 
where, in the second line, m is even and nonzero.

We see that all super-Virasoro operators have their usual forms,
say as in, except for the fact that they are written in
terms of odd modes only. We must now see how this changes the central
extension terms. The -mode anomaly  was
calculated in with the result

 

Thus we will only calculate the anomaly due to the -modes, and
this can be easily done via

 
where m is, of course, even and positive.  The expectation value
in the third line vanishes for  and , whereas the
expectation value in the fourth line vanishes for  and
.  This yields

 
where all the summations above are over odd integers and
 is the number of space coordinates.  The
summation in the second line, when taken over all integers,
produces the well-known NS-sector central extension term.  On the
other hand, our odd integer summation gives

 

Hence the total central extension term of the first commutator is
 

Can this anomaly be cancelled by ghost contributions?  There are
general reasons to expect the answer to be negative: Our Dirichlet
boundary condition reduces the usual full open string disc to half
a disc with a diameter that is not allowed to change under
conformal mappings (the appearance of only even Virasoro modes is
related to this constraint; in classical terms, we only have the
operators 
, which can only effect conformal transformations invariant
under ).  Furthermore, world-sheet and space-time
properties are always intimately linked: the symmetry of the
world-sheet  action under diffeomorphisms and Weyl symmetry
ensures Poincare  invariance in space-time; similarly, world-sheet
supersymmetry is transformed into space-time supersymmetry after
the GSO projection. Reasoning in the other direction, our breaking
Poincare  invariance down to  by choosing a special fixed
point suggests a breakdown in conformal symmetry on the world-sheet. As a
simple explicit example, we will show below how ghosts indeed fail to
remove the anomaly in the bosonic string with one end fixed.

We will use the notation of. The main new feature is
that the open string boundary conditions  and
 at  and  lead to
the exclusively even-moded expansions
 

The ghost Virasoro operators are
 
where  m is again even.  The  satisfy the usual
Virasoro algebra
 
with an anomaly term
 
The complete Virasoro generators corresponding to 
are  , where
we have shifted  so that it will annihilate physical states.
The total anomaly is now
 
The presence of the term quadratic in  shows that no choice of
 and  can make the total anomaly disappear.  In this
respect, our system resembles an ordinary string in a lower than
critical dimension.

Leaving ghosts aside for the rest of paper, we now return to the
central extension term appearing in the anti-commutator of the
. This can be similarly computed with the result
 

At this point, we note that the anomaly-free  closed
subalgebra of the NS-sector of the usual RNS string is now reduced
to the Abelian super-subalgebra of  and .

The mass-shell condition comes from the zero-frequency part of the
Virasoro constraint .  At the quantum level,
the masses of the states follow from

 
where  is the Casimir energy resulting from normal
ordering. In the NS sector, the mass shell condition reads

 

Substituting the mode expansions, this becomes

 

where

 


The Casimir energy is now

 
showing that the normal ordering constant for our NS-sector
vanishes. Hence the usual tachyonic ground state in the NS
spectrum has now been replaced by a massless scalar.

Although the Casimir energy is zero for this sector, we calculate
the sum  for
later use.  Using , the sum over odd
integers is simply , and hence
the result is .  This shortcut calculation agrees
with the result obtained from regularization schemes.

Ramond constraints 

The super-Virasoro operators of this sector  are

 
and

 
Substituting the known mode expansions of  and , we
find

 
where m must be even, and

 
where s is  necessarily odd.  An exception is the operator

 
which is all that survives here from  the generalized Dirac
operator  of the standard RNS string. The super-Virasoro algebra of
this sector is as follows:

 
where  and the commutators (or
anticommutators, as appropriate) of  or
 with other operators vanish.

The central extension terms of this algebra can be calculated as
in the previous section, giving

 

Then the total central extension term of the first commutator,
including the contribution of the  modes becomes

 

A similar treatment for the central extension term of
anti-commutators of fermionic generators yields

 

To calculate the normal ordering constant of this sector, we
proceed exactly as in the previous section.  The mass-shell
condition for this sector is

 

In terms of modes, this becomes

 
where  has already been given in (64) and

 

The Casimir energy is now

 

We note that the normal ordering constant here is nonzero, unlike
that of the R-sector of the usual RNS string.

The Spectrum 
Mass formulas in the NS- and R-Sectors: 

With the calculated normal ordering constants, we can write down
the mass-shell conditions.  For the NS-sector, we have
 
while for the R-sector
 
where , as calculated in.
This doubling of the slope relative to  of the usual
open string is one of the principal distinguishing features of our
system. A quick way to understand this result is to consider a
classical string with one end fixed in its highest angular
momentum (leading Regge trajectory) mode, where it rotates
rigidly. This can also be viewed as an ordinary open string in the
same mode with its center of mass at rest and then throwing away
one half.  In order to preserve the  relation 
with  and  both being halved, the slope has to be doubled.

Since half of the world-sheet supersymmetry has been broken at the
beginning by the restriction , we do
not expect  space-time supersymmetry to appear the way it does in
the RNS string subjected to the GSO projection. Actually, the
halving of supersymmetry via -branes is a familiar
phenomenon, and the fixed end here is nothing but a
-brane.  While the spectrum is thus not expected to be fully
supersymmetric, we have two further options in the degree of
superymmetry breaking:

(i) :   The masses of the states in the NS-sector have the
the same values as those in the R-sector for 
, partially preserving SUSY in the mass spectrum.

(ii) :   Mass values in the two sectors are
completely different and SUSY is completely broken.


In the following, we wil work with the minimal supersymmetry breaking
option , . All states except the NS scalar being
massive, we expect to see irreps of , which is clearly a
remnant of the space-time SUSY enjoyed by the ten-dimensional
superstring. We now examine the spectra of the two sectors sectors
separately.

Neveu-Schwarz spectrum: 
A physical state in the NS-sector must satisfy

 
and the last condition leads to
.

There is also a   constraint that has to be handled
separately.  An examination of the NS constraint algebra (37-39)
shows that all the physical state conditions can be obtained from
,  and . The latter does not in fact annihilate
physical states; it instead requires them to be eigenstates with
the mass as the eigenvalue.  From (39) and (85) (recall
), we see that

 
We note that this amounts to taking the square root of the
Klein-Gordon-like operator .  The novelty is that this
happens not in the fermionic but in the bosonic sector!

We now examine how low-lying physical states are obtained.  Since
negative-metric states have been barred from the beginning, it is
not immediately obvious what role is left for the above
constraints to play.  If we use the  directly, the answer in
the bosonic NS sector turns out to be that all 
and  oscillators for  are ruled out, and the
surviving states are automaticaly organized into  irreps.
Hence the daughter trajectories are eliminated from the spectrum.
The  constraints prune the remaining states even further; for
example, a potential  state of the form
 is
prohibited by the  constraint. Finally, the 
constraint allows only specific linear combinations of the states
that have survived that far. This is obviously different from what
happens in the light-cone gauge in the usual RNS string, where all
combinations of 
oscillators on the vacuum are guaranteed to produce physical
states, which then combine with the others at the same mass to
give  irreps.  There being no obvious pattern to the
allowed states beyond what we have just mentioned, we limit
ourselves to displaying below the contents of the first four
levels.


 

 

ia a massless scalar, providing  a stable vacuum for this sector.
, : We start with the two massive
vector states
 



 
allowed by the  constraint.  However, the only combination
permitted by  is .
, : Under , the massive
tensor states
* 
are the allowed combinations.  We recall that since the even
 and b modes have been eliminated at the beginning, we
cannot have excitations such as  and
. Out of these four, the condition
 allows only



and



, 
* 
* 

The tensorial form of the first state is dictated by ,
which is obtained from the anticommutator of  and . As
mentioned earlier, the same  prohibits states with higher
oscillators of the form , The forms
of the second and fourth states are determined by the action of
. Finally, only the combination



obeys .

Ramond spectrum: 

The physical states in the Ramond sector must satisfy


 
However, using the superalgebra (72-76), one can see that these
infinite set of conditions can be reduced to just the , 
and  constraints.  In addition, taking the square root of
(76), we have an  constraint which simplifies to
 

This is what remains of the Dirac equation.  We must now discuss
the properties of the Ramond ground state  and
the meaning of (94).

Majorana spinors with 16 components (and depending on 16 real
parameters) are allowed in our  Minkowski space-time.
These 16 components consist of linear combinations of the two
independent  spinors, which we will denote by 
and .  These are projected out of a 16-component
spinor by the operators  and ,
respectively.  Thus (94) indeed serves as a Dirac equation in
halving the number of independent components.

We now apply combinations of creation operators with  on
ground states , and then obtain the physically
allowed combinations by imposing the  and 
conditions:


 





Note the  constraint (94) has eliminated  and kept
.







is the only permissible combination.
Imposing 
forces  to be   since 
anticommutes with .

* 

The  and  parts of this separately satisfy the
Virasoro constraints (92) and (93), but the superconstraints (91) force
them into this particular combination. Because of the even number
of  modes, the basic spinor is .
The  transformation properties of these states have been indicated
above, but one must be careful in distinguishing between these boldface
numbers and the actual physical degrees of freedom (the
NS spectrum, where the boldface numbers are identical with the
number of physical states, is free of this complication).
The R-sector  generators are built out of 's
and 's, and thus transform the R-states exactly as indicated as
in boldface.  However, a look at the  state shows that we cannot be
dealing with 35x8 physical states: the  merely shuffle the 8
components of the ground state spinor.  Thus we have at most 8x8 = 64
states, but since the tensor is traceless, 8 spinor components
corresponding to  are absent, and the true physical
content is .  This is not as unfamiliar a situation as it
might first appear: consider a scalar field  and its gradient
.  The latter transforms as a -vector, but the
physical degree of freedom is still just , which is a -scalar.

Examining the physical content of the  states, we see that
 contains 35x8 = 280 states,
but these do not belong to a single irrep.  Among the 280 states there is
a  of the form 
 and the rest is .  The part
 represents another ,
because the  does not increase the number of states
(bringing the number down from 280 to 64) and tracelessness in 
takes off another 8.  Thus the  content is 
.  Counting the  and  modes separately
and adding the numbers may seem surprising, but it is again not new: in
the Higgs phenomenon, the massless photon field  and
 are added to form the massive vector
field .  Although all three formally transform as 4-vectors,
the final  has 2+1 = 3 degrees of freedom.

Discussion 

Our concern in this note has been twofold: The first was to see whether an
RNS string with one fixed end would provide qualitative
phenomenological hints and distinctive signatures about the spectrum of
hadrons with one very heavy quark.  The second concern was the more formal
one of working out the novel consequences of the unusual mixed
Dirichlet-Neumann boundary conditions and seeing  whether the
resulting system can be quantized in a consistent way. Just as in the
original attempts to apply string theory to hadrons, these two aims are
partially in conflict, most notably in the dimension of space-time.

Ignoring this conflict as was customarily done in the old string-based
hadrodynamics, we can summarize the predictions of our model as follows:
(i) There is no
space-time supersymmetry except for the fact that meson and baryon Regge
trajectories have the same slope, leading to equal meson and baryon masses
for the higher states. (ii)  The Regge slope is twice that of the one
observed for lighter hadrons. (iii) There are no daughter trajectories,
which means the number of states at mass  behave asymptotically
as const.  (in keeping with the policy of disregarding
unrealistic demands of the model whenever inconvenient,  presumably
has to be taken as 3 rather than 8), rather than the 
behavior seen for ordinary hadrons.  An interesting point here is that if
we consider an interaction where the free
ends of two of our strings  join  while the heavy quark ends are kept
fixed, we are led to a model in which 
 with  in the range
.  For such strings with both ends fixed on -branes, all
 modes and, consequently, all  are allowed.  In this
sector, there will be "daughter excitations", with the same spin but
equally spaced masses. but not in the sense there
are any leading linear Regge trajectories above them (the latter cannot be
present  because the
balancing of centrifugal force against tension in a rigid rotation
mode that defines leading trajectories is imposible when both
ends are fixed). This is in qualitative, and one hopes, not entirely
fortuitous  accord with the multiplicity of
 and  states of spin one. In any case,
the Coulomb part of the QCD potential is known to play an
important role in the dynamics of heavy quark-antiquark systems, ensuring
deviations from a mass spectrum based on the purely string-based picture.

Turning to string-theoretic issues, we start with the question of whether
using the more conventional  range  would have made a
physical difference. One may  anticipate that the simultaneous doubling of
the  range and the
halving of the mode index  will result in an equivalent physical
system,
and this is indeed what happens.  The mixed boundary conditions now produce
half-integral  and  modes and integral Ramond  modes, but
the allowed physical spectrum is exactly as the one above except for an
overall scaling.  In particular, the vanishing of the NS vacuum energy
and the preference for a  space-time and  symmetry remain.
We
prefer working with odd  and  and even  modes because this
leads to the disappearence of odd 's.  We have broken
Poincare  invariance by fixing one end of the string at a
special point in space; this is consistent with discarding the
operators   and  which involve the generator of space
translations.

The GSO projection turns out to be inapplicable to the mixed boundary
condition superstring.
This is already suggested by the fact that low-lying states do
not exhibit space-time supersymmetry beyond matching masses and Regge slopes
in the two sectors, but there are more basic manifestations of the
incompatibility. For example, our final physical states are not
homogeneous in the number of
space-time fermions.  Furthermore, in the R-sector we already have
the remnant Dirac equation operators , but not in the role
they play in the GSO projection. Since the mode structure here is
different from the standard RNS string (for example, our  operators
add an integer rather than half  an integer to the squared mass), one
could not in any case have expected the GSO procedure to work in the usual
way.





Acknowledgements 

We are indebted to M. Arik, S. Deg er, C. Deliduman, M. Duff,
R. Gu ven, A. Kaya, P. Sundell and G. Thompson for helpful
discussions. 

 25 

 Nambu Y 1970 Quark model and the factorization of the
Veneziano amplitude Symmetries and Quark Models   ed R Chand (New
York:
Gordon and Breach) p 269; Nambu Y 1970 Duality and Hadrodynamics
Lectures at the Copenhagen Symp  

 Susskind L Phys. Rev.   D 1   1182

 Dolen R, Horn D and Schmid C 1968  Phys. Rev.  
166   1768

 Veneziano G 1968 Nuovo Cimento   A 57   190

 Harari H 1969  Phys. Rev. Lett   22   562

 Rosner J 1969  Phys. Rev. Lett   22   689

 Ramond P 1971  Phys. Rev.   D 3   2415

 Neveu and Schwarz J H 1971 Nucl. Phys   B31  

 Gu rsoy U and Sac liog lu C 2001 Class.
Quantum Grav.  18   2665

 Corrigan E and Fairlie D B 1975 Nucl. Phys.   B
91  

 Siegel W 1976 Nucl. Phys.   B 91   527

 Kleinert H, Lambiase G and Nesterenko V V 1996 Phys.
Lett.   B 384   313
 Fro hlich J, Grandjean O, Recknagel A and Schomerus V
2000 Nucl. Phys.   B 583   381
 Green M B, Schwartz J H and Witten E 1987 Superstring
Theory   vol 1(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 206
  Polchinski J 1998 String Theory   vol 1 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press) 57
 Polchinski J 1998 String Theory   vol 2 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press) 136
 Gliozzi F, Scherk J and Olive D 1977 Nucl. Phys.   B
122   253

