





                                         
                     
            
            
                        








    







     





  
  

 [.3cm] 
#1  
#1  


 
#1 #2    
1 2  
 
 
i  
Tr  
STr  
^  


N   
Z   
Q   
R   
C   


B  
H  
R  
  
F    
L    


i
Ortin 




11:letter
  

















      0#6#7 
      2#4#5 
      #3
      #1      ##             #22              @ 
             0    



 
-  




.450 "006C 1 




KUL-TF-2003/05 
FFUOV-03/02 
hep-th/0303183 
March 2003 
2truecm 


A Microscopical Description of Giant Gravitons II: 
.5truecm 
The  Background  
1.3truecm 


    Bert Janssen (E-mail address: 
                                  bert.janssen@fys.kuleuven.ac.be  ) ,
    Yolanda Lozano (E-mail address: 
                                  yolanda@string1.ciencias.uniovi.es ) 
    and 
    Diego Rodriguez-Gomez (E-mail address:
                                  diego@fisi35.ciencias.uniovi.es ) 
                                                             


Institute for Theoretical Physics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,  
Celestijnenlaan 200D, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium   


 
Departamento de Fisica,  Universidad de Oviedo, 
  
          Avda. Calvo Sotelo 18, 33007 Oviedo, Spain 

 
Departamento de Fisica Teorica, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid,

          Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain 
2truecm 



ABSTRACT 
.5truecm 

In this article we continue with the microscopical investigation
of giant graviton configurations in  spacetimes, initiated in
hep-th/0207199. Using dualities and a Matrix theory derivation we propose an
action that describes multiple Type IIB gravitons. This action contains multipole
moment couplings to the Type IIB background potentials. Using these couplings,
we study, from the microscopical point of view, the giant graviton and dual giant
graviton configurations in the  background. In both cases the
gravitons expand into a non-commutative 3-sphere, that is defined as an 
-bundle over a fuzzy 2-sphere. When the number of gravitons is large we find perfect
agreement with the Abelian, macroscopical description of giant gravitons in this
spacetime, given in the literature.








Introduction 

Giant gravitons are stable brane 
configurations with non-zero angular momentum, that are wrapped around
- or -spheres
in  spacetimes, and carry a dipole moment with respect to the
background gauge potential. 
They are not topologically stable, but are at a dynamical 
equilibrium because the contraction due to the tension of the brane is precisely 
cancelled by the expansion due to the coupling of the angular momentum to the background 
flux field.  It turns out that these spherical brane configurations are massless, 
conserve the same number of
supersymmetries and carry the same quantum numbers of a graviton. The fact 
that they are extended objects of finite size has lead to the name of giant gravitons.  

These configurations were first proposed in as a way to satisfy the stringy
exclusion principle implied by the AdS/CFT correspondence. The spherical -brane
expands into the  part of the geometry with a radius proportional to its
angular momentum. Since this radius is bounded by the radius of the , the
configuration has associated a maximum angular momentum.
The -brane giant graviton configurations later found in expand, 
on the other hand,
into the  component of the spacetime, so that there is no upper bound implied on
their angular momentum. They are referred to in the literature as dual
giant gravitons. One expects that quantum mechanically these different states will tunnel
into each other, forming a unique ground state. In it is speculated that
the stringy exclusion principle may still be satisfied if  
once the quantum mixing is taken into account there is no supersymmetric
ground state for angular momenta
beyond the exclusion principle bound. Other giant graviton solutions in various backgrounds
have been studied elsewhere in the literature. Giant gravitons
in pp-wave backgrounds have been studied in.

The appearance of giant gravitons as blown up massless particles hints to a connection 
with other examples of expanded brane configurations, more precisely to the dielectric effect, 
where multiple coinciding D-branes can expand into higher dimensional D-brane
configurations.  
There are two complementary descriptions of this effect. Consider the case in which the
D-branes expand into a spherical D-brane.
The first one is an Abelian description, describing 
the spherical D-brane with a large number of D-branes dissolved on its worldvolume
. The second one is a non-Abelian formulation,
describing how multiple coinciding
D-branes expand into a D-brane with the topology of a fuzzy 2-sphere. 
Both descriptions agree in the limit 
where the number  of D-branes is very large.

It has been suggested in the literature (see for example 
) that it should be possible to describe the giant
gravitons of in terms of dielectric gravitational waves.
Since massless particles, in particular gravitons, are the source terms for 
gravitational waves, it is natural to expect that a dielectric effect for these 
gravitational waves will provide a microscopic picture for the giant graviton 
configurations. By analogy with the dielectric effect for D-branes,
it is believed that in the 
limit when the number of gravitons, , is large, this non-Abelian, microscopical 
description should match the Abelian, macroscopical description of,
in terms of an spherical brane with angular momentum, where microscopically
the angular momentum of the Abelian description is
interpreted as the total momentum of the multiple gravitational waves, propagating in
the spherical part of the geometry. 

In an action describing Type IIB gravitational waves was derived using 
Matrix string theory in a weakly curved background.
This action shows the linear couplings to closed string backgrounds, 
and contains the now familiar multipole couplings that give
rise to the dielectric effect. From them one can construct
configurations of multiple coinciding gravitational waves expanding into
higher dimensional fuzzy surfaces. 
However, with a non-Abelian action for gravitational waves only known
up to linear order in the background fields it is not possible to
check whether dielectric gravitational waves really provide a 
microscopical description for the giant gravitons in 
backgrounds, given that the  spacetime cannot
be taken as a linear perturbation to Minkowski.

In reference we gave one step further in this direction, by
providing a closed expression for the worldvolume action for multiple
M-theory gravitons, valid beyond the linear approximation. A linear action
for M-theory gravitons can easily be constructed by just uplifting the
linear action for multiple Type IIA gravitons constructed in 
 using Matrix string theory in a weakly curved 
background(The derivation in considers Matrix string
theory in a weakly curved background in the Sen-Seiberg limit, so that
the strings carry spatial momentum, and then takes static gauge.
In this way one arrives at an action that describes multiple massless
particles carrying momentum. In the Abelian limit, this action is related to
the perturbative action for massless particles through a Legendre transformation
(we refer the reader to for the details of this construction).) . 
Demanding consistency with the action for
coincident D0-branes when the gravitons propagate along the eleventh direction
it is possible to extend this action beyond the linear approximation used 
in the Matrix theory calculation. In fact, a non-trivial check of this action
is that it predicts the polarisation of the gravitons into fuzzy surfaces,
in such a way that in  backgrounds the energy and radius of 
the dielectric configurations exactly match those of the giant graviton
solutions of(The explicit calculation inis for the giant graviton solution in  and the dual giant
graviton solution in , i.e. the cases involving fuzzy
2-spheres.) .

With a closed expression for the action for M-theory gravitational waves
it is possible to construct an action for Type IIA gravitational waves valid
beyond the linear approximation of. This action was presented
in. Given that Type II waves are simply related by a T-duality
transformation, it is straightforward to construct an action for multiple
Type IIB gravitational waves valid beyond the linear approximation of.
With this action it is then possible to construct explicit configurations
of multiple Type IIB gravitons in the  background, which we
can compare with the 
giant graviton and the dual giant graviton solutions
in this spacetime.
This is precisely the aim of this paper.  

The construction of non-Abelian giant gravitons in  turns out to be more 
involved than the eleven-dimensional non-Abelian giant graviton solutions of. In 
this background 
the gravitational waves expand into a spherical D3-brane, and hence a fuzzy 3-sphere 
Ansatz is needed in the non-Abelian construction, rather than the well-known fuzzy 2-sphere,
in terms of 
 matrices. Non-commutative odd spheres have been constructed in, as 
subspaces of fuzzy even spheres. It turns out that these constructions are not applicable 
to our case. The main reason is that due to our construction of the action for Type IIB 
gravitational waves via T-duality, this action exhibits an extra isometry direction associated 
to the coordinate over which the T-duality was performed. This isometry will require a 
non-manifestly -symmetric solution, which is not of the type presented in.
Furthermore, the fact that we are dealing with gravitational waves, which have a one-dimensional 
worldvolume, allows only non-Abelian couplings similar to the ones one encounters in the case 
of fuzzy two-spheres. The solution to this apparent paradox is to consider the three-sphere as
a -bundle over  and choose the extra isometry direction to be the fibre coordinate. 
The fuzzy version of the  will then consist of a (Abelian) -fibre over a fuzzy .
   
The paper is organised as follows: we start in Section 2 with the construction of the action 
for Type IIB gravitational waves in the way explained in the previous paragraphs.
This action is valid beyond the linear order approximation taken in, 
and can therefore be used to study the  background considered 
in this paper. With this action, we provide, in Section 3, a microscopical description 
of the giant graviton configuration of in . This solution 
is expected to occur, microscopically, in the form of  gravitons polarised in a 
fuzzy 3-sphere contained in . Describing the  as an  bundle over  
and making non-commutative the base 2-sphere we find a giant graviton solution which 
in the large  limit reproduces exactly the (Abelian) result of. This is 
a non-trivial check of the validity of our microscopical description and, in particular, 
of our non-commutative Ansatz. Further support is provided by the calculation in Section 4. 
In this section we construct microscopically the dual giant graviton
solution of. Describing the 3-sphere contained in  as an  bundle
over  and making this  non-commutative we find a dual giant graviton solution 
which is also in perfect agreement with the results in when  is large. 
Section 5 contains the Discussion, where we comment on the relations between our non-commutative 
3-sphere solutions and other constructions of odd non-commutative spheres previously discussed in 
the literature.



 

The action for multiple Type IIB gravitational waves 

In this section we construct an action for Type IIB gravitational waves suitable
for the study of giant graviton configurations in the  
background(We will be dealing throughout the article with only the
bosonic part of the worldvolume effective actions. This is enough for the study
of the bosonic giant graviton configurations.) .
The starting point is the action for multiple Type IIA gravitational waves presented in
. This action is simply the weakly coupled (Type IIA) version of the action 
there proposed for the microscopical study
of M-theory gravitons in  spacetimes. The M-theory action ofgives the couplings of multiple gravitational waves to M-theory background fields,
in the form of a closed expression valid beyond the weak background field limit.
The extension beyond the linear order of Matrix theory can be done
by demanding agreement with the action for multiple
D0-branes when the gravitons propagate along the eleventh direction. 
T-dualising the action for the Type IIA waves we will obtain an action for Type IIB
waves also valid beyond the linear order approximation taken in.

The Born-Infeld action proposed in to describe multiple Type IIA gravitational waves
is given by
 
where
 
In this action the direction of propagation of the waves occurs as an
isometry direction,  being the Killing vector pointing in this 
direction(This is inferred by the analysis of the monopole
term in the Chern-Simons effective action, which shows that the momentum 
arises as the charge with respect to the background field .
For details see.




) .
In our notation  and 
. 
This action is manifestly invariant under global gauge
transformations along the Killing direction:
, since this direction is projected out through the
effective metric  and the
contraction of the 3-form with . The condition that 
implies that the gravitational field is transversal to the direction of propagation
of the waves. For simplicity, this action has been calculated for
vanishing ,  and the worldvolume scalar field .(The 
worldvolume scalar field comes from the reduction of the eleventh scalar, and forms an
invariant field strength with the RR 1-form potential.)  

We now make a T-duality transformation along a tranverse direction  in order to 
obtain the action for Type IIB gravitational waves. This transformation was explained 
in detail in reference, for the linearised action. The action for Type IIB
gravitational waves contains two worldvolume scalars  and , being, respectively,
the T-dual 
of the Type IIA worldvolume scalar  and the T-dual of the embedding scalar in the direction
of the dualisation. Their gauge invariant curvatures are given by 
 and  and 
together they form a doublet under the Type IIB S-duality transformations. Consistently with 
S-duality and the truncation imposed in the Type IIA action, we will set ,
,  and  equal to zero. Also, for simplicity we take .
This truncation is suitable for the study of gravitational waves in
the  background, as we show below. Hence, we obtain the following 
Born-Infeld action:
 
where now
 
Here  is a new Killing vector, pointing along the direction in which we
performed the T-duality transformation. It is easy to check that
this action is invariant under the global isometric transformations generated by 
and : , since these 
directions are projected out through the effective metric
 and the 
double contraction of the 4-form with the two Killing vectors. It is due to the fact that we
have two isometric directions that  can couple to the Born-Infeld part
of the action. This coupling plays a key role in the microscopical description of the 
 giant graviton solution, that we will perform in the next section.
In this action  still points in the direction of propagation of the waves, since under
the T-duality transformation and with the truncations above
the monopole term is mapped onto itself. The other isometric
direction, , is however not physical, but just an artifact of the T-duality transformation.
We are therefore describing waves which are smeared in the -direction. In the Abelian limit,
() is still a complicated expression containing two isometric directions.
However, together with the (Abelian) Chern-Simons coupling, which is given by:
 
this effective action can be related to the (dimensional reduction along the
 direction of the) usual perturbative action for massless particles
 
by means of a Legendre transformation that restores the dependence on the
direction of propagation (see section 2 in for the details).
In the non-Abelian case, however, it is not possible to restore this dependence.
First of all, this direction is not matrix-valued, so even though we could in
principle restore some explicit dependence on its time derivative, the new terms
would be Abelian. Second, it is clear that the Legendre transformation cannot give
rise to non-Abelian commutators involving this direction, so we would end up in any
case with an action with reduced transverse rotational invariance. Thus, we are constrained
to work, in the non-Abelian case, with an action with two isometries, and assume
the presence of the extra unphysical isometry.

This isometry will however play a key role in our microscopical description of giant
graviton configurations in . Indeed, the presence of this compact
isometry suggests the representation of the 3-sphere of the giant graviton configurations
as a  bundle over , with the  invariance being associated to 
translations along this direction. We will see that the giant graviton configurations
correspond to the polarisation of the gravitons in fuzzy 3-spheres represented as 
bundles over a fuzzy .

Finally, we turn to the Chern-Simons part of the action for the Type IIB waves.
This action was constructed, to linear order in the background fields, in
reference (see expression (4.5)). In particular, the linear coupling to 
the 4-form RR-potential, relevant for the construction of giant gravitons in the  
 background, was shown to be given by:
 
In this action the pull-backs into the worldvolume are defined in terms of
gauge covariant derivatives
 
with respect to the scaling symmetry
 
In this way we ensure (local) invariance under the isometric transformations
generated by the two Killing vectors. Using gauge covariant pull-backs it is possible
to eliminate the pull-back of the isometric coordinates, and to reproduce the
isometric couplings in the action in a manifestly covariant way. For example, the
pull-back of the reduced metric in (), 
, can be written as
, in terms of the covariant pull-backs.
The action is then given by a gauged sigma model of the type considered in
.

The coupling in () plays a key role in the microscopical description
of the  dual giant graviton solution, that we
perform in Section 4. It is due to the fact that we have a second isometric direction
that the  electric potential of this background can couple in the one-dimensional 
worldvolume effective action of the gravitational waves.

The effective action that we will use in the next sections to study the giant graviton
configurations in the  background is then given by: 
 
with  given by () and 
by (). 



The giant graviton in  

The macroscopical description 

The giant graviton solution in  was computed in,
by looking at stable test brane solutions where a D3-brane with
angular momentum in  had
expanded to a 3-sphere contained inside the . 
We briefly review this construction in order to compare it, in the end, with
our microscopical description. 

Taking the line element for the metric on  as
, with
 
and
 
the trial solution considered in has , 
, where  in static gauge, and , i.e. it corresponds to
a spherical D3-brane
with radius  orbiting the  in the  direction:
 
This D3-brane carries a non-vanishing magnetic moment with respect to the 
RR 4-form potential of the background, which prevents its collapse to
zero size. Parametrising the unit 3-sphere in () as
 
the RR 4-form potential is given by
 
where  is the volume element on the unit 3-sphere.

Substituting this trial solution into the worldvolume action of the D3-brane,
one arrives at the following Hamiltonian:
 
Here  is the integer arising through the quantisation condition
of the 4-form flux on 
 
with  the tension of the D3-brane, and  is the angular momentum carried by 
the brane, which is a constant given that  is a cyclic coordinate.

The Hamiltonian () has two stable minima, one for  and another for 
 
The value of the Hamiltonian is in both cases
, i.e. both solutions represent massless particles with angular momentum
. So the first solution corresponds to a pointlike graviton, while the second 
minimum corresponds to a D3-brane with radius , which is the
giant graviton solution. The giant graviton  satisfies the stringy exclusion 
principle, since the condition  implies an upper bound
on the angular momentum: .


The microscopical description 

In this section we provide a description of the giant graviton solution in terms
of coincident gravitons expanding into a D3-brane, which is inside the -part of the background 
geometry. We will check the correctness of this description by looking whether, for a 
large number of gravitons, it is in agreement with the previous macroscopical description 
in terms of a test D3-brane. 

The similarity between the giant graviton construction in and the Abelian
description of the dielectric (or magnetic moment) effect for D-branes suggests a 
microscopical description of the giant graviton in terms of gravitons expanding 
into a D3-brane with the topology of a fuzzy 3-sphere. In this description the expansion of 
the gravitons takes place due to their interaction with the RR 4-form potential of the 
background. At the level of the graviton worldvolume effective action this
interaction occurs in the form of a non-Abelian dielectric coupling.

The action that we have proposed in section 2 to describe Type IIB gravitons 
contains two isometric directions, one of which is identified with the direction of
propagation, whereas the other one reflects the fact that the background
on which the gravitons propagate contains a compact direction, which is the
direction of the T-duality transformation involved in the construction. The point now
is to identify these isometries in the background (). It is clear that the first 
isometry lays in the -direction. The second isometric direction can, on the other
hand, be identified
when one considers the 3-sphere as a -bundle over . The natural choice for the 
second isometry is the direction associated to the -fibre. 

Representing the  with radius  as a submanifold of  with coordinates
 satisfying , the Hopf fibering, 
, is given by a stereographic projection of a point  of the 
 to a point  of the   (see for example):
  
Points on the  that differ by an overall factor  get mapped onto the 
same point  of : . In this way the Hopf map
is dividing out a  fibre in the . 
Inversely the coordinates   on the  with 
can be obtained from the Hopf map via 
x_1 = 2 a   Re  (z_0 z_1  ), 1cm 
x_2 = 2 a   Im  (z_0 z_1  ), 1cm 
x_3 = 1 a    ( z_0^2 - z_1^2 ),
where  is an arbitrary parameter with dimension of length, that relates the radius 
 of the  with the radius  of the :
R^2  =  _i=1 ^3  (x_i)^2  
       =  1 a^2  [ z _0 z_0+z _1 z_1 ]^2
       =  L^4^4  a^2 .

Parametrizing the geometry of the  in terms of Euler angles 
 
where ,  and ,
we get the round metric for :
 
Here the angles  and  parametrise the -base manifold and
 the -fibre bundle.  Note that the metric has the necessary twist in the fibre 
in order to obtain the  as the global space.
The coordinates  on the  are then 
given by
x_1 = R _1 _2, 1cm 
x_2 = R _1 _2, 1cm 
x_3 = R _1 ,  
and we can identify the coordinate  with the isometric direction in the gravitons 
effective action not associated to the direction of propagation.

Using Euler angles to write the metric of the three-sphere in coordinates adapted to the 
fibre structure, the background metric () and four-form gauge field are given by
&& ds^2 = -dt^2+L^2^2 d^2+L^2^2  4 
(d_1^2+^2_1 d_2^2+
(d_3+_1 d_2)^2) , 
  [.3cm]
&& C^(4) __1_2_3  = -1 8  L^4 ^4 _1.
In order to make a non-Abelian Ansatz, it is convenient to go to Cartesian coordinates 
describing the -base manifold of the , 
keeping in mind the constraint that . In these 
coordinates, the metric and the four-form RR-field become 
&& ds^2 = -dt^2 + L^2 ^2 d^2 
          + L^2 ^2  4 R^2  [ dx_1^2 + dx_2^2 + dx_3^2 ] && 2cm 
          + 1 4  L^2 ^2 [ 
                  d_3 + x_3 R (x_1^2 + x_2^2)  ( x_1 dx_2 - x_2 dx_1) 
               ]^2 ,
 

&&C^(4) __3ij =L^4 ^4   8 R^3  _ijk x^k , 
1cm  for   i,j,k=1,2,3 .
We can then make the following non-commutative Ansatz for the 2-sphere that is
parametrised by :
 
with the  ,  forming an  representation
of  (in our conventions ).
Trivially, with this choice
 
so we are dealing with a non-commutative version of the  contained in 
(). Therefore, with this non-commutative Ansatz, the 3-sphere 
becomes an -bundle over a fuzzy .  This situation is forced by the topology 
of the space in which the Type IIB gravitons propagate, having  an extra compact 
 direction. Thus, the physical picture will correspond to the gravitons expanding into 
a non-commutative D3-brane, described in coordinates that reflect a 
 structure. To see that 
this is the right microscopical picture we have to check that in the limit in which the 
number of gravitons is large we recover the description in, in terms of a 
D3-brane with the topology of a classical, commutative, . We will carry out 
this calculation in the remaining part of this section.

The action () for Type IIB waves in the  background
described by (the non-commutative version of) the coordinates (), contains
 
in the Born-Infeld part, while the contributions to the Chern-Simons part vanish.
We then find:
 
where we have dropped those contributions to  that will vanish
when taking the symmetrised average involved in the symmetrised trace prescription.
In our description, since the direction of propagation is isometric, we are effectively dealing 
with a static configuration, for which we can compute the potential as minus the Lagrangian.
In the limit  we can approximate the square root by
 
and since , we have for the potential
 
which can be seen as the first order expansion of
 
in the same limit above. Introducing  inside the
square root we have
 
This potential has two minima, the point-like graviton at ,
and a solution that should correspond to the giant graviton solution at 
  
Both solutions have an energy , and are therefore associated to massless particles
with angular momentum . There is an upper bound on the angular momentum that comes 
from the condition , which implies that
 
Comparing the potential (), the radius () and the upper bound
() with their Abelian counterparts in the macroscopical derivation,  
we find that there is exact agreement in the large  limit when
 
Making use of the fact that in the microscopical description the total angular 
momentum is quantised in terms of the tension of the gravitational waves, ,
we obtain the following relation between the tension  of the waves and the tension 
of the D3-brane: 
T_0=8^2 T_3,

which is indeed satisfied, given that the isometric transverse
direction is an angular variable with period .


The dual giant graviton in  

The macroscopical description 

The dual giant graviton solution in  was computed in
, by looking at stable test brane solutions where the
D3-brane with angular momentum in  expands to the 3-sphere
contained inside the  component of the spacetime.
For this giant graviton type of
solution there is no upper bound for the angular momentum, because
it expands in the non-compact part of the geometry. Let us briefly summarise
the construction in these references in order to compare it, in the end, 
with our microscopical description.

The trial solution in this case is taken with , 
and , which corresponds to a spherical D3-brane with radius 
orbiting the  in the  direction:
 
This D3-brane carries a non-vanishing dipole moment with respect to the
RR 4-form potential, which prevents its collapse to zero size.
Parametrising the unit 3-sphere in () as
 
we have
 
Substituting this trial solution into the worldvolume action of the D3-brane,
one arrives at the following Hamiltonian:
 
where  is given by ().

The stable solutions correspond to , the point-like graviton, and  
, the dual giant graviton, both of which have
energy , representing massless particles with angular momentum
. Contrary to the giant graviton solution of the previous section,
the dual giant graviton solution does not satisfy the stringy exclusion
principle, because the absence of an upper bound for its radius implies that
 is neither bounded.


The microscopical description 

We now want to provide a microscopical description of the
dual giant graviton solution. This description will be in terms of
coincident gravitons expanding into a D3-brane which is now expanded
in a fuzzy surface contained inside the  part of the geometry.
As in the previous section, we represent the  in ()
as an  bundle over , take Euler angles such that
 
and identify the coordinate  parametrising the  with the compact 
isometric direction coming from the T-duality construction. The isometry 
associated to the propagation direction is again taken to be .
The background metric () is then given by
 
Taking Cartesian coordinates in the  that is parametrised by
 and 
 
the metric and 4-form potential take the form
&& ds^2 =  - (1+r^2 L^2 ) dt^2 + L^2 d^2  
            + r^2 4R^2  (dx_1^2 + dx_2^2 + dx_3^2)&&  1.4cm  
            + r^2 4  [ d_3 
               +x_3 R(x_1^2 + x_2^2) ( x_1 dx_2 - x_2dx_1) ]^2
&& C^(4) __3 0ij =-r^4 8R^3L _ijk x^k
for . Thus, the natural non-commutative Ansatz to make in this case is
 
with  forming an  representation of . Our
description of the dual giant graviton will again be in terms of gravitons
expanding into a non-commutative D3-brane with topology
, the validity of which should be tested by 
checking the agreement with the macroscopical description for large number
of gravitons.

The action () for Type IIB waves in the particular background
defined by (the non-commutative version of) ()
contains:
 
The Born-Infeld part of the action then takes the form:
 
while the Chern-Simons part is, in turn, given by:
 
We then have a potential:
 
In the limit  we can approximate the square root by
its first order expansion, take the symmetrised trace (which to this order
will only produce a factor of  in front of the action) and regard the
remaining expression as the first order expansion of the potential
 
exactly as we did in the previous section.

This potential has two minima, at , corresponding to the point-like
graviton, and at
 
which should correspond to the dual giant graviton solution.
Both minima have energy . Comparing these results with the
Hamiltonian and the radius of the macroscopical derivation, we find that,
in the large  limit, there is exact agreement when the condition ()
is fullfilled.


Discussion 

In this paper we have discussed a explicit Matrix action which is solved
by a non-commutative 3-sphere. This Matrix model arises as an action for coincident Type IIB
gravitational waves. This action is constructed using T-duality from the action for
coincident Type IIA gravitational waves of, and is such that the T-duality
direction appears as a special isometric direction, on which neither the background fields
nor the pull-backs depend. The presence of this compact isometric direction suggests the
representation of the fuzzy 3-sphere solution as an  bundle over a fuzzy 2-sphere base
manifold. Accordingly, our solution does not show manifest  covariance, 
this invariance being broken down to . The 
invariance should, still, be present in a non-manifest way, in the same fashion than the
 covariance of the classical 3-sphere is not explicit when the  is described 
as an  Hopf fibering. This fuzzy 3-sphere 
should occur as a BPS solution of the Matrix model, preserving the same 
supersymmetries as the point-like graviton. We have not checked out this property explicitly,
but it is expected from the agreement with the dual macroscopical
description, in which the supersymmetry properties of these spherical
configurations are demonstrated explicitly. 
 
Odd non-commutative spheres have been previously discussed in the
literature. We would like to mention some relations between these different
constructions.

In references an -covariant matrix realisation of the condition 
 is found, in terms of matrices acting on some vector space.
As for any fuzzy sphere with more than two dimensions,
this matrix algebra contains more representations than is necessary to describe
functions on the 3-sphere, so certain projections need to be done to eliminate the excess
of degrees of freedom. The non-commutative 3-sphere that results has manifest  covariance,
but its non-commutativity cannot be removed completely in the large  limit. On the contrary,
the 3-sphere solution that we have constructed in this paper
shows only manifest  covariance, but approaches neatly 
the classical  in the large  limit, where all the non-commutativity disappears. 
The fuzzy 3-sphere of can be represented in the large  limit
as a fibration of a 2-sphere over an interval(We thank Sanjaye Ramgoolam for pointing this
out to us and for the discussion below for finite .) .
For finite , it is expected that this representation is in terms of
a discrete  fibration
over a 2-sphere, where both the  and the  are non-commutative. The reason for this is
that the algebra of functions on  is infinite dimensional so it cannot fit 
inside a finite Matrix Algebra as that of the fuzzy . 
It would be interesting to develop a careful description of this  fibration structure.
 
The fuzzy  solution with manifest  covariance 
is expected to play a role in a plausible description of Type IIB gravitons in terms of
an action with no isometry directions (other than the direction of propagation). We should
mention at this point that the reason why we have not succeeded in constructing such an action
is a technical one, namely the impossibility of restoring the dependence on the T-duality direction 
in the non-Abelian case. Should the construction of such an action be possible, an 
covariant solution as that of would most likely be the right Ansatz for the study
of giant graviton configurations.

In fact, an explicit physical realisation of the fuzzy 3-sphere discussed above is in the context of
non-BPS Type IIB D0-branes. The 3-sphere arises as a solution of the action for
coincident non-BPS Type IIB D0-branesin a flat background with constant 5-form field strength.
In this construction the
tachyonic field of the D0-branes plays an essential role in describing the fuzzy  as a
subspace of a fuzzy . This solution cannot however be interpreted in the large  limit 
as a spherical D3-brane, because its dipole moment vanishes for large 
 (As discussed in this could be due to 
the fact that the background they consider is not
a consistent supergravity background.) . Our 3-sphere solution, on the other hand, 
has an interpretation as
a spherical D3-brane, since its dipole, or magnetic moment, coupling to the
5-form field strength resembles that of a spherical D3-brane, not only at finite  but also in
the large  limit(This result seems to confirm the
previous observation in, since our solution occurs in a consistent supergravity 
background. One should take into account however that we are
dealing with gravitational waves and not with non-BPS
D0-branes.) . 
A dual macroscopical description in terms of a single
D3-brane with whom to compare the microscopical description inis however not possible, given that it is not known how to dissolve non-BPS D0-branes 
in the worldvolume of a BPS D3-brane(It is likely 
that considering a D3, anti-D3 system would help for this purpose.) .
Our solution on the contrary arises when studying the polarisation of,
BPS, gravitational waves. For this system not only the Lagrangian is defined in a 
better way, since there is no uncontrolled tachyon dynamics, but, 
moreover, a dual description in terms of a single D3-brane
exists, which can be compared in the large  limit with the
microscopical description.
The agreement between the two approaches provides in fact the strongest support
to our construction.




Acknowledgements 

The authors are grateful to Jos Gheerardyn, Walter Troost and especially Sanjaye Ramgoolam for very
useful discussions.  The work of B.J. has been done as a post-doctoral fellow of the
F.W.O.-Vlaanderen. B.J. was also partially supported by the F.W.O.-project G0193.00N, by 
the European Commission R.T.N.-program HPRN-CT-2000-00131 and by the Belgian Federal Office for
Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs through the Interuniversity Attraction Pole
P5/27.  The work of Y.L. has been partially supported by CICYT grant BFM2000-0357
(Spain). D.R-G. was supported in part by a F.P.U. Fellowship from M.E.C. (Spain).
He would like to thank the Departamento de Fisica Teorica at
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid for its hospitality while part of this work was done.










 99 

J. McGreevy, L. Susskind, N. Toumbas, JHEP 0006 (2000) 008, hep-th/0003075.

M.T. Grisaru, R.C. Myers, . Tafjord, JHEP 0008 (2000) 040, hep-th/0008015.

A. Hashimoto, S. Hirano, N. Itzhaki, JHEP 0008 (2000) 051, hep-th/0008016.

S.R. Das, A. Jevicki, S.D. Mathur, Phys. Rev. D63 (2001) 044001, hep-th/0008088.

J.M. Camino, A.V. Ramallo, JHEP 0109 (2001) 012, hep-th/0107142.

J.M. Camino, A.V. Ramallo, Phys. Lett. B525 (2002) 337, hep-th/0110096.

D. Berenstein, J. Maldacena, H. Nastase, JHEP 0204 (2002) 013, hep-th/0202021.

K. Skenderis, M. Taylor, JHEP 0206 (2002) 025, hep-th/0204054.

H. Takayanagi, T. Takayanagi, JHEP 0212 (2002) 018, hep-th/0209160.

N. Kim, J.-T. Yee, Supersymmetry and Branes in M-theory Plane-waves , 
hep-th/0211029.

J.-T. Yee, P. Yi, JHEP 0302 (2003) 040, hep-th/0301120.

R. Emparan, Phys. Lett. B423 (1998) 71, hep-th/9711106.

W. Taylor, M. van Raamsdonk, Nucl. Phys. B558 (1999) 63, hep-th/9904095.

W. Taylor, M. van Raamsdonk, Nucl. Phys. B573 (2000) 703, hep-th/9910052.

R.C. Myers, JHEP 9912 (1999) 022, hep-th/9910053.

S.R. Das, S.P. Trivedi, S. Vaidya, JHEP 0010 (2000) 037, hep-th/0008203.

Y. Lozano, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 106011, hep-th/0012137.

B. Janssen, Y. Lozano, Nucl. Phys. B643 (2002) 399, hep-th/0205254.

B. Janssen, Y. Lozano, A Microscopical Description of Giant Gravitons ,
to appear in Nucl. Phys. B, hep-th/0207199.

Z. Guralnik, S. Ramgoolam, JHEP 0102 (2001) 032, hep-th/0101001.

S. Ramgoolam, Nucl.Phys. B610 (2001) 461, hep-th/0105006.

S. Ramgoolam, JHEP 0210 (2002) 064, hep-th/0207111.

 
E. Bergshoeff, B. Janssen, T. , Phys. Lett. B410 (1997) 131, hep-th/9706117.

 
E. Bergshoeff, Y. Lozano, T. , Nucl. Phys. B518 (1998) 363, hep-th/9712115.

 
E. Eyras, B. Janssen, Y. Lozano,  Nucl. Phys. B531 (1998) 275,  hep-th/9806169. 
         

M. Nakahara, Geometry, Topology and Physics , IOP Publishing Ltd, Bristol and 
Philadelphia, 1990.

 
B. Janssen, P. Meessen, Phys. Lett. B526 (2002) 144, hep-th/0009025.

S. Mukhi, N.V. Suryanarayana, JHEP 0011 (2000) 006, hep-th/0009101.
        











