



James Lucietti
  DAMTP, Centre of Mathematical
Sciences, Cambridge University, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA,
UK 
 E-mail: J.Lucietti@damtp.cam.ac.uk   

Canonical quantization of a massive particle on   

The classical theory for a massive free particle moving on the
group manifold  is analysed in
detail. In particular a symplectic structure and two different sets of
canonical coordinates are explicitly found, corresponding to the
Cartan and Iwasawa decomposition of the group. Canonical quantization is
performed in two different ways; either by imposing the future-directed constraint
before or after quantization. It is found that this leads to different quantum theories. The Hilbert space of either theory decomposes
into the sum of certain irreducible representations of 
; however, depending on how the constraint is imposed
we get different representations. Quantization of the mass occurs,
although a continuum exists in the unconstrained theory corresponding
to particles that can reverse their direction in time. A representation on function space is worked out in
detail, and from this the wavefunctions of  and
the  black hole are deduced. A quantization in terms
of the "chiral" variables of the theory is also carried out giving
the same results. Comparisons are made between QFT in  and the
quantum mechanics derived. 


Introduction 

Our present understanding of string theory in curved backgrounds is rather
limited. One of the simplest non-trivial backgrounds would appear to
be ; this space is actually the group manifold
, therefore this allows one to re-express bosonic
string theory with a  field as an  WZW model,
which arguably is easier to study. It is important to understand strings in
 from the point of view of the  correspondence, as a
detailed understanding of the string theory would allow non-trivial
tests of the conjecture and maybe even insights into its proof. Now,
much work has been done on the subject, for example , , , however a
systematic canonical treatment is lacking.
An obvious starting point for all this is to study the simpler case of
a free particle in such a space, since it should correspond to the

limit of the string theory, and of course it is interesting in its
own right. The particle Lagrangian will be cast in a form similar to
the WZW model, and then analyzed in a group theoretic way, following
 , . 

In this paper we first study the classical theory for a massive free particle moving on the group
manifold . We will make use of the
elegant approach to phase space and Poisson brackets introduced by
Witten  and Zuckerman . This involves the identification of the phase space with the manifold of all classical
solutions, and defining a symplectic form on this manifold directly
from the Lagrangian. This leads to interesting
(quadratic) Poisson brackets in terms of certain "natural" variables. As
expected it is found that the current algebras provide a
representation of  the
Lie algebra of the isometry group of the manifold. Quantization of
this system can be done canonically, leading to the result that
the Hilbert space of the theory furnishes the direct sum of
certain irreducible representations of the quantum current algebra which is still
. The irreducible representations turn out to
be most of both discrete series, but the exact representations seem to
depend on how one imposes the constraint that the particle should be
future directed. The consequences of this are that the particle mass
becomes quantized (as expected since there is a closed time-like
direction). Interestingly  in the exceptional
interval appears in the unconstrained system leading to a continuum of
mass states which enjoy the property of being able to reverse their
direction in time. We must note that quantization of a
particle on  has already been attempted , however
our results differ slightly; if we impose the constraint before
quantization we do indeed reproduce their results, however quantizing
the unconstrained theory we get a quantum correction to the
Casimir which changes the allowed representations, and hence the
masses, even after the constraint is imposed in the quantum theory.

A Schrodinger representation of the
algebra is taken, and all the wavefunctions are worked out, confirming
the allowed values of the mass. From this we have also deduced the
Hilbert space structure for quantum mechanics on 
(the universal cover of ) which is a physically more reasonable
space since it has no closed timelike curves. Wavefunctions for the
 black hole (rotating, massive and non-extremal) were also deduced. 

A more interesting quantization, going back to Fadeev et
al. ,  and later Goddard et al. , , is
carried out too, involving quantities which correspond to the "chiral"
nature of the theory inherited from the bivariance of the metric. This gives the same results, as one of our
quantum theories, and provides a
strategy which will be useful for quantization of the string.

Finally a section on QFT is presented in which some of the fundamental
functions, such as the Wightman function, are calculated. These are
compared to the propagator in the quantum mechanics, which can take
two different forms, depending on which expression for the Casimir is
chosen. The Casimir with the quantum correction leads to a
simplification in the formulae and thus appears critical in some
sense; further, it is also consistent with the Breitenlohner-Freedman bound in .

The classical theory 

The geometry of  

The Lie algebra  consists of all real two
dimensional traceless matrices. A convenient basis is given by,

 

which satisfy 
, where 
 and  is the usual alternating symbol
(), and 
. Note that the structure
constants in this basis are . The
Killing form of a Lie algebra  is defined as a
 tensor , such that 
where . It is easy to show that
, and it is
this metric (actually )  on the Lie algebra
which is used to raise and lower Lie algebra indices.


Now, any group element can be written uniquely as

, where 
and , this is called the Cartan decomposition. Any (semi-simple) Lie group possesses a natural left and right
invariant metric, 

. A calculation then
gives,

 

This is the metric for  with the
cosmological constant
. To get the metric for the universal cover
 one simply takes  to range over .

Massive Particles 



Let  be
the curve corresponding to the particle's worldline. The parameter of
the curve  will be called the proper time and will be
assumed to take all real values since  is geodesically complete. The
Lagrangian we will use is,

 

Hence we see, from (), that the Lagrangian is simply
 , where
 is the metric for , although it must be
 supplemented with the mass-shell constraint (see Appendix B).










Now, one may wonder why we
have chosen to use () as our particle Lagrangian, and
not the more familiar
 , where
 is the mass; this latter Lagrangian is singular (i.e. 

 and hence one cannot express  in
 terms of the canonical momenta), which will lead to a constraint
 (the mass-shell condition) which by itself is not so bad. What
complicates matters is that one cannot gauge fix the reparameterisation
invariance covariantly (see  for a good account); breaking spacetime
covariance is undesirable, as after quantization one needs to
show that the theory is still covariant.
 Also it must be noted that the "square-root
 Lagrangian" is actually classically equivalent to 
, where 
 is an einbein on ; this Lagrangian can be gauge fixed
covariantly, e.g.  ( The symbol  means
weakly equal in the language of Dirac, in other words equal
modulo the constraints.) , and in fact with this constraint we get
that the phase space structure is the same as that of the Lagrangian
() with the mass-shell constraint (see Appendix B).

It will be useful to find the Hamiltonian
 formulation for our Lagrangian system. Firstly, the canonical momenta
 are
 
. The canonical Hamiltonian is then
 found to be . The mass-shell constraint is . Now at this point one is tempted to take
 the phase space as  with coordinates
 , and proceed as usual by defining the standard
 Poisson bracket, working out the Noether currents and their algebras
 in preparation for the quantum theory. However this route will turn
 out to be plagued with pitfalls at the quantization stage, such as
 operator ordering ambiguities in expressions involving the metric in
 a general coordinate system. Also, solving the equations of motion
 covariantly is not really possible in this formalism. Since we are dealing with a group
 manifold we will employ a more group theoretic approach.

  
The left invariance of the
metric gives the current 
 and the right invariance gives 
. The equations of motion are
simply the current conservation laws 
. A general solution can be easily obtained in this
language, .

A more useful form for a general
time-like (it is here that restriction to massive particles occurs) solution can be derived as follows. Firstly note that
isometries map time-like geodesics into time-like geodesics. The action of the
isometries on geodesics is transitive. Hence given one time-like
geodesic,  say ( for
future-directed),
all others are given by the action of an isometry on it. Therefore
a general time-like geodesic can be written as
, where
 and  are group elements. It is clear that
the map  and 
, with
, leaves  unchanged
(in fact for any such map which leaves  unchanged,
 must be of this form);
therefore,

 

where  and   belong to 
 and 
respectively, where  is the Cartan subgroup given by 
. Note that using () the Hamiltonian
works out to be .

Phase space and Poisson brackets 

We will follow the elegant approach of Zuckerman  and Witten , in order to get a
covariant derivation of the Poisson brackets. This involves defining
the phase space , as the manifold of classical solutions
of the Euler-Lagrange equations of the Lagrangian. Then in order to
define Poisson brackets, as is well known, one needs to find a
symplectic form on ; recall this is simply a closed
non-degenerate two form. The idea is that one can avoid moving into
the Hamiltonian formalism by defining a symplectic form directly from
the Lagrangian ; we sketch how this works in the general case of a
one-dimensional field theory. Consider a theory with fields 
 and an action 
. Let  be the space of fields  and
 the submanifold of solutions to the variational problem
, where  is the exterior derivative on
. Now,  is a (0,1)-form on ; it can be shown that  where
 is the exterior derivative on  and the decomposition is unique. Then one defines the two form (on
) as  which is the symplectic
structure desired; it is clear, since  and  anticommute on

, and that  vanishes on  (this corresponds to the
Euler-Lagrange equations as ) that  showing that no
special choice of  has been made.

Applying this procedure to () gives 
. Therefore a symplectic form for  is given by,

 

where the factor of two has been introduced for convenience.

Poisson brackets for the
theory are defined in the usual way,

 


Now, one can choose a parameterization of the
cosets such that 
and .
Note that choosing a different parameterization simply redefines
 appearing in (). Using this parameterization, and substituting into () we
get,

 

and  and . Hence we have found
canonical coordinates on the phase space with  only the
following non-zero Poisson brackets,

 

It is also interesting to work out Poisson brackets of other
variables. Define 
 and 
, and use the following
convenient notation (Define 
, and

. Then we get nice laws such as 
)  for 
, 
 and .
Then it is found that,

 

Now, the currents are easily found to be,
 

which then give the following brackets

 

where 
 is the tensor Casimir. This gives us the current algebras,

 

Since  and  belong to the Lie algebra
, then we can write the current algebras in
terms of their components in the basis . We
get,

 

which are simply two copies of . It should be noted
that the current algebras can be deduced from equations ()-() alone
without the need to resort to canonical coordinates. A possible
sticking point in the derivation of () appears to be when one gets
to,

 
 It seems that the only way to know how 
 moves past the 's is to use an explicit parameterization
 (and hence canonical coordinates). In fact we can avoid working in
 canonical coordinates as follows. Consider
 
. It is convenient to use the isomorphism
 
 defined by,

 

for . Then it is easy to show that,

 

Note that  . If we consider 
 where  is a not necessarily commutative
algebra, then it is a straightforward computation to check that,

 

which reduces to 
 in the case where
 is commutative. Applying this to () (where 
) we get the desired result. Equation () will be needed
in the quantum theory.

Global coordinate systems and constraints 

In the previous section we parameterised the cosets using the Cartan
decomposition, leading to a global set of coordinates
 for the phase space. Actually, this is not
quite true since  and  are identified modulo , and
hence as functions  are not continuous and hence
not smooth. This corresponds to the well known fact that one cannot cover a
circle with a single chart. Thus, strictly, the formulas involving
these coordinates at best are valid in some open region of the
circles, for example everywhere except one point, such as . A
set of Poisson brackets which do hold globally are 
 and , and these serve as a global
replacement of , which as we have explained can only be
satisfied at best everywhere except at a point. Of course all the
formulas derived actually involve only  or  and hence
are all valid globally. See Isham  for a good account of
such subtleties.

Now it is clear that the future-directed constraint  will need to
be imposed. This can be either done before or after quantization. In
the coordinates developed so far this is best done after. This is because
restricting the phase space classically to , which implies 
and , means that we will have to quantize canonical
variables of the form  which is problematic. Instead we will derive a set of
coordinates which after the restriction  still allow an easy
quantization.

To do this, we need the Iwasawa decomposition of
. This tells us that any element of the group
manifold can be written as , where , and thus the
coset  can be parameterised by . If
one proceeds to calculate the symplectic form, we get the same
expression as before except that  and
similarly for . However, now the variables  are
not periodic but take all real values. This means that if one imposes
the constraint classically the phase space restricts to three
canonical pairs of the form  or
 which are both straightforward to deal
with since both these are symplectomorphic to the standard 
 phase space.
More explicitly, one finds that the current  has the following components in these Iwasawa coordinates,

 

and of course it is easy to verify from the canonical Poisson brackets
that they satisfy the  algebra. Analogous
expressions hold for the right current .


The quantum theory 

Canonical quantization 

Canonical quantization has a long history and many problems. Schematically, given a phase
space  and canonical coordinates , then the
quantum theory is constructed via a correspondence map

, such that the quantum observables are Hermitian with
respect to the inner product on . The canonical
coordinates will satisfy 
, and

 for more general observables. Now this only works
if the canonical coordinates take all real values, and is not
particularly useful unless they are global coordinates for the phase
space. It is also clear
that ordering ambiguities arise upon quantization, and in general
these have to be resolved case by case.

Before moving on we recall the standard, straightforward example of
when the phase space is . Then we take global coordinates
 and of course the natural symplectic form
 gives the Poisson brackets
. To quantize the system one takes unitary
representations of this algebra, called the Heisenberg algebra, and it
is well known that there exists a unique irreducible representation of
this realised on  (in fact the more precise
statement concerns unitary representations of the Heisenberg group
since this will involve strictly bounded operators, see ).

Cartan coordinates 

If we carry this procedure out for the system studied in the
previous section then we simply get the following quantum
conditions (We make use here of the correct quantization of
the angular variables, as discussed in the previous section and in
more detail in  .) ,

 

The Hamiltonian will be , and a
general observable, , will evolve according to Heisenberg's equation
of motion , which
is equivalent to 
. Of course we are now interested in the quantum versions of
the current algebras; tentatively  we take the left current to be 
 where  is some
unknown constant. Now, if we compute the components of the current
we find that indeed there are potential ordering problems since we end
up with functions of  times functions of , however they happen
to be all Hermitian combinations of the canonical variables, and so we
conclude that we have taken an acceptable definition for the
current. Note that if we choose  we get 
which is a desirable property (but not essential). Anyway, we get

 

where . It is easy to the check that  provide a unitary
representation of the
algebra of ,

 

The Casimir
 can be also calculated to give,

 








A similar set of calculations for the right algebra
gives,

 


Therefore we deduce that  which then tells us that the
Hilbert space of states for the quantum theory decomposes as
follows,

 

where  is the eigenvalue of the Casimir which labels the
irreducible representations, and  is the carrier space of an
irreducible representation. Explicitly (for the left algebra) we have,
 
where  is a basis
for , and  is either integer or half
integer depending on the representation. However not all irreducible representations of  are allowed.
In fact the only ones allowed are ,  
(where
) and  for
. This follows from the fact that ,
and hence .

We deduce that the allowed values for the mass (in units of )
(The geodesic 
 in the coordinates
 is .
Hence , and thus 
. Of course the mass  is then defined
as the positive square root. This is all classical; Appendix B tells
us that the same holds quantum mechanically i.e.  on physical states.)  are,

 

that is  is either a positive integer or in the interval .

Quantization of the mass is not unexpected since  has
closed time-like direction, that is topologically it is 
, where the  refers to time. The continuum
  is more interesting.

An explicit basis for  can be constructed from a state
 satisfying 
. Namely , where

 

will span the Hilbert space for appropriate values of . It
is in fact an orthogonal basis and normalised if .

We have not yet imposed the constraint  corresponding to the
future directed condition of the geodesics. Now we need to find a way
to impose this condition quantum mechanically. This turns out to be
actually fairly easy. We merely note that classically the constraint
told us that . Hence we see that quantum mechanically a sensible
constraint is ; note the corresponding statement  also
exists. Thus we need to pick a subspace of our Hilbert space for which
these conditions hold. This is easy to do and gives,

 

Note in particular that the mysterious continuum has
disappeared. This continuum actually corresponds to states which can
flip their direction in time and of course have no classical
counterpart; naturally they are excluded in the quantum theory after
imposing the future directed constraint.


Iwasawa coordinates 

In these coordinates we have the interesting option of imposing the
constraint  before or after quantization. Interestingly this leads
to slightly different quantum theories.

First we will mimic the previous section and quantize the
unconstrained system and then impose the constraint. Of course we hope
to reproduce the same results. The quantum conditions are,

 

and note there are no subtleties due to periodic variables
here. Resolving some of the ordering ambiguities in the currents
(imposing that the components be self-adjoint suffices) leads to our
left current being,

 
 and these satisfy the same  algebra as in the
 previous section, as they should! The Casimir can be computed, and
 reassuringly we get , which is the same as we got
 by quantization of the system in the very different Cartan
 coordinates. Note this wasn't a priori guaranteed, since it isn't
 necessarily obvious that quantizing a system in completely different
 canonical coordinates is compatible. Of course, from here on we'll
 get the same quantum theory as in the previous section before and
 after the future-directed constraint is imposed.

Now, as we've mentioned in these coordinates we can actually quantize
the constrained classical system. To do this, we briefly explain how
one would quantize the classical system with phase space 
, see . Let  be global coordinates. There is a
nice way of mapping this to the standard 
 phase space; simply define the
diffeomorphism 
. It then follows that 
 showing that the phase spaces are
symplectomorphic as previously asserted. Therefore one can choose
 as canonical coordinates and simply quantize
as usual via a Heisenberg algebra,
. Note since  it
follows that , which can be taken as our
fundamental quantum condition for quantum mechanics on
. Now, lets apply this to our
system. Expressing the classical current  in components in the
coordinates  gives,

 
 
Quantization then involves imposing the conditions,

 

and quantization of the currents requires simply resolving the order
ambiguity in  which we do by writing
. Then, once again it
is an easy exercise showing that we have the 
algebra satisfied using the quantum conditions. Interestingly
computing the Casimir gives  in contrast to the previous
quantizations. Now, the Hilbert space decomposes into irreducible representations of
, and it is easy to see that
 as an operator (since ). Thus since  (the right
algebra will have the same Casimir) we see that the Hilbert space
decomposes as,

 

Note this differs from our other quantum theory by the absence of
 in the Hilbert space; of course we get a
different mass spectrum, namely .














   
Representation on function space 
 
We would like to find a representation of the quantum mechanics
on the space of functions on . As usual, the wavefunction of a
state  in the position representation is 
, and a basis for these functions is
desirable. It would be nice to derive how the currents act on the
position eigenstates from the canonical formalism developed. This
would involve calculating matrix elements of the operator matrix
 in some basis. Instead we cheat slightly and take a shortcut.
To do this we note that the
algebra of the Killing vectors is 
 and of course this acts naturally on functions on . Hence all we need to do is find the
Killing vectors as these give what we want automatically. One can
check that all the following are Killing vectors,

 

and that they satisfy the following algebra

 

where . The Casimirs 
 and , turn out to be

 

where 
 is the Laplacian of the metric . Now, one can
easily solve for the eigenfunctions of . It consists of the
following set of differential equations,

 

the first two of which can be solved to give,

 

where  and .
Note that single valuedness of  requires .

The third equation, with the help of () (we choose this
Casimir since it leads to simpler mass dependence in the
wavefunctions, however it is easy to convert between the two), can be rewritten as , which is the Klein-Gordon
equation with shifted mass. Substituting into this leads to a differential equation for
, which takes the form,

 

Now, change variables to
, and 
. The result is,

 

with 
and  and
, which is the hypergeometric equation.

For  two independent solutions about  are,
 

and for  we have two independent solutions
about ,
 

Now, as in ordinary quantum mechanics, we would like to restrict wavefunctions to be
square integrable. However since we are dealing with a non-compact
space this might be too restrictive and we want to account for the divergence
arising from infinite volume. Also, arguably, a more natural norm on
the wavefuntions might be the one from the Klein-Gordon inner product.  Instead we'll find the larger class of
bounded functions on , which will include finite norm functions
in either norm.

Now,  and . As  we have 
, and using the
Wronskian one can show that the solution independent of  goes as  
 for  and as  for  as 
. Therefore the solution independent of  is not
allowed. The behaviour of the
solutions must be studied as  as well; 
, and solutions independent of this behave as
 for  and as 
for . Therefore for  we
get . Also for
 we see that solutions independent of   are disallowed; hence
 and  must be dependent which occurs if and only if
either  or   (see  p.79). 















Therefore,  we deduce
that for  either  or  
which causes the mass  to be  quantised; for 
the mass can take any value. Note that this agrees exactly with the
results of the previous section. More explicitly we have the following possibilities:

 
A continuum , 
 

where .
A discrete series, with  and ,


 

where either  and , or where
 and ,  and  in both
cases. Note that the case corresponding to both  and  
 is not allowed since .



 are the Jacobi polynomials. 

Note that to extend
this to quantum mechanics on  one simply removes the identification  ; this implies that  is
not quantised and hence neither is the mass  in the region
. This is entirely expected as time now is topologically
. Note that in field theory quantization of the
frequencies is restored by imposing conservation of energy, and two
different stress tensors (minimal and conformal) give two different
types of modes as is well known , .





Now, of course, we need to think about imposing the constraint
. As explained this amounts to  and , which tells us that
 and . This allows us to deduce that , as one
would want for future directed particles. Note that
this is actually consistent only with  of the discrete
series. Only the discrete series describes the time
directed theory, and these functions are actually all strictly
square integrable on . Note that on the cover
 these wavefunctions will not be square integrable
since time is not compact.

 

Deductions for the  black hole 

It is well known that one can get the  black hole from  as
the quotient , where  is a discrete subgroup  generated by a particular
Killing vector  . In other words  is an orbifold of . Therefore
we can deduce quantum mechanics in the  background from the quantum
mechanics we have already worked out for  by simply restricting
the Hilbert space of wavefunctions to ones which are consistent with
the identification procedure. Unfortunately the coordinate system
 used in the previous section is inconvenient for
expressing the identification. Therefore we introduce the coordinates
 defined by,

 

Note that these coordinates do not cover the whole of , but
after the identification,

 

one has a coordinate system which covers the black hole in the
exterior region . Note to see this one needs to make the
coordinate change,

 

which gives the metric for  in the exterior region,

 

with ,  and ; note that
 are different to the ones in the previous section. The mass
of the black hole is  and the angular momentum is
. It was shown that any wavefunction  on 
must satisfy ; this result then follows for
wavefunctions on . The metric in the coordinates ()
reads,

 

Then solving one gets  

, where  are constants and  satisfies
the hypergeometric equation with ,
 and . Then,
imposing the identifications (), it follows that
 and  with . For  we have
two linearly independent solutions about ,
 

and for  we have two linearly independent
solutions about ,
 

Now,  and . Therefore for  a general
solution can be written as 
, and hence   as ,
which imposes no conditions. The large  limit is more interesting;
note that for  a general solution can be
written as  as 
. Now,  and 
which implies that for  the general solution is in ,
whereas for  only  belongs to . The special
cases  and  need attention. Firstly it can
be shown, using the Wronskian, that as  a solution independent of 
behaves as  for  and as
 if . From this we deduce
that if  two linearly independent solutions are allowed, and
for  only one is allowed. It can also be shown that a solution
independent of  behaves as  for
, and as  for  as .
From this we deduce that if  then only one solution
exists for , and for   solutions exist with
 only when  and  are linearly related; this
occurs when , or when  and 
, which are both impossible.

To summarise
the allowed wavefunctions are:

 
For  with  and ,
 

where  and  are linearly independent; for  a wavefunction linearly independent of
 can be constructed and will be of the form 
plus an analytic function; however this does not belong to ,
and so we lose a solution in this case.

For   with ,

 
where for  we have no solution.


Therefore, we see that for  quantum
mechanics in a  background, a "larger" portion of the Hilbert
space occurs for , i.e. it is more likely that a
particle will have its mass in that region. We have not yet imposed
any constraint corresponding to future-directed motion of the
particle. A simple way of doing this might be to impose that the
energy of the eigenfunction, that is the eigenvalue of
, be positive. Doing this gives the condition 
.

What about the regions  and  of the black
hole? Well, a similar analysis can be carried out as before, however
we can take a short cut. First we note that
 will be a coordinate system for 
 if we make the formal replacements , 
, ,  and . Therefore
we get the same metric and differential equation (except for the range
of ). Solutions near  have already been studied
above and we found two solutions for  and just one for
. The behaviour at the origin must also be examined; now
since , we see that for  we get two well-behaved
solutions, whereas for  only one solution is allowed. The special
case  is  allowed only when  is an odd integer. So
dependence on mass does not strongly
feature here. Finally, the region  can also be studied in
the same way by letting , , 
,  and
. Under the mapping 
 the region  is mapped in the interval
, and therefore using Pfaff's transformation
(This is a simple identity regarding hypergeometric functions,
namely .)  only the behaviour at the origin needs
examining, which we have done above telling us that we have two
solutions for  and just one for , and hence  the
mass does not feature here at all.


"Chiral" quantization 

In this section we aim to show how a subtly different kind of
quantization can be done, involving quantities which relate more
directly to the symmetries of the system. The proposed
quantization , , , consists of quantizing  to Hermitian operators
as before, and quantizing ,  to operator
matrices which are unitary in the sense 
 (Note that
unitarity of  and  is consistent with
canonical quantization if, for example, the choices  and
 are made for the Cartan coordinates. This is allowed since the
canonical variables  and  are even functions of  and
 respectively, and hence their Hermiticity is unaffected by
such a choice.) . The quantum conditions are

 

where  and
. Quantum
consistency requires that






 

where  (note that 
). Equations () follow from  being
unitary and equations (). Equation () comes from associativity
, where 
 and similarly for the others. Equation ()
deserves some attention; it is equivalent to
 hence ensuring
locality in the quantum theory. We will show this at , the
general result follows from Heisenberg's equations of motion. First
note that 

, where . Now, the argument runs as follows:

 

where () was used in the fifth equality and the quantum
conditions were used in the other steps. It is easy to see, from the algebra
above, that
requiring  implies
(), hence completing the equivalence.


Now, an explicit formula for  the braiding matrix is wanted. If we
start from the ansatz,

 

where , and then
impose the conditions above we get 
 (from (),() independently), and that  can be any analytic
function of  or  (from ()). A computation gives,

 

where . Imposing the classical limit
implies,

 

If we make the choice 
then we get,

 

Now we come to the problems of ordering of the quantum variables.
In particular how do we define the currents  in the
quantum theory. Motivated by the canonical quantization we define the
quantum currents to be,

 

where  are unknown constants. This now allows one to
calculate the following brackets,

 

 

which reduce to the algebras of  when one expands
, and similarly for . What is remarkable is
that when one computes the Casimirs  and , one finds
that they are independent of  and , and we get,

 

However to do this the result

 is needed, which appears only to be calculable using
canonical coordinates. Note that to show equations () the
explicit form of the braiding matrix () is required.
Straightforward manipulations lead to,

 

and from equation () it is easily verified that,

 

which when substituted into () give,

 

Now using equation () where  we get
the first of equation () as required, by the sole use of the quantum
conditions (), () and ().


Comparison to Quantum Field Theory 

In the previous sections we have built up a quantum theory in ,
however we found that there are (at least) two possible theories
depending on how one imposes one of the constraints. Of course one can
also investigate quantum field theory in this space. It may prove
fruitful to compare results here with the quantum mechanics in order
to gain insight into which is the "true" quantum theory, or even if
this question is meaningful. In order to make such a comparison we
need to calculate some quantity computable in both theories. One
obvious such candidate is the amplitude for the transition of a
particle between two points in . In the QFT this will
correspond to the two-point function, or the so-called Wightman
function. 


So first we briefly outline QFT in , also see  for a
good detailed account where boundary conditions are discussed which we will not do here.
In a curved space a free scalar field satisfies the following equation
of motion,

 

where  is a constant. Minimal coupling corresponds to  and
conformal coupling to  (in three dimensions). We will use the standard static metric
for ,
 

Then we have . We proceed by writing
the general solution to the Klein-Gordon equation as,

 

where   is a complete basis for functions satisfying
(). One can derive a finite norm basis in the static coordinates
introduced, and we find,

 
for .
The normalisation of these functions is with respect to the
Klein-Gordon inner product 

, where  is a spacelike hypersurface. Also note that 
 and . Note  implies 
.
Now we are ready to compute the Wightman function. From the
canonical commutation relations  it
is easy to see that,

  

If we choose  then since 
, the sum collapses to,

 

which can be evaluated using well known generating functions for the
Jacobi polynomials  to give,

 

where 
 and thus 
is the invariant distance on . Note that the expression
obtained for the Wightman function is only well-defined for 
 (i.e outside the "lightcone"), since there are branch points at
 and a cut for . Now, it is clear that 
 improves the convergence of the sum over modes and still
gives a solution to the homogeneous equation. Note that under this
transformation 
. Thus a suitable expression for the Wightman function
is  

 

Now we can deduce some other interesting functions closely related to
the Wightman function. The commutator is given by the
jump across the branch cut, that is . Thus,
for ,

 

which can be deduced from well known hypergeometric identities  and the
result . Of
course for  the commutator is zero, as required by
causality. Hadamard's elementary function can be computed in a similar
manner, yielding for 

 

and for  it is simply twice the real part of equation
(). Now we can move on to the Feynmann function which
satisfies the inhomogeneous equation. In the mode sum () if
we replace  we get the Feynman function, and 
 improves convergence. This will correspond to 
 thus giving

 

We should note the following identity ,


 

allows to us see more clearly the behaviour of the function, the
positions of the branch points for instance.

Now we will explore a more direct method for deriving these
various functions. The operator  acting on
functions of the invariant distance  becomes,

 

and since the Wightman function satisfies the homogeneous Klein-Gordon
equation, we can write it in terms of two independent solutions to the
corresponding ODE, namely 
 and  
. Inspecting these solutions, we see
that the first goes to zero as  and the second diverges,
we therefore discard the second solution. Upon comparison (For purely mathematical interest we should note that we have deduced a quadratic transformation formula
for hypergeometric functions, namely,

)    with the
Wightman function derived with the mode expansion we can get the
proportionality factor so,

 

The  prescription can be invoked by letting 
 as before.


Now we would like to derive the corresponding expression in our
quantum theories. More precisely we look for position eigenstates 
 satisfying , where we have
put a hat on the operator for clarity. Note that it is a nontrivial
fact that we can simultaneously diagonalise the matrix elements of
, but in fact one can since they all commute amongst each
other which is the locality condition addressed in the "Chiral
quantization" section. The quantity we are interested in then is the amplitude 
 ( the identity corresponds to the origin in the
static coordinate system). This can be computed using any convenient
basis  for the Hilbert space , as

. One could use the basis we mentioned earlier 
 and compute the matrix elements of the operator matrix
; in principle this would allow one to deduce 
. It would be nice to perform such a
calculation, however instead, as before, we take a shortcut. Just to
recap, in a position
representation we seek eigenfunctions of the current algebra which can
be represented by the differential operators,


 

It is straightforward to check that they satisfy the correct algebra

 

where . The Casimirs 
 and , turn out to be

 

Thus in an irreducible representation the eigenfunctions of
 satisfy the Klein-Gordon equation with a mass that depends
on which expression for the Casimir is used. Therefore we  can use the basis 
 and thus end up
with an expression for  which equals 
with  for  and  for . It is
interesting to note that  appears to correspond to some sort of
critical coupling since  in this case. It should be noted
that the well-known Brietenlohner-Freedman bound for the Klein-Gordon
equation in  is  (in these
conventions) , ; thus we see this corresponds to 
 which agrees with the Casimir . Hence it
appears that the quantum mechanics with the quantum correction to the
Casimir is consistent with the field theory, despite the fact that
the definition of mass is somewhat arbitrary.

Conclusions 

We studied the motion of a free massive particle moving on the group manifold
 both classically and quantum mechanically in a covariant
canonical formalism. We derived two different quantum theories
depending on whether the constraint that the motion be future directed is
imposed classically or quantum mechanically. The allowed values of the mass of
a particle quantum mechanically are quantized in either case.  Only
certain representations of the current algebra were allowed in the
Hilbert space, namely (most of) the discrete series. Interestingly in
the unconstrained theory  the continuous series in the exceptional
interval is  present leading to a small continuum of mass states;
these states have the property that they can flip between moving
forward or backward in time, and of course have no classical
counterpart.

 A function representation was
derived and all the wavefunctions were found; from this we deduced such a
representation for  and the  black
hole. It would be desirable to derive the function representation
directly from the canonical quantizations discussed, rather than the
more ad-hoc method of finding differential operators which satisfy the
correct algebra.
 
A quantization in terms of "chiral" variables of the
theory was carried out, which amounts to determining something called
a braiding matrix, and this gave the same results as canonical
quantization of the unconstrained theory.

Upon comparison with QFT we found that one of the quantum theories
corresponds to a critical coupling (neither minimal or conformal),
which is consistent with the Breitenlohner-Freedman bound. It
would also be interesting to see the connection between the different
quantum theories and boundary conditions in  which must feature
since it is not globally hyperbolic.

 
Possible extensions of this work include a similar treatment for
massless particles, and of course attacking the problem of a canonical
quantization of string theory in .

I would like to thank Malcolm Perry for many discussions and useful
comments. This work was supported by EPSRC.

Some representation theory 

In this section we summarise the unitary irreducible representations
of  and its universal covering group
, see  . Both have the same algebras, namely
. Let  be a basis for the
algebra satisfying 
, where  and
 is
the diagonal metric with . . Consider a unitary representation
, so . Therefore we have,

 
 
Define . The Casimir operator is 
. Now, lets examine the spectrum of  in
an irreducible unitary representation; necessarily the Casimir will be
 diagonal.

 

where  and  is the
eigenvalue of . Since  is Hermitian,  can be
chosen to be an orthonormal basis for the carrier space to the
representation, also  must be real. It is easy to show that,

  

So far everything stated applies equally to  and
. The differences arise from the
differences in the spectrum of . By considering the
representation induced on the enveloping algebra it is easy to show
that  is either integer or half-integer in the case of
, whereas this restriction fails for
.
 
The principal discrete representations correspond to highest and lowest weight
representations. More explicitly,  is defined by 
, and thus  and . Similarly  is defined
by , and therefore  and . For
  is not restricted further, whereas
for  .
The principal continuous representations correspond to no highest or lowest weight, so the
spectrum of  is unbounded. Also,  and
, where  and 
. These representations are labelled by , and
  correspond to irreducible representations of ,
and for  gives two inequivalent irreducible representations of
.
There is another set of representations for which the spectrum of 
is unbounded. These are called the exceptional representations, for which
 () and , and will be
denoted by . Note these are often also called
 or ,
and there is no confusion with the  representations above since we
have different values of . Here,  corresponds to
 representations of .


Reparameterization invariance at the quantum level 

Here we provide justification for why gauge fixing the Lagrangian
 by letting  does not
spoil reparameterization invariance quantum mechanically; see
also  for a different argument. So to begin
we note that the Lagrangian is singular, leading to the primary
constraint 
. We want to also impose the constraint 
. If we look for secondary constraints we find 
, where  is conjugate to
, and no more occur. It is easy to see that  is
first-class, and ,  are second class. Now, we replace
Poisson brackets on the phase space with canonical variables
, with the Dirac bracket defined by 
 for any two
observables , where  and 
. Now, using the Dirac brackets instead of the Poisson
brackets, allows us to set  and  strongly to zero;
therefore  for any observable , since once the
second class constraints are set strongly to zero  will only be a
function of . This allows us to deduce that . Hence the Lagrangian  (the
constant  isn't important and will be dropped) with
the constraint  will give rise to the same phase space and
equations of motion as the manifestly reparameterization invariant
Lagrangian. Also, the constraint is easy to implement quantum
mechanically giving rise to the BRST operator  which is
nilpotent (since  is a ghost). The physical state conditions are
 and , where  is the
antighost and ; this implies ,
which becomes .



 99 
 A. Hanson, T. Regge, C. Teitelboim, Constrained Hamiltonian
systems , Print-75-0141 (IAS, Princeton), 1976. 135pp. 
Contribution to the Lincei Interdisciplinary Center for Mathematical Sciences and their Applications, no. 22. 
 J. Polchinski, String Theory Volume 1, CUP 1998, p. 129-131.
 M. Chu, P. Goddard, Quantization of a particle
moving on a group manifold , 337 1994 285 .
 M.Chu, P. Goddard, I. Halliday, D. Olive, A. Schwimmer,
Quantization of the Wess-Zumino-Witten model on a circle , 266 1991 71 .
 G.J. Zuckerman, Action principles and global
geometry , in "Mathematical Aspects of  String Theory", edited by
S.T. Yau, World Scientific, Singapore, 1987.
 E. Witten, 276 1986 291 ; 

C. Crnkovic, E. Witten, Covariant description of canonical
formalism in geometrical theories , in "Three hundred years of
gravitation", edited by S.W. Hawking and W. Israel, CUP
1987, p.676.
 L.D. Fadeev, On the Exchange Matrix for WZWN
Model , 132 1990 131 .
 A.Yu. Alekseev, L.D. Fadeev,  : A Toy
Model for Conformal Field Theory , 141 1991 413 .
 J. Maldacena, H. Ooguri, Strings in  and
 WZW Model. Part 1: The Spectrum , 42 2001 2929 .
 J.M. Evans, M.G. Gaberdiel, M.J. Perry, The
No-ghost theorem for  and the Stringy Exclusion Principle , 535 1998 152 .
 J. Balog, L. O'Raifeartaigh, P. Forgacs, A. Wipf,
Consistency of string propagation on curved spacetimes. An
 based counterexample , 325 1989 225 .
 M. Banados, M. Henneaux, C. Teitelboim, J. Zanelli,
Geometry of the 2+1 black hole , 48 1993 1506 .
 V. Bargmann, Irreducible unitary representations
of the Lorentz group , 48 1947 568 .
 G.E. Andrews, R. Askey, R. Roy, Special
Functions , CUP 1999.
 G. Dzhordzhadze, L. O'Raifeartaigh, I. Tsutsui, 336 1994 388 . 
 C. J. Isham, Topological and global aspects of
quantum theory , Relativity, groups and topology II, Les Houches 1983
Session XL, edited by B.S. DeWitt and R. Stora, North-Holland 1984.

 Krzysztof Gawedski,  Classical origin of
quantum group symmetries in Wess-Zumino-Witten Conformal Field
theory , 139 1991 201 .

 S. J. Avis, C. J. Isham and D. Storey, Quanutm
field theory in anti-de Sitter space-time , 18 1978 3565 .
 C. Dullemond and E. van Beveren, Scalar
field propagators in anit-de Sitter space-time , 26 1985 2050 .
 C. Fronsdal, Elementary particles in a curved
space II , 10 1974 589 .
 P. Breitenlohner and D. Z. Freedman,
Positive energy in anti-de Sitter backgrounds and gauged
extended supergravity , 115 1982 197 .

 J. Balog, L. O'Raifeartaigh, P. Forgacs, A. Wipf,
Consistency of string propagation on curved spacetimes. An
 based counterexample , 325 1989 225 .
 Itzhak Bars, Ghost-free spectrum of a
quantum string in  curved spacetime , 53 1996 3308 . 
 I. Pesando, Some remarks on the free
field realization of the bosonic string in  , 0003036 




