

[equation]

General Superfield Quantization Method. 

II. General Superfield Theory of Fields: 

Hamiltonian Formalism 
A.A. ReshetnyakE-mail: reshetnyak@ssti.ru  
Department of Mathematics, Seversk State Technological Institute,


Seversk, 636036 , Russia 
 
In the framework of started in Ref.[1] construction procedure of the
general superfield quantization method for gauge theories in
Lagrangian formalism
the rules for Hamiltonian formulation of general superfield theory of fields
(GSTF) are introduced and are on the whole considered.

Mathematical means developed in [1] for Lagrangian formulation of GSTF are
extended to use in Hamiltonian one. Hamiltonization
for Lagrangian formulation of GSTF via Legendre
transform of superfunction 
 with
respect to  is considered.
As result on the space 
parametrized by  supervariables ,
,  the superfunction
  is defined. Being
equivalent to different types of Euler-Lagrange equations the distinct
Hamiltonian systems are investigated. Translations along  for
superfunctions on 
being associated with these systems are studied.
Various types of antibrackets and differential operators acting on
 are
considered.

Component (on )
formulation for GSTF quantities and operations is produced.
Realization of the GSTF general scheme is demonstrated on  6 models.
PACS codes: 03.50.-z, 11.10.Ef, 11.15.-q 

Keywords: Lagrangian quantization, Gauge theory, Hamiltonization,
Superfields. 

Los Alamos database number: hep-th/0303262 
Introduction 

The problem of construction of the general superfield quantization method
(GSQM) for general gauge theories in Lagrangian formalism, in which it  is
possible to establish a superfield realization for BRST symmetry type
transformations [2] and which includes  the BV quantization method [3] on
component (on ) level, can not be adequately and noncontradictory
decided without the preliminary creation of GSTF. The latter contains the all
information on ways of the superfield formulation for concrete models of GSTF.
Construction of the Lagrangian formulation for GSTF, as the 1st stage
in creating of GSQM, was realized in paper [1]. In that work both preliminary
historical
excursus on the ways of development of the quantization methods for gauge
theories on the BRST symmetry basis and motivations for origin of the
GSQM construction problem were considered. By the following stage
after Lagrangian
formulation for GSTF [1] being by composite part of GSQM in the Lagrangian
formalism (in the usual sense) it appears the creation of the Hamiltonian
formulation for GSTF
that represents the investigation subject of this paper.

In Sec.II  having a preparatory character the possibility
for determination of the Euler-Lagrange equations integrals is considered
together with
introduction of special constraints system for one of integrals in the
Lagrangian formulation for GSTF.
Moreover a sequence of algebraic and
analytic questions of the mathematical means from Ref.[1] are transferred
with some modifications  onto superalgebra of superfunctions

.
Creating of the Hamiltonian formulation for GSTF on a basis of
realization of the Legendre transform of superfunction


 with respect to superfields
 and construction of

 together
with obtaining  of dynamical equations in 
essentially reflecting the properties of  are realized in
Sec.III.

Sec.IV is devoted to detailed study of the properties and relations among
different Lagrangian and Hamiltonian systems of ordinary differential
equations (ODE) with respect to differentiation on  describing an
arbitrary model of GSTF with various modifications.

Important role of
the 2nd order odd (with respect to  and 
gradings) operator  acting on
 and
nontrivial master equations in
 together with
translation transformations on  along integral curves of different
Hamiltonian systems (and their some modifications) for arbitrary
superfunctions given on 
are described in Sec.V. In connection with these transformations
the key role of  solvability conditions fulfilment for the Hamiltonian
systems  is demonstrated here as well.
Systematic investigation of the gauge theories in the Hamiltonian
formulation for GSTF including the solvable Hamiltonian systems together with
introduction of detailed concepts on constraints, representations on the
gauge theories, gauge transformations of general and special types are
carried out in Sec.VI.

Sec.VII is devoted to extension of the superalgebra 
  [1] of the 1st order differential operators acting on the
superfunctions from 
to superalgebra   of the 1st and 2nd orders
ones defined on 
. The different types of antibrackets being generated by the
2nd order odd operators  are studied here as well. The concept
on transformation of operators from   is introduced.

Component (on ) formulation for quantities and relations of the
Hamiltonian formulation of GSTF is considered in Sec.VIII.

General statements of Secs.II-VIII are demonstrated in Sec.IX on the example
of 6 models, whose superfield Lagrangian formulation had been proposed
in paper [1]. As it had been noted in that work the almost all from
mentioned models appear
by the initial ones to constructing of the interacting  superfield (on
) Yang-Mills type models in realizing of the gauge principle [6].

The final propositions and analogy for Hamiltonian formulation of GSTF with
ordinary classical mechanics in the standard (even) Hamiltonian formalism
conclude the work in Sec.X.

All  assumptions, in the framework of which the paper is made, in fact had
been pointed out in the introduction of work [1]. In the paper unless
otherwise stated it is used the  system of notations suggested in Ref.[1].
Special Properties of the Lagrangian Formulation for
GSTF. Superalgebra 
 
Integrals of Lagrangian System 

E.Noether's theorem [4] analog applied to translation along ,
being one from the coordinates of the superspace
 [1], on a constant parameter  
 being considered in question as continuous
transformation of global symmetry for integrand in
 
permits one to find the integral of motion for Euler-Lagrange equations
 
or one for equivalent system 2n ODE of the 2nd order with respect to
differentiation on 
 
in the following form
 
The fulfilment of relation (2.4b) is the nontrivial fact. In
particular, in absence of the explicit dependence of  on
 (that corresponds to above-mentioned symmetry transformation)
 
Eq.(2.4b) is reduced to
 
By the sufficient condition for solvability of the last equation is the
fulfilment of the following  system of equations on arbitrary solution
 for system (2.3)
 
Indices , , generally speaking, will be able to destroy the
locality and covariance  of the corresponding
superfunctions, being  by elements of representation 
space, with respect to index   corresponding to the
restriction  of the superfield (on
) representation  of supergroup  onto
subsupergroup  [1].
By one from the possible choices for system (2.7a,b) parametrized by
discrete value  it appears the setting 
 
Thus in order to the superfunction  should appear by
integral for Eqs.(2.3) in fulfilling of Eq.(2.5) it is necessary to reduce
the system (2.3) to one of the 2nd order on  3n ODE
 
called further the extended Lagrangian system (ELS). Subsystem (2.9c,d)
appears
by additional constraints to differential constraints in Lagrangian formalism
(DCLF) (2.9b) [1]. For , 
 and absence of
explicit dependence upon  for  the constraints
(2.8) coincide with DCLF corresponding to the GSTF model  which is the
natural system from corollary 2.2 of theorem 2 of the Ref.[1]. The presence
of arbitrary superfunctions , 
   in
Eqs.(2.9c,d) reflects the fact of the Eqs.(2.7) fulfilment on the solutions
for LS (2.3).

In general case the equation (2.4b) is always fulfilled without
additional constraints (2.7) for following choice of explicit
dependence of   upon 
 
where as in (2.5) the quantity  is one from the system
of projectors ,  acting on
 [1]. The consistency
of Eq.(2.4b) and its solution (2.10) follows from the fact that for
the system of the 1st order with respect to  n ODE of the form
 
it is necessary to fulfill the solvability conditions [1] which have
the form  of the 1st or 2nd orders on   system of 2n ODE
 
Equivalently, in place of the 1st subsystem in Eqs.(2.12) the following
system can be written (no longer in the superfield form with respect to
superfield representation  [1])
 
It means in fact, that in Eq.(2.4b) in front of 
 the projector 
(from system ,  being by projectors on
 as well [1]) can be
written.

The comparison of the constraints (2.9c,d), relations (2.4a,b) and Eqs.(2.5),
(2.6) permits one to represent the Eqs.(2.6) in the whole 
 in the form
 
Eq.(2.14) imposes definite restrictions on
, 
in (2.9c,d)
 
Consider  two possible limiting cases of the Eq.(2.14) fulfilment.
Namely, having put the constraints (2.9c) for   and 
 satisfying  to equations
 
obtain their solution [1] in the whole 
 
It means the superfunction  does not depend
on  and has the form
 
Together with (2.17) and identical fulfilment of Eq.(2.4b) the following
equality is valid
 

Another variant is derived in fulfilling of the
condition (2.5) and of  constraints (2.9c,d) for  for any
configuration of .
This case is realized by means of identities
 
An arbitrary differential consequence of the last relation being obtained in
calculating of the  order derivative () of Eq.(2.19)  with
respect to  means the independence of the
superfunction
 on superfields  in the whole

 
It follows from (2.20) the superfunctions 


appear not only by
integrals of motion for system (2.3) but are constant for any value of
 by virtue of
. The
last fact can be interpreted as well with help of Noether's theorem.
Namely, the invariance of  with respect to symmetry
transformation, being by translation of the superfield 

 on an arbitrary constant superfield 
(),
corresponds to existence of integrals for Eqs.(2.3), i.e. to conservation
of the "momenta" 

.
The condition (2.5) have been made use for the last conclusion as well.

Remark:  The definition of the symmetry transformations,
Noether's Theorem formulation and its proof in the context of GSQM are the
separate problems and are eliminated outside the paper's scope.

The independence of the
"momenta" upon  implies together with (2.19) the identical fulfilment
of Eqs.(2.3) meaning formally that
almost any superfields  are the solutions for LS
(2.3) and under condition
 
exactly the any  are the same.

From these two cases of  Eq.(2.6) fulfilment  for any superfield
 it follows that by the sufficient condition for
its resolution is the existence of the solution for system (2.7) for
arbitrary configuration  and . The latter
implies the identical vanishing of 
,  in (2.9c,d) together with
constraints (2.7) themselves, i.e. their fulfilment
for any .

Thus, the validity of Eq.(2.6) for any  imposes
the strong restrictions on the structure of the superfunction .
Indicate in this case the necessary condition on the structure of

 (2.4a) and therefore for 
 
Except for Noether's integral for LS the another (non Noetherian) one exists
of the form
 
that is equivalent to realization of the only condition (2.5) without
relationships (2.7), (2.22).

Consider the problem of reduction of the 2nd order
on  system of 2n ODE  (2.3) to the normal form (NF), i.e. to the
system of solvable ODE with respect to higher derivatives: superfields
 (formally).
It is possible in  if and only if
the condition (2.21)  on the rank of supermatrix 
 is fulfilled almost everywhere in .
The comparison of the conditions (2.21) with (2.22) leads to very strong
restriction on the structure of , namely to its
independence upon superfields .
Therefore for realizing of the Eq.(2.6) on the given
stage of study of the classical theory properties  confine
ourselves by conditions (2.5)-(2.7) instead of (2.22).

Having suggested the realization of (2.21) the formulated problem
can be solved by means of Legendre transform of  with respect
to superfields 
. To this
end, introduce the additional to ,

superfields of  (Lorentz) type [1] 

as the superfunctions over .
The last set is the Berezin superalgebra over number field 
( or ) being by Grassmann algebra with () even with
respect to  grading (from latter only  are even with
respect to  grading
and other  are odd with respect to  one)
generating elements  and with one odd with respect to 
 grading one  [1]. 
 are transformed with respect to the supergroup 
superfield representation 
which is connected by a special form with representation(as one
had already been noted in Ref.[1] the separate work would be devoted
to detailed study of (ir)reducible supergroup  superfield representations) 
 (conjugate to  with respect to a some bilinear form).
Grading properties of those superfields, called further as
superantifields, and their derivatives on :
  

are written as follows
 
 
In accordance with terminology of the work [1] the
superantifields
, 
 belong to
 ,
 or 
being by superalgebra of the superfunctions, to be
transformed with respect to
supergroup  superfield representations  and
defined on .
Elements of Algebra and Analysis on 
 

The transformation laws for superantifields
,

with respect to action of the supergroup  = 
 [1]
(ir)reducible superfield representation   operators
have the form
 
and realize the finite-dimensional (2.25) and infinite-dimensional (2.26)
superfield representations  respectively.

Under permutation of two and more elements from 
K the sign ("" or "") arises being
dictated by their (!) grading.

 
Starting from supermanifolds  and 
let us formally construct the following supermanifolds 
, , 
 and 
 parametrized by local coordinates
 
, ,

, , 
  
, 
and
, ,

,  respectively with  
.

 
In complete analogy with Ref.[1] define the superalgebras of superfunctions
    

   determined on
  ,
  
respectively and being by formal power series with respect to
generating elements , 
,  and
,  correspondingly ( =
 or ). In
particular, these sets contain superalgebras of superfunctions
   
   
respectively appearing by finite polynomials with respect to 
, . For any superfunction
 


    
 the transformation laws are valid, in acting of representation
 constructed from ,   on the
indicated superalgebra, following from (2.25), (2.26) respectively
 
By definition  is expanded in the formal power series (in
finite sum for polynomials  corresponding to local superfunctions) in
powers of , 
 
where the notations are introduced
 
Coefficients of decomposition  in (2.29) appear themselves by superfunctions.
Moreover they are expanded in power series with respect to
,
  as well and


    [1].
In addition the coefficients
possess the following properties of  generalized symmetry, for instance, for
, 

 
Introducing the operations of differentiation with respect to superfields
,  on

one can convert the last  superalgebra in one of the
-times differentiable superfunctions

  .
In equipping of

by a some norm one can convert this set into functional space
regarding the series in (2.29) by convergent with respect to above norm and
operations of differentiation on
, 
by commutative with sign of sum.

Regarding that  and 


 are supplied by above-mentioned structure of norm
and by corresponding convergence of series (2.29) for arbitrary
   we assume to be valid the following
expansion in the functional Taylor's series in powers of
 = 
,  =

 in a some neighbourhood (possibly in
the whole ) of
, 
(write this fact only for

, )
 
For coefficient's superfunctions




the properties (2.31) and expansion in Taylor's series in powers of
, 
 hold [1]. Notations of the form (2.30)
have been made use in
(2.32) and the left partial superfield derivatives with respect to
, 
 for fixed  were introduced
nontrivially acting on the  only at
coinciding . Their nonzero action
on   and 
 reads as follows
 
At last, according to Ref.[1] one can use the combination of decompositions
(2.29) and (2.32) regarding, for instance,  is expanded with
respect to , 
 as a polynomial and in Taylor's series in powers of
 in a
neighbourhood of . It should be noted
that for local superfunctions the  series (2.32) (or mentioned
combination of decompositions (2.29), (2.32)) pass into finite sum.
The action of projector's systems ,  and
,  are
naturally extended onto  decomposing the last set in direct sum
 
By invariant subsuperspaces in  with respect to action of
projectors  are the following
ones
 
from which the only  is the nontrivial subsuperalgebra,
whereas  and  are  nilpotent
ideals in . To decompose  into a direct
sum of subsuperalgebras it is necessary to make use in explicit form the
superfield-superantifield structure of the coordinates

 while in decomposition (2.35) that
polarization was not taken into account. Preliminarily indicate  the
corresponding definite gradings for superfields ,
 in ignoring of the
superfield-superantifield structure
 
Projector  with respect to coordinates 
 
is given to be covariant, and   with respect to action
of projectors  are not reduced
further.
Choosing the coordinates on  in the form
 we get
 
System of even, with respect to 
 gradings,
projectors , ,  or
,  are described by relations
being analogous to one  in Ref.[1]
with multiplication table and completeness relation respectively
 
Systems  and  on
  are connected by means of relations
 
Projectors , ,  are  derivations
on , whereas
for ,  the following rule in acting on
the product of any 
 is valid
 
Any  is
decomposed onto the component functions (not being by elements from a
superspace of superfield representation )
 
from subsuperalgebras , , 
,  respectively.

The matrix realization of elements from  (as the vector superspace
elements) in the form of column-vector from 4 components
 
permits to represent the projectors in the form of  matrices
 
The analytic representation for  by means of relations
(2.32), (2.42) leads to validity  of the projectors realization  as the 1st
order differential operators under their action on  
 

 is
understood as the
indivisible object for partial differentiation with respect to :
, but

. 


The left partial superfield derivative with respect to superfield
 for fixed  is introduced in (2.45).
The connection
between derivatives  and 
under their action on the elements from  is established by the
formula (being by continuation of the corresponding one given on
 [1])
 
Class  of regular (analytic) over  superfunctionals
on  as continuation
of the class  of superfunctionals on 
 [1] is defined by the formula
 
It is evident that  is given with accuracy up to
 component part of .
Since the operator  does not lead out
 from , then
 belongs to . Besides   is a
scalar with respect to action of  operators,
being by restriction of representation  operators onto
, if  is transformed by the rules (2.27) or
(2.28).

An analog of the basic lemma of variational calculus [1] is valid in this
case,
from which it follows the connection for variational superfield derivatives
of  with respect to  with partial
superfield ones of its density
 with respect to ,
.
For instance, obtain
for the  left and right derivatives with respect to superantifields the
formulae respectively
 
The connection of above left and right derivatives is established by the
relationship
 
Superfield derivatives have the following table of Grassmann parities
according to (2.24), (2.36)
 
The th superfield variational derivative with respect to superantifields
,, 
 of superfunctional  is expressed in
terms of
partial superfield ones with respect to 
, , , 
,, 
 of its density  by the formula
 
By means of the last relation the superfield variational derivative with
respect to
 of arbitrary superfunction 
 is
defined for necessarily(!) not coinciding values
of  and . For its calculation from arbitrary 

   it is sufficient
to know the values of the following derivatives arising from (2.33), (2.48),
(2.51a)
 
Remark:  Further  all derivatives
with respect to , 
 are considered (under omission)
by the left and the right ones with respect to these superantifields
are labeled by the sign "r".

Basic Statements of the  Hamiltonian Formulation 

for GSTF 

Define on 
the superfunction  by the
relation
 
Having considered the problem on extremum for  with
respect to superfields  we
arrive to standard Legendre transform of 
 with respect to 
being defined by the relationships
 
expressing by virtue of (2.21) 
 in terms of generalized "momenta" - superantifields
:
 = 

. It follows from expressions (3.1), (3.2) the consequences
for Legendre transform
 
Definition:  Call the system of the 1st order on 
3n  ODE, 2n from which are in NF
 
the generalized Hamiltonian system (GHS) being defined by superfunction
 (3.3) and the subsystem of
2n ODE (3.5a,b) is called the  Hamiltonian system (HS).

DCLF (2.3b) expressed in terms of  coordinates
in Eqs.(3.5c) are according to definition
the system of n algebraic (i.e. of the 0 order with respect to operators
of differentiation on ) equations on 2n unknowns 
 for any values of . Call the subsystem
(3.5c) the generalized constraints in Hamiltonian formalism (GCHF). In the
same way just as  DCLF for Euler-Lagrange equations restrict the
formulation
of Cauchy problem in  [1] the
GCHF have the analogous meaning with respect to HS (3.5a,b).

Under fulfilment of the condition
 
let us call  the holonomic
constraints in Hamiltonian formalism (HCHF).

The integer-valued functions 
written in (3.6) appear according to Ref.[1]  by functions of degree
on  with respect to generating elements
. In addition we assume the following
functions given on 
 
and called the least degree and degree of corresponding superfunctions
with respect to .

To be solvable GHS (3.5) must satisfy to solvability conditions of the type
(2.12) written additionally to GHS. Therefore the solvable GHS
is equivalent to the system of the 1st order on   5n ODE
consisting, in addition to (3.5), of the subsystem
 
being valid by virtue of identity 

.

At last note that  (3.3) is a scalar with
respect to action of the superfield representation 
 operators  and is transformed with respect to
 ones by the rule (2.26), (2.28)
 
so that
 
Statement 3.1  (equivalence of GHS (3.5) and LS (2.3))

GHS (3.5) is equivalent to system of the 2nd order on  2n ODE (2.3)
under following admissible formulation of the initial conditions [1] (Cauchy
problem) for GHS in  for
 determining the integral curve  for
GHS
 
In this case the Cauchy problem for LS (2.3) in
 means the integral curve for Eqs.(2.3)
 in 
for 
goes through point 
 [1]
 
and must satisfy to DCLF:

.

Proof of the Statement 3.1  will be developed later in fulfilling of the
condition (2.21).

Remarks: 

1)  The question on formulation of the Cauchy problem is more
complicated for
field theory since both GHS (3.5) and LS (2.3) with respect to indices of
supergroup  representation have the nontrivial (hidden in this work
in the condensed notations) functional structure;

2)  system (3.5) can be obtained from problem on conditional extremum
for superfunctional
 
in fulfilling of GCHF (3.5c), or equivalently from problem on
unconditional extremum for the extended superfunctional
 
in setting of the additional superfields  to be equal
to 0 after  variation. Superfields  play the standard
role of Lagrange multipliers for GCHF (3.5c)
extending , being transformed with
respect to representation  and having the same
, ,  gradings as for
 (

).

Superfunction  is the expression of the integral (2.4a)
for Eqs.(2.3) in terms of
coordinates on 
 
The translation of the superfield  along  on a
constant parameter 
 
for  has the form (3.10) (further denote
 in (3.10) as ).
Expression (3.10) on the solution  of GHS
(3.5) is given by the formulae taking representation
(2.46) for  into account
 
being true on the solutions for HS (3.5a,b) as well.

Vanishing of the expression (3.17) means by virtue of (2.4b), (3.4)
the fulfilment on the solutions for GHS (3.5) of the following equation
 
Eq.(3.18) under validity of the condition (2.5) with regard for
(3.4) is reduced to the system
 
By sufficient condition for Eq.(3.19b) resolution is in force of (2.7)
the fulfilment on the solutions for GHS of the following system
 
With join of the superfields 
 into uniform superfield  (being
transformed with respect to a some
subrepresentation  from ) now without
definite  parity the system (3.20) will be written in
the form
 
System (3.21)   according to (2.8) and (3.4) takes the form for 
 
The designation for odd Poisson bracket (antibracket)  as a
bilinear differential mapping on 
is introduced in the relations (3.17) - (3.19) having the form
in coordinates 
and  for arbitrary 

 
where
 
In the 3rd equality in (3.23) it is assumed that ,
 are to be homogeneous with respect to 
grading. Properties of
 parities for
antibracket read as follows
 
Under equivalent parametrization for  by
coordinates 
 (3.21) the antibracket (3.23) takes the form
 
Index  on the antibracket
(3.26a) denotes the local coordinates with respect to which one is calculated.
By omission we suppose that 
is calculated in the initial
coordinates .
Antibracket  satisfies to standard properties of an generalized
antisymmetry, Leibnitz rule and Jacobi identity for arbitrary
, , 
with definite  parity
 
Summarizing of the developed investigation of the properties for
  let us formulate the results in the form of

Statement 3.2 

In order to the superfunction  not explicitly
depending upon  would be by integral for GHS (3.5) it is sufficient
to fulfill of the following system of equations (being algebraic with respect
to  on solutions for GHS)
 
the proof of the fact that condition (3.28) is necessary for
realization of Eq.(3.19b) appears by  more technically complicated problem 
Remarks: 

1)  System (3.28) or (3.21) considered for any values of superfields
 may be interpreted as a consequence from Noether's theorem
of the
fact that translation transformation  on a constant superfield :

  is a symmetry
transformation for  and therefore in this case
the relation is true
 
Then the set of superantifields  is  conserved on
solutions for GHS
 
2)  Statement 3.2 in fact permits one to claim that 
appears by the integral for only Hamiltonian part (3.5a,b) of the GHS
under conditions (3.28).

Thus   in fulfilling of (3.19a) is the integral
of the 1st order on  system 4n ODE
 
with arbitrary superfunctions 

satisfying to the property
 
Definition:  Systems (3.31) and (3.31a,c) are called the
extended generalized Hamiltonian system (EGHS) and the extended HS
(EHS) respectively.
Subsystem (3.31c) we will call the special constraints in Hamiltonian
formalism (SCHF) and their analog (2.7) as the special constraints in
Lagrangian formalism (SCLF). In fulfilling of the conditions
 
call SCHF, SCLF the holonomic SCHF (HSCHF), holonomic SCLF (HSCLF)
respectively.

From relations (2.3b) for 
 with regard of
(3.4) it follows the explicit representation for GCHF (3.5c) in terms
of  and 
 
In obtaining of (3.34)  the formulae following from calculation rules for
composite derivatives and from Legendre transform (3.2) have been made use
in addition to above-mentioned ones
 
One can show the SCHF (3.31c) under definite choice for 
 are equivalent to the SCLF (2.9c,d) out of
solutions for LS (2.3) as well. Analyzing a set of solutions for SCHF
(SCLF) simultaneously with other Eqs.(3.31) ((2.9)) one can pass by means of
addition to
the subsystem (3.31c), ((2.9c,d)), in general, a nonlinear combination of
Eqs.(3.31a) ((2.9b))  to equivalent EGHS (3.31) (ELS(2.9))
in which the superfunctions  (
)
vanish.

Described transformation of EGHS (3.31) (ELS(2.9)) changing the SCHF
(3.31c) (SCLF (2.9c,d)) themselves, being considered without other
Eqs.(3.31a,b) ((2.9a,b)), does not change a set of solutions for EGHS (ELS)
on the whole.
Under various choice of the SCLF, SCHF being realized
by changing of parameter  and
under special structure of the superfunctions ,  it
is possible to achieve that the Eqs.(2.6), (3.19b) written in the whole
spaces ,  would be by
double zeros of solutions for LS (2.3), GHS (3.5)  respectively
 
with arbitrary superfunctions   
and  
, ( 
) possessing by the properties
 
The fact, that the left-hand side of expressions (3.36) are
double zeros for solutions of the systems (2.3), (3.5)
respectively, means the fulfilment on their solutions of the equalities
 
Note that under definite choice for superfunctions ,
 the equations (3.36) themselves will become
by equivalent to each other (in sense of change of variables under Legendre
transform) out of solutions for GHS and LS as well.

Being easily obtained from definition of Legendre transform (3.2)
the following relation taking Eqs.(3.4), LS (2.3) in the form (2.2) and
formulae (3.5c) into account
 
establishes the coincidence of GCHF (3.5c), therefore of DCLF (2.3b) as
well, with
Eqs.(3.5a) from HS. On the solutions for the other half of equations
from HS (3.5b), in fulfilling of the condition (3.19a), the GCHF (3.34)
are defined only in  and have the more simple
form
 
Relationship (3.40) leads to validity of

Statement 3.3  (on equivalence of GHS and HS)

GHS (3.5) is equivalent to its proper subsystem - HS (3.5a,b).

Representation (3.34) is very useful for proof of implication from GHS (3.5)
to LS (2.3) in the Statement 3.1. To this end, it is sufficient to
differentiate with respect to  the subsystem (3.5b), next to multiply
the obtained expression on the supermatrix elements 
 taking the formulae (3.35b,c,d) into account, having
got from the left in derived
differential consequence for (3.5b) the Eq.(2.3a) in terms of
coordinates on  and .

But from the right with use of the property  for Legendre
transform to be involutory, relations (3.34) and Eqs.(3.5a,b) themselves
the system of DCLF 
 will be obtained, which
vanishes by virtue of validity of (3.5c) and (3.40)
 
Thus one can take for granted the Statement 3.1 entirely (inverse
implication was developed by directly construction of GHS (3.5) from LS
(2.3)). Combining the results of Statements 3.1, 3.3 we arrive to
conclusion on equivalence of HS (3.5a,b) and LS (2.3). It means in setting of
Cauchy problem for HS  the identical fulfilment of the Eqs.(3.11c).
In what follows we will be able to ignore the Eqs.(3.11) in this question.

Relations (3.42) mean the solvability conditions for subsystem (3.5b),
written in the 1st subsystem in (3.8), are identically realized  on
solutions for HS (3.5a)
in force of the formula (3.42). GCHF (3.5c) are  the differential consequence
of (3.5b) coinciding with (3.5a). But solvability of subsystem (3.5a) written
in the 2nd subsystem in (3.8) and being equivalent to solvability of
(2.3b), that with allowance made for (2.12) is given by the equations
 
being additional to (2.3), is more complicated problem. From
equivalence of HS (3.5a,b) and LS (2.3), Statements 3.1, 3.3  it follows
the easily provable validity of the

Statement 3.4  (on equivalence of EGHS and EHS, of EGHS and
ELS)

a) EGHS (3.31) is equivalent to its proper subsystem EHS (3.31a,c);

b) EGHS (3.31) is equivalent to ELS in setting of Cauchy problem for EGHS
in  for  in
the form (3.11) and integral curve  must
satisfy to the equations
 
Cauchy problem for system (2.9) in the Lagrangian formalism in this case is
formulated in  and corresponding
integral curve  satisfies to
DCLF and SCLF
 

From the last statement  it follows the subsystem (3.43) is
formally  the solvability conditions for EGHS (3.31) which on the whole in
terms of antibracket have the form
 
In its turn, the subsystem (3.46b) is equivalent to the following one
on solutions for (3.31)
) 
From explicit form of Eqs.(3.46a), (3.47)  it is obvious that on the
solutions for EGHS and on any solution for (3.46a) it
follows the identical fulfilment of Eqs.(3.46b). In obtaining of the
relations (3.46), (3.47) the identity 
 with following formula have been made use
 
being valid 
(and even from ).
In (3.48) through   an integral curve of
HS (3.31a) is
denoted as in (3.17)  taking statement 3.3 into consideration. The fact,
that projector  in (3.48) and, therefore in (3.46), (3.47) was
omitted in comparison with (3.18), for now  means the tending to obtain,
namely, the such expression that is provided by solvability of the relations
(3.46a).

Remarks: 

1)  Statements 3.3, 3.4 have been obtained with use of not only
Legendre transform but with regard for validity of LS (2.3). One can
give rise to doubt the equivalence of GHS and HS, for instance, for
following structure of superfunction  satisfying to (2.5)
 
In that case the relationships are valid
 
and GHS has the form
 
In that example the HS is the subsystem (3.51a) which has  its 1st subsystem
to be necessarily considered by solvable and then the equivalence of
GHS and HS is obvious;

2)  if we will ignore the dynamical Eqs.(2.3b) in obtaining
of HS (3.51a) by means of Legendre transform (3.3), (3.4) then the 2nd
subsystem in (3.51a) has the form
 
HS being defined in question by the 1st subsystem in (3.51a) and by
Eqs.(3.52) will not be equivalent to HS (3.51a), therefore to GHS (3.51) and
to one's own GHS!

Statement 3.5  (indication for solvability of EHS (ELS))

In order that EHS (3.31a,c), ELS (2.9) were solvable it is
sufficient that corresponding master equations (3.19b), (2.6) would be by
double zeros for solutions of HS (3.31a), LS (2.9a,b) respectively.

Proof:  1)  Hamiltonian formulation.

In force of remark after relation (3.47) it is sufficient to verify in
validity of subsystem (3.46a). Reduce the right-hand side of (3.46a)
to more convenient form for further analysis with allowance made for Jacobi
identity for antibracket (3.27c). Jacobi identity with superfunctions 
 
,
,  leads to expression
 
Choosing as   the coordinates 
obtain the equivalent subsystem for (3.46a)
 
which, by virtue of nondegeneracy of the supermatrix 
 (as the ordinary matrix (!)) (3.24), is equivalent
to the system (3.39).
Having used by hypothesis of the Statement on the structure for master
equation (3.19b), therefore having the form (3.36b), we verify in
validity of the Statement for EHS.

2)  Lagrangian formulation.

The solvability conditions for ELS are the system consisting of Eqs.(2.3b),
(3.43) and
 
or equivalently for  nonvanishing summands on the integral curve 
 for LS (2.3)
 
The structure of constraints  (2.7) and representation (3.55b)
permit one to state that for solvability of the system (3.43), (3.55a) it
is sufficient the solvability only for subsystem (3.43) which is equivalently
given by the expression (without  projector)
 
Representation (3.56) for solvability conditions (3.43) is equivalent to
Eqs.(3.38). Having used by hypothesis of the Statement on the
Lagrangian master equation (2.6), therefore having the form (3.36a) we verify
in validity of the Statement in this case as well.

Statement 3.5 permits to
make  more deeper inference on a solvability and on the solvability
conditions (3.46a) for EHS themselves, on ones (3.43) for ELS and etc.
Namely, the
calculation of the th () derivative with respect to
 of expression
(3.46a) on the integral curve   value for HS leads
to the expression taking Eq.(3.48) into account
 
The identical vanishing of the left-hand side of (3.57) implies the vanishing
(without  projector) in the superfield form the right-hand one as
well for any . That fact is really provided in force of
Statement
3.5 and Jacobi identity of the type (3.53)  with superfunctions



; ; 
 
The analogous statement applied to ELS has the trivial form being written by
the formula
 
by virtue of nilpotency of the operators ,
 [1] and Eq.(2.5).

Finally, having
considered the 2nd derivative on  of an arbitrary 
 calculated on the solution  for HS in
scope of  Statement 3.5 validity obtain from (3.48) the formula
 
If the left-hand side of (3.60) vanishes identically, then vanishing of the
right-hand one is provided by Jacobi identity in the form (3.53) for
. Analogously to proof  of the
expression (3.57) vanishing one can show the same for any 
 . Thus, it is proved the technical, but very important for
formulae writing,

Statement 3.6 

In fulfilling of the solvability conditions (3.46a) for EHS (3.31a,c)
the formula for translation of arbitrary superfunction 
 with respect to variable  on a constant parameter 
 along solution 
for HS (3.31a) is written without  projector in
front of antibracket
 
In obtaining of (3.61) the conditions (3.19) and following derivation rule
of antibracket have been made use being valid for any ,

 
Remark:  In  Statement 3.5 (later in 3.6 too) in fact it is
considered as the integral curve for EHS (ELS) not only the
integral curve  for HS (3.31a)
(
for LS (2.3)) but such , ()
which satisfies to SCHF (3.31c) (SCLF (2.9c,d)) and is denoted further as
 
 
Properties of the Differential Systems for  Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian Formulations of GSTF 

The combined analysis of  Statements 3.1, 3.3, 3.4 leads to the result
deserving of the exceptional consideration.

Definition:  We denote the model of GSTF on  given on
 () with
superfunction  (), with corresponding dynamic
system LS, ELS [GHS, HS, EGHS, EHS]  by the triple of
quantities  
, where
,  (, ,
, ).

Statement 4.1  (diagram of equivalent formulations for GSTF
model on )

The following commutative diagram is valid in formulating of the GSTF model
 
whose vertical arrows formally denote the equivalence relation (i.e.
presence,  for instance, of special isomorphic mappings between
 and
,  and
, LS and GHS (HS)), and horizontal ones are
mappings of the restriction of the left column by means of
SCLF in the 1st row or by SCHF in the 2nd and 3rd rows.

Remarks: 

1)  Conducting of a detailed proof is the separate problem and requires
except for established correlation for  and  by
Legendre transform a more exact  description for ,
 from geometric viewpoint;

2)  the right column is described by  , 
 not explicitly depending on ;

3)  if the master equations (2.6), (3.19b) have the form
(3.36) then it
follows from Statement 3.5 the solvability of  the corresponding dynamical
systems of equations from the right column.

ELS (2.9) arises from variational problem on conditional extremum for
superfunctional (2.1) in fulfilling of Eqs.(2.9c,d)
for SCLF. On the other hand, ELS follows from variational problem on
unconditional extremum for superfunctional
 
with vanishing, after calculation of the 1st order variation for
, of the superfields
 extending the
 and being by Lagrange multipliers to
SCLF (2.9c,d).
 are transformed on a some  subrepresentation
from   and possess by the gradings
 
Statement 4.2 

1)  Superfunctions 
, 
 at absence of the explicit dependence
upon  appear by the integrals of solvable ELS (2.9);

2)  On the integral curve  for solvable
ELS the superfunctionals  and 
achieve their critical values for arbitrary configurations of

 
Proof:  1)  Expressions
 
taking the equations  =

into account prove the 1st part of the Statement.

2)  Identical formulae for the critical values of ,

 
arising from (2.1), (4.2) with allowance made for (4.5) prove the formula
(4.4) as well.

From Statement 4.1 it follows the possibility to formulate the proposition
for Hamiltonian formulation being analogous  to Statement 4.2. To this end
indicate that EHS can be obtained from variational problem on conditional
extremum for superfunctional  (3.13) under condition (3.31c) or
on conditional one for  (3.14a) in
fulfilling of SCHF (3.31c) (after variation with respect to
 it is necessary to put ), or on
unconditional one for the extended by superfields 
superfunctional
 
Superfields  in (4.7) can be chosen by the same as ones
in (4.2). In
order to obtain EHS (3.31a,c) it is necessary to put 
 after variation in .

Statement 4.3 

1)  Superfunctions
 
without explicit dependence upon  are the integrals for solvable EGHS
(3.31);

2)  On the integral curve for solvable EGHS  for
arbitrary ,  the superfunctionals
 () achieve their
critical values
 
Proof:  1)  Relations
 
being obtained with help of solvability conditions for EGHS, representation
(3.36b), formula (3.53) and Statement 3.6 prove the 1st part of the Statement.

2)  The validity of the 2nd one follows from formulae (4.10) and
 
Corollary:  From Statement 4.3 it follows the
,  ()
appear by the integrals for EHS as well.

Representation (3.31a,c) for EHS  implies for
 the following consequence for EHS under
parametrization of  by the coordinates (3.21)
 
Assume now the superfunction  depends explicitly upon
. Then its translation along integral curve 

for Hamiltonian subsystem (4.12a) has the form
 
where in view of absence of the solvability conditions  fulfilment
for (4.12a) without use of SCHF (4.12b) one can not apply the Statement 3.6.

Result (4.13) is differred from one (3.17). The requirement of  invariance for
 under such translations leads to the equation
taking place on solutions  for Eqs.(4.12a)
 
A solution for (4.14) will be equivalent to one for (3.18) only in
fulfilling of conditions (3.19). Moreover the transformations
,
 is devoided of the nilpotency
property
 
At the same time the restriction of those transformations by SCHF (4.12b),
so that the master equation (3.36b) holds, makes them by
coinciding with  
 (see (3.61), (3.63)).

Operator , Master Equation, Translations on
 along Integral Curves for HS 
Operator  

For an arbitrary superfunction   the
expression for supercommutator is valid
 
That formula is not in general true in calculating of mentioned
supercommutator in the direction of integral curve
 for Hamiltonian part of EHS (3.31a) which has
the form
 
In deriving of (5.2) it was used the formulae (3.61), (3.62) and
 
together with Jacobi identity (3.27c) for 
.

Remark:  The fulfilment of Eqs.(3.18) without formal writing
of  projector leads to the contradictory relation
 
The contradiction is taken off in fulfilling of Eqs.(3.19) and (3.36b).

The requirement of renewal of supercommutator value in the form (5.1) on
solutions for Hamiltonian part of EGHS (3.31a) by calculating of the
supercommutator on the coordinates  of 
 with consequent summation under condition  uniquely
leads to relation
 
In (5.5) it  was introduced the definition  of the 2nd order odd (with respect
to  and  gradings, but not on
 one) differential operator
 
which in Darboux coordinates 
 and 
 has the form
 
The geometric interpretation of relation (5.5) is as follows:
antisymplectic divergence of tangent vector 
 in any point of the integral curve
 for HS (3.5a,b) is equal to doubled value of
the result of operator  action on
 out of dependence from Eqs.(3.19), (3.31c).
Vanishing of the above divergence is equivalent to validity of the equation
 
Statement 5.1 

In calculating of the supercommutator (5.5) along integral curve
 (3.63) for EHS (3.31a,c) the equation (5.8) at
absence of the explicit dependence upon  for  is the
differential consequence for SCHF (3.31c) with vanishing 
.

Proof:  Using of the fact that action of  on
 under comparison of the formulae (5.7),
(3.31c) takes the form in question
 
we arrive directly to validity of the Statement.

Remarks: 

1)  The relation to be analogous to (5.5) in the case of symplectic
geometry and usual Hamiltonian equations is identically fulfilled;

2)  the conservation of supercommutator value (5.5) on the solutions
 for EHS in terms of Darboux coordinates
 leads to
consequence for (5.5)
 

The requirement of Eqs.(3.19b) fulfilment
for any configuration  irrespective to
EHS (3.31a,c) appears by  stronger condition on the structure of

 
On the Lagrangian formalism language
the situation considered in Sec.II beginning with Eqs.(2.16a) up to (2.22)
inclusively corresponds to this equation.

Statement 5.2  (solvability criterion for Eq.(5.11))

For existence of a solution for Eq.(5.11) it is necessary and sufficient to
realize the following representation 

 
with superfunctions   (
representation 
 being used in (5.12) can be distinguished from adopted one
in (3.21) by value of parameter . It is main that antibracket in terms
of  has the same form as in
(3.26)) .

Proof: 
1)  The sufficiency by a certain way follows from representation
(3.26) for antibracket and the equality respectively
 
2)  Let us represent the antibracket  in the invariant coordinate-free
form
 
where  is the nondegenerate
closed odd differential 2-form on . That form
directly inherits all above properties from ones for antibracket (3.25),
(3.27).  The explicit form for antibracket (3.25) in local coordinates
, 
 on  or in
coordinates  of the type
(3.26a) permits one to present  by the formulae
 
where  is the sign of
external multiplication. Grassmann parities ,
,  for elements ,
, ,
,  are defined to be
coinciding with , , 
gradings of the coordinates , ,
,
,  respectively.

Symbol  in (5.14) denotes by definition the odd
(with respect to ,  but not
) skew-symmetric (antisymplectic) gradient of
superfunction . Obtain in coordinates
 on  the expression
for coordinates of 
 as the vector field on 
 in the basis

with regard for (3.24)
 
In every point of  a vector fields subset
turning the form  into zero  forms the isotropic
subsuperspace
 of the maximal dimension , where  and  are
dimensions of even and odd (with respect to  grading) isotropic
subsuperspaces respectively. For the case of maximal dimension 
is called by the Lagrangian superspace.

From Eq.(5.11) and relation (5.14) it follows that 
  in any point from . In its
turn, it means that
in basis  in an
arbitrary point from , with coordinates
, among coordinates of the vector 
at most  are linearly independent. By virtue of supermatrix
 nondegeneracy in (5.16) the last
conclusion is valid for column-vector 
 as well, i.e. the representation (5.12a) with
 possessing by properties (5.12b)
follows from (5.11) and (5.13).

Remark:  Coordinates 
 and 
 of the same point from  defined in
(3.21) are equivalent in the sense that they are connected by anticanonical
transformation.

Statement 5.3  (indication for solvability of Eq.(5.11))

For fulfilment of Eq.(5.11) it is necessary to be valid the following
condition on solutions
for equations
 for
a some parametrization of  = 

 
The proof follows from the results of Statement 5.2, namely from
representation (5.12).

Note that Lagrangian subsuperspace  is defined ambiguously.
Relation (5.17) itself is the consequence for formula (2.22) taking account of
(2.4a), (3.3), (3.4). The comparison of the condition (5.17) with
one (2.21) expressed in terms of 
and coordinates 
 on ,
with regard for (3.35d), in the form
 
in fact leads to independence of
 upon  that is very strong
restriction on a structure of the model. Ignoring of the condition (5.18)
after Legendre transform of  realization results in
completely different dynamics.

Statement 5.4 

 satisfying to (5.11) is the integral for HS (3.5a,b)
constructed with respect to given .

Really the translation of  with respect to 
along integral curve
 of the pointed HS on 
  is given by the formula
 
This fact provides the solvability of corresponding HS (3.5a,b)
in the sense of the type (2.12) relations as well and validity of
Statement 3.6 in question.

Remark:  Without fulfilment of equation (5.11) HS itself does
not satisfy to solvability conditions (i.e. is unsolvable), and therefore
the Statement 3.6 is not valid for such HS in the sense of the Eqs.(3.8)
nonfulfilment. The removal of that contradiction is provided by restriction of
the right-hand sides of HS (3.5a,b) until their  components
[1]. But the latter is the explicit violation of the superfield form of
equations and  appears by the obstacle for further interpretation of HS role
in the quantization method itself.

Statement 5.5 

There exists a parametrization of 
by Darboux coordinates , 
that in fulfilling  of Eq.(5.11) the identities are valid
 
HS in this coordinates has the representation
 

From Statements 5.2, 5.3 in fact it follows the validity of the last
Statement for , but more detailed proof is
not carried out here.

Relations (5.20) represented through antibracket are conserved under
anticanonical transformations together with form of the operator
 action on an arbitrary superfunction from
. Then the following equation holds in
any local coordinates on  (connected with each
other via anticanonical transformations)
 
defining the further limitation for . Really, having
acted on Eqs.(5.20) by
  obtain
the realization of the result (5.22).
Thus, Eq.(5.22) appears by the consequence of Eq.(5.11)(!) Equation
(5.22) permits among them the same interpretation as it was made for relation
(5.5).
Translations on  along Integral Curves for 

the Hamiltonian Systems 

Let us classify some properties of translations with respect to
 on  of an arbitrary 
   along
integral curves ,
, ,  of
the corresponding differential systems of equations: HS (3.5a,b) (or
equivalently (3.31a)), EHS (3.31a,c) with master equation (3.36b), HS given
by (4.12a) and HS described in Statement 5.4 respectively
 
Call the differential operators of the 1st order ,
, ,  by the generators
of translations on  along corresponding integral curve.

Formally formulae (5.23c,d) point to coincidence with respect to the form with
corresponding transformations (5.23b,a) but it is not in general the case. The
action of the generators on  is equal respectively
 
Additional relation (4.12b) applied to  in its definition
permits to make conclusion that
 
It is not difficult to establish the properties of
possession by nilpotency for the transformations (5.23), that is equivalently
reformulated for their generators
 
Let us note that in this case in spite of equality (5.25) validity the
relations hold
 
In obtaining of the formulae (5.26) the antibracket's properties
(3.25), (3.27), master equation (5.11) for (5.26d), Eq.(3.19b)
in the form (3.36b)  and its
differential consequence (3.39) for (5.26b) (see remark after (3.62)) have
been made use.

In terms of operators ,  we have proved
the

Statement 5.6 

The nilpotency of operators ,  appears by
sufficient condition for the type (2.12) solvability  respectively for EHS
(3.31a,c) and HS of the form (3.31a), built with respect to 
 being by a solution for master equation (5.11).

The generators in (5.23a,b,d) , ,
 given through only the operator 
 and antibracket do not depend on a concrete choice of the
coordinates  on  connected
with each other via anticanonical transformations. Therefore, the translation
transformation with respect to  along integral curve
 of HS (3.31a) given, equivalently, by the Statement
5.5. (Eqs.(5.21)) together with Eq.(5.20) is defined by a generator
 coinciding with . Properties
(5.24d), (5.26d) are valid for   as well.

Remark:  Under attainment of the maximal value for rank in the
expression (5.17) the corresponding Lagrangian subsupermanifold 
   in terms of coordinates
 is defined one-valued in the
framework of the Statement 5.5 and is parametrized only by 
.
On the other
hand, the projection of solution  for HS of the type
(3.31a), in
fulfilling of (5.11), on subsystem of the form (5.21) without realization of
the identity (5.20) leads to unsolvable HS. That fact means the
supermanifold  is not already parametrized
by superfields 
 (value of parameter  in (3.21)  characterizing
index  is now differred from formulated in Statement 5.5). Corresponding
 being by the translation generator on 
along projection for given
 on the above-described type (5.21) subsystem
is defined by the formula
 
has
 as an eigenfunction with zero eigenvalue,
but is not nilpotent
 
It is the same operator  for 
(  ) is considered in
the BV quantization method (without auxiliary, for instance, ghost-antighost
type superfields  and for ).

HS (3.5a,b) with  satisfying to (5.11) corresponds in
the Lagrangian formulation to solvable LS (2.3) with

satisfying to Eqs.(2.5), (2.6) for any  

 
Condition (5.18) for , meaning for  being
one-valued constructed via Legendre transform of the given
 with respect to  in
view  of the supermatrix  (2.21) nondegeneracy, leads to identity
 
Formula (5.31) means the independence of
S upon  that leads to the trivial
dynamics on .  The latter  implies that LS (2.3) is restricted to
proper trivial subsystem (2.3a). Note that any superfields 
 satisfy to that subsystem and in fulfilling of
(2.5) the corresponding superfunctional  (2.1) vanishes
identically.

Eq.(5.22) for  taking into account of (5.30), (5.31)
and (3.35) means the realization of the equivalent equation for

 
Detailed Investigation of the Hamiltonian 

Formulation of GSTF 

In connection with addition to LS (2.3) the SCLF 
  (2.7) it is necessary
for Lagrangian formulation of GSTF to modify the system of initial postulates
formulated in [1]. SCLF  can be
linearly (functionally) dependent themselves. Taking into account of the SCLF
structure  the assumptions have the form being consistent with ones
in Ref.[1].

. There exists a configuration

   that
 
. There exists, at least locally, a smooth supersurface
  
 

  
 
the such that the following condition almost everywhere on 
is fulfilled
 
Remarks: 

1)  Assumption 2 from Ref.[1] on the rank of supermatrix
of the 2nd superfield variational derivatives with respect to 
 and  of superfunctional
 



 remains valid without
changes;

2)  the rule for calculation  of the type
(6.3) supermatrices ranks had  been pointed out in [1];

3)  because of SCLF  and DCLF
 are not in general case (functionally) independent
from each other, then in addition to assumption 2 of the work [1] and 
(6.2), (6.3) it is necessary to introduce the value for rank of 
 supermatrix  
where  is the smooth local supersurface described
in [1];

4)  the smooth supersurfaces  and  are defined at
least locally in a some neighbourhood of the corresponding configuration
 and 
below.

In consequence  of SCLF  dependence for
 it follows by analogy with Theorem 2 from the Ref.[1] a
possibility to realize an equivalent set of SCLF with one's own
differential operators 

   
, , 
 leading to identities among  [1].
The joint investigation of  and ,
based on the relation (6.4), together
with corresponding operators ,
 [1] and 
is not developed here.

Analysis  of GCHF ,
SCHF  independence under condition (3.19a) one
can separately and jointly develop in 
directly. To this end it is necessary to reformulate the assumptions 1-3
suggested in [1] in terms of , , 
, , .

. There exists a configuration   =

  that
 
. A smooth local supersurface  
   exists the such that
 
A separation of index  [1] exists
 
that the following condition with regard of (3.35f) almost everywhere on
 holds
 

 
where  is a some neighbourhood of  described, for instance, in [1].

. A configuration    
 exists that
 
. A smooth local supersurface  
   exists
the such that together with (6.2a) being valid for 
 the expression is true
 
and almost
everywhere on  the relation holds
 
Adapting remark 3) after (6.3) to the case of the Hamiltonian formulation of
GSTF note that by analog of the formula (6.4) under a simultaneous analysis of
 and  in
addition to assumptions  and  it appears  the rank value
of   supermatrix
 
Assumptions ,  are sufficient in separate investigating of
GCHF  structure without SCHF and  in
investigating of .

In the framework of conditions - the theorem being almost
analogous to Theorem 2 in Ref.[1] is formally valid.

Theorem 1  (on reduction of GCHF to equivalent
system in generalized normal form (GNF))

A nondegenerate parametrization
for superfields  exists of the form
 
that the system of  GCHF 
(3.5c) being by algebraic with respect to derivatives on  is
equivalent to one of independent algebraic equations in GHF
 
Superfields  and their "momenta" 
 are arbitrary and the number of them
() coincides with number of algebraic (on
) identities among GCHF
 
with a) local and b) linear independent operators 
 
:
 
b) functional equation
 
has the unique vanishing solution.

Remarks: 

1)  Operators  can
be chosen in a such way that from (3.5c), (2.21) and Ref.[1] it follows
the equalities
 
2)  relation (3.40) permits to
conclude on convention of Theorem 1 because the subsystem (3.5a)  of the 1st
order with respect to derivatives on   differential equations is in
NF now. However there are the forcible arguments to consider Theorem 1 (see
corollary 1.2);

3)  the writing of GCHF (3.5c) in equivalent form (6.14) leads to
necessity of the type (2.12)  solvability conditions fulfilment for
Eqs.(6.14).
Realization of those conditions with necessity results in
absence of explicit dependence on  for 
 and therefore the Eq.(3.19a) holds;

4)  representation of equivalent GCHF in the form (6.14) is possible,
in particular, under assumption that in realizing of Theorem 2 in Ref.[1]
additionally to postulate  the following condition is valid
 
permitting to present 
 as the superfunctions being
essentially dependent upon .

The proof of Theorem 1 is out of the paper's scope. Let us indicate a some
main corollaries (being by analogs of the corollaries for Theorem 2 in
Ref.[1]).

Corollary 1.1 

HCHF 
 in fulfilling of the conditions
 
and under nondegenerate parametrization  = 
 are equivalent to system
of algebraically independent in a sense of differentiation on  HCHF
 
The number of [] coincides with one of the
algebraic on  identities among 
 with linearly independent operators
  

 
where  are the
operators satisfying to conditions of the corollary 2.1 from Ref.[1].

Corollary 1.2 

For a model of GSTF in the Lagrangian formulation representing the
almost natural system (see Corollary 2.2 of Ref.[1]) with 
  and
HCLF 
 
the superfunction  and HCHF
 are given by sequence of
relationships
 
Equation (6.24d) is resolvable with respect to

 
In (6.24) ,  are  quadratic
parts with respect to extended superantifields 
 and , whereas
 is at least cubic on 
, .
Condition (6.7b) and identities with linearly independent operators 
 are given by the relations
respectively
 
Remark:  If HCHF are resolvable then the explicit dependence
upon  does not take place for all superfunctions in Corollaries
1.1, 1.2.

Corollary 1.3 

If for GCHF (3.5c) (HCHF ) the
conditions almost everywhere in any neighbourhood
 are realized:
 
then  all 
() appear by linearly independent
and already are in GHF.

Corollary 1.4 

Under a particular choice of  in
Corollary 1.2  being not explicitly dependent upon  and for
 (natural  system) in the form
 
the Hamiltonian subsystem in GHS (3.51)
obtained via only  Legendre transform (3.2) without regard for
dynamical equations of HCLF (2.3b) is represented by means of the system
consisting of the 1st subsystem in (3.51a) and identities (3.52)
 
a) The above system (6.28) satisfies to solvability condition,
but  is not its integral;

b) By adding to that system the HCHF 
 the solvability conditions for given HS is conserved and

appears now by integral for obtained GHS to be equivalent to LS (2.3).
However the HCHF themselves do not appear by solvable in view of nonfulfilment
of Eqs.(3.39). Corresponding integral curve according to Existence and
Uniqueness Theorems for solution of the 1st order on  ODE [1] has
the form
 
The fulfilment of (6.29b) reflects the requirement of compatibility of
 with HCHF.
Eqs.(6.29b) themselves for all 
already are the Euler-Lagrange equations for  in an usual
sense (as in the classical field theory).

If to start from a priority of superfunctionals  (2.1), 
 (3.13), then they are defined with accuracy up to
 component of one's densities. This ambiguity leads
to possibility to satisfy to the nondegeneracy conditions
for  (2.21) and therefore for  (6.8)
by means of addition of the corresponding .
However above described operation can destroy a
explicit superfield form for integrands (, ) in
the expressions for , . If it is
necessary to hold  the structure of densities ,
 by fixed (that is  more natural  from viewpoint
of physics), then  and  must not
possess of the such above-mentioned ambiguity in one's definitions and
hypothesis (2.21) is not fulfilled obstructing to possibility for
the Hamiltonization (3.2) realization. It means that assumption 
(6.8) does not take place. In this case a corresponding problem of
the theory investigation  in Hamiltonian formulation for GSTF is  more
complicated one and requires the combined study of DCLF (2.3b) and constraints
arising on the 1st stage of Dirac-Bergmann algorithm [5]. The last
problem appears by separate subject of investigation just as a study
of  the SCHF  independence problem both
separately and simultaneously with GCHF  in a
presence of the assumptions , ,  and condition (6.12).

Led in Secs.II-VI investigation permits to introduce  the terminology
being analogous to one for the Lagrangian formulation of GSTF [1].

Definitions: 

1)  The model of superfield theory of fields (mechanics) being given by
superfunction , 
(or by superfunctional  
) under condition  (3.5c) (or by )
satisfying to assumptions - (6.5)-(6.8) is called the gauge
theory of general type (GThGT) of superfields 
with nondegenerate  and in realizing of the 1st condition
in (6.26) for GCHF the nondegenerate theory of general type (ThGT).

2)  Under additional fulfilment of the  Corollary 1.1 conditions (6.20)
on HCHF  and  let us call the
model
by the gauge theory of special type (GThST) of superfields 
with nondegenerate . In realizing for HCHF of the 2nd
relation in (6.26) we will call the model by the nondegenerate theory of
special type (ThST).

3)  Call the formulation of GThGT, GThST with  (or
)  by the Hamiltonian
formalism for description of GThGT, GThST, or equivalently the Hamiltonian
formalism (formulation) for GSTF.

Remark : At  presence of SCHF 
 in the Hamiltonian formalism for the model description  we will say
that the GThGT (GThST) is given with SCHF.

4)  GThGT (GThST) with or without SCHF, for which the
 possibly satisfies to Eqs.(3.19), (3.39)
on an integral curve of the
corresponding system (GHS, HS, EGHS, EHS), we will regard by belonging to the
I class  of gauge field theory models. The same definition we relate to GThGT
(GThST) with SCLF  
 or without them, for which the
Eqs.(2.5), (2.6), (3.38) on an integral curve of the corresponding system
(LS, ELS) in the Lagrangian formalism  for GSTF are possibly valid.

5)  GThGT (GThST) for which the  satisfies to
master equation (5.11) let us relate to gauge field theories of the II class.
The same we will say on GThGT (GThST) in the Lagrangian formalism with
 satisfying to (5.30).


A set of GThGT (GThST) is not divided onto
models  belonging only to the I class or only to the II one.
As the example, consider in Hamiltonian formalism the GThST belonging to the
I class with SCHF  for 
 
Given SCHF corresponds to SCLF 
 defined in (2.7a). The latter  means that 
 satisfying to (3.15), (2.18) may contain only potential
term on solutions for (6.30)
 
and therefore the model belongs
on solutions for SCHF (6.30) to the II class theories.

As for the generators of gauge
transformations of general type (special type) GGTGT (GGTST) in Lagrangian
formalism [1] the identities (6.15) for GThGT and (6.22) for
GThST with operators 
, 
respectively, whose sets are complete and linearly independent, i.e.
are the bases in  corresponding linear spaces  = 

,  = 
, make possible the
following interpretation for quantities
, 
.

Definitions: 

1) Any 
,

 satisfying to identities
 
let us call by the GGTGT and GGTST respectively in the Hamiltonian formalism;

2) Call superfunctions ,
 given by the formulae
 
the trivial GGTGT, GGTST respectively. Properties for superfunctions
,
  are the same as for the analogous
superfunctions in Lagrangian formalism for GSTF [1].

Any GGTGT, GGTST can be represented respectively in the form
 
These formulae convert
 in an affine -module and
 in an
affine -module.

The so-called equivalence transformations (affine transformations of modules
) are valid for the basis elements
,
 respectively
 
Properties of the superfunctions
,
,
,
 completely coincide with analogous
ones for corresponding superfunctions in Lagrangian formalism [1].
Relationships (6.15) for GThGT are interpreted as a consequence of invariance
for superfunctional  with respect to following
transformations of ,   in the
infinitesimal form
 
with arbitrary superfields 



defined on .

Really the sequence of the formulae holds
 
Identities (6.22) for
GThST, in general, can not be  interpreted as a consequence of invariance for
 with respect to the infinitesimal transformations
 
with arbitrary superfields  having the same Grassmann
gradings as for  in (6.37). However for superfunction
 in Corollaries 1.2, 1.4 (in the latter
,  do not depend
on  explicitly) a property of its invariance holds just as in
Lagrangian formalism [1].

Formally one can call the considered infinitesimal transformations written
in the form (6.37) the GTGT for   and the GTST for
, if latters are of the form (6.39).

The concluding remarks from Sec.VI of the paper [1] on irreducible and
reducible
GThGT, GThST and on investigations of corresponding gauge algebras of GThGT,
GThST are valid for the Hamiltonian formalism of GSTF as well.
Extension of Superalgebra   up to  

Let us continue the action of special involution  [1] from 
 and
 onto  by
means of the relations
 
where  are the superfields being -conjugate
to superfields  with components
 
The subspace of superfields being invariant with respect to  is formed
by the superfields
 
Superfields  are transformed with respect
to the supergroup  superfield representation  being by
-conjugate to representation : (
,  = .
The restrictions of involution onto subsuperalgebras
,
 appear by the identity mappings.

The continuation of the superalgebra    [1] of the
1st order differential operators acting on 
 being by linear span of

,   to superalgebra
 
of the 1st and 2nd orders ones acting on 
through elements of the basis
 
is realized with help of tensor product  introduced in [1]
and written, for instance, for
 
For other operators (7.4)  write compactly with allowance made for
structure of  formulae (7.5)
 
Note that  on . Properties
of gradings for operators (7.4) are given by the table
 
In terms of the coordinates  the operators
 and

 are combined  into the expressions
respectively
 
By means of the
basis elements (7.5), (7.6), (7.8) one can write the superfield (at least
with respect to operators of differentiation) elements of
  not being contained in  
 
By writing of (7.9), (7.10) it is taken into consideration according to
Ref.[1] that by relationships
 
involution  is extended onto    as well.

The superfield elements built from operators (7.8)
have the form in coordinates 
 

 

The operators , ,
,
, , 
, , 
 are invariant with respect to , but the only
,
,
, ,
 are defined in the superfield form with respect to
,  representations.
Operators , ,
 appear by the realizations of projectors ,
,  on  in the relation (2.37).

All algebraic properties for   [1] under the
composition of operators are literally transferred onto subsuperalgebra
  of the 1st
order operators in  . The additional properties for
analogous ones from [1] have the form
 
For subset   with basis 
 the remarks  being analogous
for   [1] are valid.

For the 2nd order operators let us point out only the following formulae
 
A deviation of  in order to be derivation in acting on
the product of arbitrary ,  
 yields the definition for antibrackets
 
which have the gradings as in (3.25).
Antibracket  is not obtained by means
of (7.16) from operator . It follows from
(7.17) the definitions for antibrackets in the superfield form
 
Antibrackets (7.17), (7.18) satisfy to standard properties for odd Poisson
bracket (3.25), (3.27). In particular, Jacobi identity for corresponding
antibrackets can be obtained from action of squared (formally) operators
, , 
on the product of 3 arbitrary superfunctions from .

Operators ,
, ,
   differentiate the antibrackets 
with corresponding (coinciding for
 and ) indices by
Leibnitz rule. For example, for any from operators  
, ,
 and for  the following relation
holds
 
In fact the relationships (7.16)-(7.18), (7.6), (7.10), (5.6), (5.7) make
having the same rights a construction of antisymplectic differential
geometry on  both starting from the operators 
, , next
obtaining the antibrackets  and vice versa
starting from the antibrackets(!) (with exception of 
and ).

With help of antibrackets one can define a so-called transformation of the
operators from  .
Let us confine ourselves by the case of operators  
, ,

having required the fulfilment of the transformation rule
 
The condition of nilpotency conservation for  with
allowance made for antibracket's properties
(3.27) leads to the equation on a superfunction 

 
Transformation (7.20) permits to achieve of the vanishing for one(!)
from  with help of a special choice for 
satisfying to (7.21). So putting successively
 
we obtain respectively
 
Choosing as  in (7.20) the sum of 
 and  from (7.22) we derive according to (7.20),
(7.22), (7.23) the formulae
 
For arbitrary  a
requirement   of the properties (7.14e) conservation taking
account of antibracket's ones (3.27) and (7.19) leads to necessity
of the compatibility condition fulfilment
 
which is the additional relation to Eqs.(7.21) for

.
Component Formulation 

Continue in the framework of the Hamiltonian formulation for GSTF a
programme, started in [1] for Lagrangian formalism, of the establishment of
connection between superfield and component field quantities and relations
of GSTF.

In fact all  formulae of the analogous section in Ref.[1] are valid
here as well under formal change of the form 
 
 in the corresponding ones from [1]. So from (2.47) let us
find
the expression for densities of superfunctionals on  through
latters themselves
 
The formula
 
establishes the
connection of the partial superfield derivative with respect to superfield
 with component ones.

The component representation for supermatrix of the 2nd partial superfield
derivatives of  with respect to 
,  is literally the same as in [1] under change of
,  on 
,  respectively.

From formulae
 
it seems natural to introduce the following component variational
derivatives (remind that  for fixed 
represents the usual functional (or function) on 
 
where (
) are considered as a single differential object acting on
.

Connection for the left and right derivatives of the form (8.5) is yielded by
the formulae
 
The relationship of the right variational superfield derivative with respect
to  and the component variational (in an usual sense)
ones on  and  follows
from (2.2), (2.48b), (8.1)
 
From (8.7) it follows as in [1] the formulae in coordinates
 and 
 respectively
 
Relationships being  analogous to (8.8) for a
superfunction   have the form
 
In obtaining of (8.10) the identities have been made use
 
All above relations are sufficient in order to get the component
expressions for operators from   being additional
to ones obtained in Ref.[1]. Let us point out the formulae only for basis
operators , ,
, 
 
At last for the antibrackets (7.17) calculated on arbitrary
 ,  from  we
have
 
The antibrackets ,

,  are
yielded from (8.15) under corresponding changes for operators
 on 

,  on
 and under
their simultaneous change for antibracket .

Formulae of this Section are sufficient in order to write  all relations
of the Hamiltonian formulation for GSTF in the component form.
Models in the Hamiltonian Formulation for GSTF 

Continue investigation of the models from work [1] made in
the Lagrangian formulation for the case of the Hamiltonian one.
Models of Massive Complex Scalar Superfield 

Begin from introduction of the superantifields(in contrast to the
designation of the complex conjugation  for superfields
 adopted in Ref.[1], in this section the sign
 is reserved for notation of the only superantifields, whereas the
complex conjugate quantity is denoted with bar:  unlike of
-conjugate quantity  for  as in
Sec.VII) 
  
,  for real component superfields
 forming the complex scalar superfield

 
defined on  [1]
 
The noncontradictory join of the real superantifields
 into
complex ones ,
 is realized by the formulae
 
providing the fulfilment of the relationship with bar from the left-hand
side meaning in question the complex conjugation
 
to be valid in this case in view of below following in (9.7a,b) relations.

The complex superantifields are the elements of complex irreducible massive
Poincare group representation and possess by the following Grassmann gradings
written, for instance, for  and its components
with respect to 
 
in accordance with connection of spin with only statistic .

Superantifields , 
 are transformed with respect to
 representation in the form
 
Superantifields ,
 are
the elements of mentioned Poincare group superfield representation and the
scalars with respect to action of  operators (2.26b).

In view of the fact that supermatrix  of the 2nd derivatives
of   with respect to 
,
 can be chosen by
nondegenerate [1], then it is possible to pass to the Hamiltonian formulation
in   parametrized by
coordinates  = (,
, ,
).  Dimensions of the supermanifolds
 and  with respect to
 parity read as follows, regarding as the independent
coordinates, for instance,
the only , 
 
Legendre transform (3.2), (3.3) is defined by the relations
 
Remind that this free GSTF model is the
nondegenerate (and even nonsingular [5]) ThST. In the framework of Sec.VI
terminology  the model
belongs to the I class in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations  and
former one is given by  superfunction  [1] defined on
 
 
and therefore the Hamiltonian formulation of model (9.7c) falls literally
under conditions of Corollary 1.4 because of the Lagrangian one in this case
had satisfied to conditions of Corollary 2.2 from the work [1].

Correspending GHS has the form (6.28), (3.51b)
 
The only half of them is independent, for instance, the equations for
, . HS (9.9a,b)
is solvable. HCHF (9.9c,d) representing the superfield (on )
generalization of Klein-Gordon equation and coinciding with corresponding HCLF
[1] do not appear by solvable. GHS (9.9) being equivalent to corresponding
LS [1] has the superfunction  (9.7c) by one's integral.

There are not of the type (6.22) identities among Eqs.(9.9c,d) although the
only Eq.(9.9d) is independent.

Equation (2.6), in force of the fact that  =  =

   in terms of
coordinates on , holds
 
Choosing SCLF and equivalent to them SCHF respectively in the form
 
we get the free massive complex scalar superfield model is described on their
solutions by only 
 and therefore belongs to the II class ThST with respect to
terminology introduced in Sec.VI. Under choice of the SCLF, SCHF in the form
(9.11), (9.12) the corresponding master equations (3.36a,b), in fact written
in (9.10), appear by double zeros of the solutions for ELS and EGHS (9.9),
(9.12). Therefore EGHS and corresponding ELS are solvable.

The antibracket  (7.18a) given on 
 has the form
 
Partial superfield derivatives with respect to superantifields 
,
 in terms of densities on
 have the same form that ones with respect to
superfields ,  in [1].
Operator  reads as follows on 

 

Eqs.(5.22) and therefore (5.8) hold trivially in question. The superfunctional
, 
,  (3.14a) with Lagrange complex scalar
multipliers  , 
(having the same Grassmann parities as for  , 
 [1]) leading on a basis of variational principle to the
GHS of the type (3.51), being differred from (9.9) in the
Eqs.(9.9b), has the form
 
Because the GHS (9.9) and corresponding LS [1] (in fact
being given by Eqs.(9.9c,d) and 
, )
are the systems of differential superfield equations in partial derivatives
of the 2nd order
with respect to  for GHS, LS and of the 1st (2nd) order on 
for GHS (LS), then as the independent initial conditions for LS one can choose
 
Then in correspondence with Statement 3.1 the Cauchy problem (9.16) both for
GHS (9.9) and for GHS of the form (3.51) are set in
 equivalently,
with allowance made for (9.7a,b), by means of the independent relations
 

The results of this subsection can be directly rewritten for the model with
self-interaction described in Ref.[1]. To this end it is necessary only in
formulae (9.7c), (9.8a,c), (9.9c,d), (9.10), (9.15) to make the changes of the
form
 

 
The other characteristics, among them the classified ones, for free model are
transferred onto self-interacting model taking the remarks made in Ref.[1]
into account.
Models of Massive Spinor Superfield of Spin
 

Let us introduce the complex superantifields ,

   defined on
 [1]
 
which are the Dirac bispinors (

 is Dirac conjugate to  as it
follows from (9.24) below)
and, therefore, the elements of 
reducible superfield (on ) Lorentz group representation.
The superantifields are given in (9.20) among them in two-component spinor
formalism.

The Grassmann gradings for superantifields and their components it is
sufficient to define, for instance, for  by the
table
 
that is corresponding to theorem on connection of spin with statistic
 but not with .

Superantifields ,  are
transformed in a standard way (as bispinors) with respect to restriction
of representation 
of the supergroup  onto .
As to ,
then the superantifields are transformed according to (2.26a) in the form
 
Superantifields ,
 are elements of
mentioned Poincare group superfield representation as well and in addition
are scalars with respect to action of  operators (2.26b).

Because of supermatrix  of the 2nd derivatives of
 with respect to
,
 is the
nondegenerate one [1], then it is possible according to Sec.III to pass to the
Hamiltonian formulation in  parametrized by
coordinates  = (,
, ,
).  Dimensions of 
 and  with respect to 
parity are the same
 
Legendre transform (3.2), (3.3) is given by the formulae
 
That GSTF model  is the
nondegenerate ThST, belongs to the I class as in Lagrangian formalism as
in Hamiltonian one and is given by means of superfunction 
 defined on  [1]
 
Therefore the Hamiltonian formulation of the model (9.24c)
satisfies to the conditions of Corollary 1.4.
Relations
(9.24a,b) establish the following correspondences in two-component spinor
formalism
 
so that the only half from them is independent.

Corresponding GHS has the form (6.28), (3.51b) and
contains   real
component equations or equivalently  6 superfield spinor equations in
four-component spinor formalism
 
The only half from them is independent, for example, the equations for
, . HS (9.27a,b) is solvable.
Superfunction  (9.24c) is the
integral of GHS (9.27) being equivalent to corresponding LS [1]. But HCHF
(9.27c,d) representing themselves the superfield (on )
generalization of Dirac equation and coinciding with corresponding HCLF [1]
do not satisfy to the solvability condition.

As one had been already mentioned there were not of the type (6.22) identities
because of this model is not gauge although HCHF code 4 independent
degrees of freedom among 8 component equations [1].

At last, the equation (2.6), in view of the fact that
 =  = 

 + 
in terms of coordinates on ,
is fulfilled and has the form
 
Specifying SCLF and being equivalent to them SCHF respectively in the form
 
obtain that on their solutions according to (9.27a) the  free
massive spinor superfield model is described by only superfunction
 and therefore belongs to the
II class  ThST.
Master equations (3.36a,b), in fact written in (9.28), appear by double zeros
of the solutions for ELS and EGHS (9.27), (9.30) with SCLF, SCHF (9.29),
(9.30).
Therefore EGHS and corresponding ELS are solvable.

The antibracket  (7.18a),
operator  are defined in the
following way in  coordinates  on 

 
Applied in this case the Eq.(5.22) and therefore (5.8) are trivially valid.
Superfunctional

 (3.14a) with auxiliary bispinors 
, 
(having the same ,
,  gradings as for  
,  [1]) from which it
follows the GHS of the type (3.51), being differred from (9.27) in the
Eqs.(9.27b), has the form
 
As far as the GHS (9.27) and corresponding LS [1] (in fact
being given by formulae (9.27c,d) and 
, ) are
the systems
of differential superfield equations in partial derivatives of the 1st order
with respect to  and of the 1st (2nd) order on  for GHS
(LS) one can choose  as the independent the following initial conditions
for LS
 
Then according to
Statement 3.1 the Cauchy problem both for GHS (9.27) and for GHS of the form
(3.51) are set in 
equivalently  taking (9.24a,b) into account by means of the following
independent relations
 

The generalization of the relationships from given subsection to the case of
massive spinor superfield model with interaction [1] is produced sufficiently
simple. To do this it is necessary to make the only following changes in
formulae (9.24c), (9.25a,c), (9.27c,d), (9.28), (9.33) respectively
 

 
Given model remains nondegenerate ThST taking corresponding remarks from
Ref.[1] into account.
Models of Free Vector Superfield 

The real superantifields 
  on  = 
 have the following expansion
in powers of  and 
 gradings respectively
 
 are transformed with respect to massless
(or massive for Proca model for ) irreducible representation of
group  and have
the usual
transformation laws relative to that group. But with respect to 
 the only  are nontrivially
transformed according to (2.26a)
 
Let us remind that Lagrangian formulation of the massless model [1] had been
given by
the superfunction 

   on  =



 
whose form  () determined the GThST with the generators
of gauge transformations
 
For N the supermatrix 
 is always degenerate so that a
standard Hamiltonization by the prescription of Sec.III is impossible.
Choosing  to be nondegenerate for
N we conclude that the necessary condition
for existence of Legendre transform for  with respect to
 is fulfilled.

Dimensions of supermanifolds  and 
, in this example parametrized by superfields 
and  = 
 respectively,  with respect to 
grading are equal
 
Legendre transform (3.2), (3.3) according to (9.40) is given by the
formulae
 
Therefore the Hamiltonian formulation of the model satisfies to conditions
of Corollary 1.4 and appears by GThST belonging to the I class with GGTST
(9.41) and HCHF having the form
 
Corresponding GHS (3.5) has the form (6.28), (3.51b) in correspondence with
Corollary 1.4
 
GHS (9.45) is equivalent to the corresponding LS [1].
Given GHS not being solvable, although
the Hamiltonian subsystem in (9.45) appears by solvable itself, has
 as
one's integral resulting in fulfilment of Eq.(2.6) in this case
in terms of coordinates on 
 
by virtue of the following expression








Defining SCLF and SCHF, being equivalent to each other, in the form
respectively
 
obtain that on their solutions the   free massless vector
superfield model is described by only 
 and, therefore belongs to the II class theory.
Master equations of the form (3.36a,b), in fact written in (9.46), appear by
double zeros for the solutions for EGHS (9.45), (9.47) and corresponding ELS.
These systems therefore are solvable.

The antibracket  and operator 
 have the form for any

 
Eqs.(5.22) and hence Eqs.(5.8) trivially hold. GHS of the type (3.51),
being differred from (9.45) in the 2nd subsystem, follows from
variational problem for the superfunctional
 
The setting of Cauchy problem, by virtue of functional dependence of HCHF
(9.44), for GHS (9.45) and for corresponding LS [1] for 
N is nontrivial, and for  is  more complicated.
It requires an additional study of HCLF and LS on the whole. GHS (9.45)
for  itself and corresponding LS [1] (given with help of (9.44) and

for ) are the systems of differential superfield equations in
partial derivatives of the 1st (2nd) order on  for GHS (LS) and of the
2nd order with respect to  for GHS and  LS.

At last, -superfield model of free massive real vector superfield
described in the Lagrangian formulation for GSTF in [1] can be obtained in the
Hamiltonian one under formal change of the corresponding superfunctions and
differential operators in the relationships (9.40a,c), (9.43a),
(9.44)-(9.46), (9.49) onto following ones
 

 

As it had been noted in Ref.[1] there are not both differential identities
among  (9.50c) and therefore any gauge
transformations. This model belongs to the class of nondegenerate ThST, being
singular in correspondence with terminology from Ref.[5] in view of 2
second-class constraints presence.
Conclusion 

The second composite part of GSQM for gauge theories in the Lagrangian
formalism in a natural way continuing the ideas and elaborations of the
Lagrangian formulation for GSTF have been proposed in the work. On
space  the superfunction
 is defined, equivalently just as  in Lagrangian
formulation, coding  all information about given GSTF model in Hamiltonian
formalism. More complicated scheme of corresponding dynamical
systems investigation on a basis of satisfaction of the solvability
conditions has led to supplement of the additional special constraints aside
from ones following from variational principle. This investigation trend has
led to definite inverse connection, namely, to modification of Lagrangian
formulation description for GSTF. In particular, it was expressed in
introduction of concepts for theories of the I and II classes. GThGT and (or)
GThST of the II class represent themselves the models of gauge theories with
master equations being valid, in contrast to the theories of the I class, in
the whole ,  in
correspondence with the kind of applied formalism.

Note that GThGT of the II class with
 has as
consequence of the master equation the property of mentioned
superfunction cancellation by means of the operator 
action.
Various constructions of the translation operations with respect to 
along integral curves for HS, GHS, EGHS, EHS together with their properties
were examined.

Important problems of the study of the 1st and 2nd orders differential
operators superalgebras and the component formulation for GSTF have been
considered.
Statements and conclusions for general formalism of the work have been
demonstrated on the examples of  free and
self-interacting massive complex scalar superfield of
spin 0 models, free and self-interacting massive spinor superfield of spin
 models in 
and  free massless and massive (Proca model) vector superfield ones in 
N.
These examples appear by the starting models for construction of interacting
superfield (on ) GThGT in Hamiltonian formulation  such as
-superfield scalar or spinor or vector (for complex vector superfield
in ) electrodynamics on a basis of the gauge principle application [6]
to models above. Note that nonlinear dynamical equations in fact written in
HCHF for self-interacting models do not coincide with respect to form with
each other for  and  components of the corresponding
superfields in contrast to free models. For the latter examples the component
on  linear equations of motion have the same form and formally
describe the same corresponding particles.

Natural algorithm to constructing from the models of usual relativistic field
theory their superfield generalization in the form of natural system,
described in the conclusion of Ref.[1] for Lagrangian formulation for GSTF,
can be literally applied to analogous construction of their superfield
generalization in Hamiltonian formalism for GSTF.

At last, let us continue the analogy [1] between quantities and relations
from classical mechanics in its usual Hamiltonian formulation with even
with respect to supergroup  () objects and ones
from Hamiltonian formulation for GSTF.
* 
Acknowledgments: 
I would like to thank Bogdan Mishchuk for discussions of some results of the
present paper.

 
References  
 
A.A. Reshetnyak, General Superfield Quantization Method. I. General
Superfield Theory of Fields: Lagrangian Formalism, hep-th/0210207.
C. Becchi, A. Rouet and R. Stora, Phys. Lett. B 25 (1974) 344; Comm.
Math. Phys. 42 (1975) 127;

I.V. Tyutin, P.N. Lebedev Physical Inst. of the
RF Academy of Sciences, preprint, No.39 (1975).
I.A. Batalin and G.A. Vilkovisky,
Phys. Lett. B 102 (1981) 27; Phys.  Rev. D 28 (1983) 2567.
E. Noether, Nachr. Knig. Gesellsch. Wissen, G
ttingen, Math-Phys. Klasse. (1918) 235, in English: Transport Theory
and Stat. Phys. 1 (1971), 186.
D.M. Gitman and I.V. Tyutin,
Quantization of Fields with Constraints (Springer-Verlag, Berlin and
Heidelberg, 1990).
C.N. Yang, R. Mills, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 191.
