 





english 

satz Theorem 
folge [satz]Corollary 
lemma [satz]Lemma 
prop [satz]Proposition 
defi [satz]Definition 


 
 
 












Conformal Covariance Subalgebras 
S ren K"oster 
 

  

We give a direct Lie  algebraic characterisation of conformal
inclusions of chiral current algebras associated with compact,
reductive Lie  algebras. We use straightforward quantum field
theoretic arguments and prove a long standing conjecture of
Schellekens and Warner on grounds of unitarity and positivity
of energy. We explore the structures found to characterise
"conformal covariance subalgebras" and "coset current
algebras".


AMS Subject classification (2000): 81T40, 81R10, 17B67, 81T05 



Introduction 

Conformal inclusions of chiral current algebras are of interest for a
large variety of reasons. Their classification was undertaken some time
ago, because they are particularly relevant to string theory for them
making string compactification possible without altering 
conformal covariance. Using general
arguments this task was transfered to checking maximal inclusions of reductive
Lie  algebras in simple Lie  algebras, for which a
classification was available already. The classification of conformal
inclusion was thus achieved, looking at the central charge of the
respective stress energy tensors, by several authors
.

Many of the conformal inclusions were found to correspond to
"symmetric spaces" (cf.  in particular) and
"isotropy irreducibility" of the coset space proved a useful yet
neither necessary nor 
sufficient criterion for an inclusion being conformal. We undertake a complete
characterisation of conformal inclusions by means of straightforward
arguments familiar in (axiomatic) quantum field theory. On the course
we prove a longstanding(To the author's surprise, there
  does not seem to be a proof available yet.) 
conjecture of Schellekens and Warner  
. 

Our analysis applies directly and rigorously to all current
algebras which are available as quark models (cf. eg. 
), because these manifestly fulfill Wightman 's axioms for
quantum field theories and thus have all properties needed for
our argument: positivity of energy, unitarity, separating property of
the vacuum for local current fields (Reeh-Schlieder  property), common,
invariant domain. 
Quark models are available for current algebras
corresponding to the classical 
Lie  algebras  (type , 
, , ) and to the exceptional Lie  algebra 
at any level  and for the types ,  for
different infinite sets of levels. 
 We believe our results to hold true for the cases , ,
 ,  at
 all levels as well, but  Wightman 's axioms appear only
 implicitly in the literature for these cases (see (chapter 11),).














Our analysis is of interest as it clarifies the situation in natural
group theoretical terms and in direct correspondence to quantum field
theoretical notions. In addition, there is no need to specialise in
maximal subalgebras and our approach is rather direct in that respect.

The author stumbled across the questions which are dealt with in this work
while investigating a related problem. This was about the question how
the inner-implementing represention , uniquely associated with every
covariant subtheory  of a chiral conformal theory
 by means of the Borchers-Sugawara  construction
, acts on the observables of the larger theory
. This illustrates why the point of view taken in this
article came to mind. An answer to the more general question is given
in an independent work.      

We proceed as follows: In the next section we introduce notations
and conventions, prove the conjecture of Schellekens and Warner 
and provide a natural argument for conformal inclusions being
necessarily restricted to level . The third section is about
studying "conformal covariance subalgebras" associated to
Lie  algebra inclusions, these being intermediate to the
original inclusion, if not trivial. The section will be closed by a
simple characterisation of "coset currents", i.e. current
subalgebras commuting with  the given current subalgebra.







Characterisation of conformal inclusions 

We study a current algebra associated with a simple(General reasoning leads to an extension of the following
discussion to 
inclusions of reductive subalgebras in reductive Lie 
algebras, cf. eg. .) , compact Lie 
algebra  by a quark model construction yielding symmetric operator
valued distributions, the currents. We will treat these as fields on
the chiral light ray. Basis elements of  will
be denoted by ; they give the "colour" of the corresponding
current . The current algebra is given by the following
commutation relations: 
 
 denotes the Killing  metric of ,
 its structure constants and  the current algebra's
"level";  is a positive integer.

By embedding a reductive Lie  subalgebra  into
 via an injective homomorphism 
 we have an associated current
subalgebra.  consists of 
several simple ideals, denoted (for the time being) by
, and an abelian 
ideal of dimension . The inclusions 
 are partly characterised by their
Dynkin  index . Denoting the Killing  metric of
 by  we have the following commutation
relations for currents associated with colours in :
 

The infinitesimal conformal transformations are implemented by the
adjoint action of the Sugawara  stress energy tensor
. It is given by:
 
 is the dual Coxeter  number of . The
commutation relation of  with a current reads as:
 

Restricting to colours in  the same
construction yields a stress energy
tensor  having the same commutation relation with
currents associated with colours in :
 

For the abelian ideal we adopt the following conventions:
, , 
. Using these as input all the formulas
above apply to currents associated with colours in 
and all of the following, if not mentioned otherwise. We shall,
therefore, drop the distinction between simple and abelian ideals of 
and use the symbol  for any simple or the abelian
ideal from now on.

With this general notation the action of a stress energy tensor
 on a generic current  reads as:
 
 This equation is obtained by applying the current algebra
 and the normal ordering prescription for currents
. The
 matrix  stands for the second Casimir  element of
  in the representation 
, if  is a simple ideal. In
 any case we have:
 
Taking the trace of this matrix one may readily see that it does
not vanish for the abelian ideal.

Now we are prepared to state and prove our main
result. Schellekens and Warner  conjectured it in their
discussion closing.
   The following holds true for the "weighted Casimir  element"
   
  of  ( stands for the projection onto
  ): 
   

This inequality is saturated if and only if
 yields a 
conformal inclusion, i.e. 
. 

 
By invariance of  the orthocomplementation 
 provides a reduction of the
representation . We
have  ,
i.e. , and
the inequality only remains to be proven for colours orthogonal to
, where . Because
all Casimir  elements commute and all are 
positive operators, we assume as well that  is a common
eigenvector for all linear mappings .

We prove the inequality by looking at specific expectation values of the
coset (conformal) Hamilton  operator
. This is a positive operator, which is given
by the coset stress energy tensor
 smeared with the test function
. The infinitesimal action of a
conformal Hamilton  operator on the test function of a smeared
field covariant with respect 
to it shall be abbreviated by , i.e. we have



Using the general commutation relation (), calculating
two and three point functions of currents (cf. ), observing
that some group-theoretical tensors involved are null for reasons of
permutation symmetry/ antisymmetry and carefully taking into
account the normal ordering of currents    one arrives at
the following formula:
 
The desired inequality may be established through
  division by 
, which does not vanish for generic  and is
  positive as an expectation value of . 

If we have
,  () is
saturated on  trivially and because of () on
 as well, hence on all of . The
conclusion in the opposite direction  
is, actually, a consequence of equation () in
proposition 
: This leads to trivial commutation relations for
, especially to ,
which yields, by a variant of the
 Reeh-Schlieder  theorem( See for
   example (lemma 2, 
 sect. V.3.B); for an argument directly referring to the
 Virasoro  algebra see.) ,
 . 
 
         






























   An embedding  can give rise to a
  conformal inclusion of the associated current algebras only, if the
  current algebra associated with  has level .

 
Highest weight representations of current algebras may be characterised
uniquely by a vector of lowest energy, which a highest
weight vector with respect to the "horizontal subalgebra" of
currents  smeared with the constant testfunction .
We look at the representation defined by the highest weight
 of the adjoint representation of . Since
 has, by the usual convention, length 2, this
representation is in accordance with the Weyl  alcove condition
 for unitary representations of current algebras
for . The following argument applies, therefore, for all but
level . 

Actually, we may restrict attention to the action of
 on , the highest
weight module of  generated from the vector with lowest
energy and highest weight . Here we have:
 
This implies a sharper version of inequality () and by theorem
 this immediately yields the desired result.






Conformal covariance subalgebras 

After we have given a characterisation of conformal inclusions
, we now pursue further the structures in
colour space which are associated with the action of 
on currents with colours in . We find that "covariant" and
"invariant" colours form, in fact, reductive Lie  algebras,
the first being intermediate to the original embedding
, the second being orthogonal to and
commuting with it. All these results are in terms on the "weighted
Casimir  element"  of the
Lie  algebra , 
which already appeared in the previous section.

The following is the main ingredient of the results in this section:
  For an arbitrary colour  we have the
  following:
   
Here  stands for the scalar product on
 induced by the Killing  form. Defining the
"covariance field"  by 


we have:
 

The familiar numerical distributions in these formulae are given by:
* 

 
  We will not give the derivation of these formulae in any detail. We
  rather indicate their verification. First, one may restrict
  attention to colours  since the weighted
  Casimir  respects the orthogonal decomposition
   with respect to
   and  commutes with all
  currents whose colours are in . "All" that one has
  to do  is to   
  apply the general commutation relation () restricted
  to colours from , follow carefully the normal
  ordering of currents, observe symmetries of group theoretical
  coefficients, keep in mind , calculate
  some -point functions of currents 
  following the scheme in, use Jacobi 's identity a
  few times and recognise the second Casimir  element in the
  adjoint representation, which amounts to twice the dual
  Coxeter  number. With all that, it is a straight forward
  algebraic exercise. The reader is invited to find a simpler
  derivation of this or an equivalent result.  

 
  A current  is said to transform covariantly  with respect to
  , if and only if 
 .
The proof of the following corollary shows that, in fact, it is
sufficient to require the equality to hold for a few, but sufficiently
many testfunctions: two suitable pairs , , are enough. 

   A current  transforms covariantly  with respect to
  , if and only if its
  colour fulfills: 
  . These "covariant
  colours" form a reductive Lie 
  algebra, , containing  as a subalgebra. If
  , then the level of the current algebra
  associated  has to be .  

 
If we have , we know from
the variant of the Reeh-Schlieder  theorem (see footnote )
and proposition  above, that  and 
the coset stress energy tensor commute. This is another way of saying:
 transforms covariantly with respect to 
  . 

Conversely: If  is covariant with respect to
, the group theoretical scalar products  in
equation () have to be zero, since the numerical
distributions involved are linearly independent. The second one of
these is the norm of ,
which makes the equation 
valid.
Now, if  and  are covariant colours, then 
 as well. This is clear, if one observes
, where  is a
constant test function: . 

The reductivity of  is not difficult to prove, either. 




is a subspace
of , endowed with an invariant scalar product, which is given by the
restriction of the Killing  form on . By invariance of
this scalar product on  with respect to  (this
being a mere restriction of invariance under ) any
invariant subspace of  has an invariant orthogonal
complement. Now this is complete reducibility of  and thus
  is reductive (25.3.a).

Since one can reduce the problem of understanding all conformal
inclusions to the studies of reductive inclusions in simple Lie 
algebras (cf. eg. ) the last part follows immediately from
corollary  
, as  is , by construction of
, a conformal inclusion and the level of the current algebra
associated with  is
less or equal the levels referring to .

 
  A current , whose colour  lies in 
  and fulfils , commutes
  with the entire current algebra associated with
  . These colours form a reductive Lie  algebra,
  the algebra of "invariant colours"; we call their
  current algebra "coset current algebra".  

 
  





We give a self-contained proof directly aiming at the
  structure in colour space. We set
  
.   is an invariant  subspace with respect
  to  the action of  on  via  
. In fact, it is the representation 
space for the trivial subrepresentation on : For
any simple ideal 
 we have by complete reducibility 

. Since both the Weyl  vector  and the contributing highest
weight vectors  are dominant, we have . For the
abelian ideal the irreducible subrepresentations on  are given by
common eigenvectors, such that 
. This gives the
same result. This means, that all of  commutes with
, i.e. . We gain directly:
.

By Jacobi 's identity and invariance of the Killing 
metric,  forms a Lie 
subalgebra of . This is
reductive by the same argument as in the proof to corollary
. 

Two concluding remarks:  Generically, the coset theory is not
generated by coset currents
. Obviously 
 has to be a conformal
inclusion for that to be the case, since the coset stress energy
tensor has to be the Sugawara  stress energy tensor of the
current algebra associated with 
. Casimir  elements of 
 give, when transfered to the corresponding
horizontal subalgebra,  "charge operators" of the coset
theory. These will, in general, fail to separate the representations
of the coset theory. The same goes for the Cartan  subalgebra of
, whose spectrum defines
characters of the representations of the coset theory.  The
coset current algebra is trivial for all inclusions with minimal  coset
theory: Here the coset theory is generated by the coset stress energy
tensor and this theory contains nothing but this field
.  Triviality of coset current algebra ought to be regarded
as generic situation. 

Currents  with vanishing covariance field  are linear
combinations of covariant and coset currents. This is obvious, since
a decomposition of  into eigenvectors
of  with distinct eigenvalues 
yields (cf. equation ): 




 As  this scalar 
product vanishes, if and only if just  and 
contribute. This means, that there are no currents with a "simple"
intermediate transformation behaviour with respect to the action of
. Typically, a current  has , i.e.
a "complicated" transformation behaviour. By the analysis in
 this behaviour is known to be physically satisfactory, still.  

Acknowledgements 
I thank K.-H.Rehren  (Gottingen) for
  many helpful discussions and a critical reading of the
  manuscript. Financial support from the Ev. Studienwerk 
    Villigst  is gratefully acknowledged.



 GNO85 
 [1] 

R.C. Arcuri, J.F. Gomes, and D.I. Olive.
Conformal subalgebras and symmetric spaces .
Nuclear Phys. B285  (1987) 327.


F.A. Bais and P.G. Bouwknegt.
A classification of subgroup truncations of the bosonic
  strings .
Nuclear Phys.   B279  (1987) 561.


S. Carpi.
Absence of subsystems for the H aag-K astler net generated by
  the energy-momentum tensor in two-dimensional conformal field theory .
Lett. Math. Phys. 45  (1998) 259-267.


J.F. Cornwell.
Group Theory in Physics, Volume III : Supersymmetries and
  Infinite-Dimensional Algebras , volume 10 of Techniques in Physics .
Academic Press, London, San Diego, 1989.

C. Daboul.
Algebraic proof of the symmetric space theorem .
J. Math. Phys. 37  (1996) 3576-3586.


P. Furlan, G.M. Sotkov, and I.T. Todorov.
Two-dimensional conformal quantum field theory .
Riv.Nuovo Cim. 12  (1989) 1-203.


P. Goddard, W. Nahm, and D. Olive.
Symmetric spaces, S ugawara's energy momentum tensor in two
  dimensions and free fermions .
Phys. Lett. B160  (1985) 111-116.


P. Goddard and D. Olive.
K ac-M oody and V irasoro algebras in relation to quantum
  physics .
Internat. J. Modern Phys. A 1  (1986) 303-414.


F. Gomes.
The triviality of representations of the V irasoro algebra with
  vanishing central element and   positive .
Phys. Lett. 171B  (1986) 75.


R. Goodman and N.R. Wallach.
Structure and unitary cocycle representations of loop groups and
  the group of diffeomorphisms of the circle .
J. Reine Angew. Math. 347  (1984) 69-222.


R. Goodman and N.R. Wallach.
Projective unitary positive-energy representations of   iff  .
J. Funct. Anal. 63  (1985) 299-321.


R. Jost.
The General Theory of Quantized Fields , volume IV of   Lectures in Applied Mathematics .
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1965.
Proceedings of the Summer Seminar, Boulder, Colorado, 1960, Marc Kac
  (ed.).

V. Kac.
Infinite dimensional L ie algebras .
Cambridge University Press, 3rd edition, 1990.

S. Ko  ster.
Conformal transformations as observables .
Lett. Math. Phys. 61  (2002) 187-198.


S. Ko  ster.
Local nature of coset models , 2003.
math-ph/0303054.


A.N. Schellekens and N.P. Warner.
Conformal subalgebras of K ac-M oody algebras .
Phys. Rev. D 34  (1986) 3092-3096.



