






    


Fermion propagator for  in the IR domain 
C. D. Fosco and A. Lo pez (On leave from Centro
    Atomico Bariloche, 8400 S. C. de Bariloche, Argentina.) 
  

  Department of Physics, Theoretical Physics 

  University of Oxford 

  Oxford OX1 3NP, United kingdom.      

 
We evaluate the fermion propagator in parity-conserving
 with  flavours, in the context of an IR domain
approximation. This provides results which are non-perturbative in the
loopwise expansion sense. We include fermion-loop effects, and show
that they are relevant to the chiral symmetry breaking phenomenon,
that can be understood in this context.



Parity-conserving  in  dimensions, in the context of the
large- approximation, is an effective theory description for many
interesting models of condensed matter theory . Moreover,
it provides a simple yet non-trivial model where to study chiral
symmetry breaking. Unlike in  dimensions, there is a truly
dynamical gauge field; besides, the model shares some important
properties with its  dimensional counterpart. For example, the
dimensionful coupling constant for the  dimensional model plays
an analogous role to the renormalization scale of the 
dimensional theory.  It is, however, a much simpler framework where to
study chiral symmetry breaking, and it allows for the use of
controlled approximations.  Many detailed studies have been carried
out using the truncated Schwinger-Dyson equations for the gap function
, both at zero - and
finite - temperature.  Results
(which are consistent with the continuum calculations) have also been
obtained by using numerical lattice
calculations -.

It is well known that  has a non trivial IR structure, where
the a priori  severe IR divergences can be consistently treated
thanks to the model superrenormalizability . Indeed, the
leading and first sub-leading logarithms have been summed to all
orders for the fermion self-energy .

The relevant degrees of freedom driving the chiral phase transition
are the low-momentum ones, with an effective dynamical cutoff set up
by the (square of the) coupling constant.  It then makes sense to
attempt approximations based on that property.  In this note, we
calculate the full fermion propagator in parity-conserving large-
, in the context of the IR domain technique presented
in , and comment on the relevance of this
result for the chiral phase transition.

The model may be defined in terms of an Euclidean generating
functional , which in the
path-integral representation is given by
 
where the Euclidean action  is,
 
with  and  denoting the fermion and gauge field actions,
respectively. For , we assume a Dirac-like form:
 
while the gauge field has a standard Maxwell action:
 
Here  , where  is a coupling constant (with
the dimensions of the square root of a mass). It is the only
dimensionful parameter in the model. The  factor is
introduced, as usual in the large- expansion, in order to have a
finite limit for the leading term in the expansion, when 
.

The Dirac -matrices are in a (reducible) 
representation of the Dirac algebra:
 
where ,  are the standard Pauli matrices. In this
representation, the model has an extra 'chiral' symmetry, generated by
a '' matrix
  
which together with other generators complete the Lie algebra of an
internal  symmetry group.  This symmetry is known to be
dynamically broken, and a non-vanishing mass for the
fermions is generated as a consequence. The  symmetry breaks
down to .

Besides, a fermion mass does not  break the parity symmetry of
the massless model.  This means that parity symmetry is not anomalous,
since there are regularizations that indeed preserve that symmetry,
like the Pauli-Villars method, for example.  This guarantees that
there is no radiatively induced Chern-Simons term, and that it is
perfectly consistent to use a parity-conserving action, since parity
is not broken by renormalization effects.

The symbol  in () denotes the gauge
field functional integration measure, plus any gauge-fixing artifacts.
An effect of the breaking of chiral symmetry is given by the
generation of a non-vanishing mass gap  for the fermionic
field. This may in turn be observed by evaluating the full fermion
propagator  in the theory defined by ()
 
which, (by integrating out the fermion fields) may be written as
 
where
 
and we have adopted Schwinger's notation 
  for the coordinate space matrix elements (or kernel) of an
operator ; in the case above the fermion propagator in an external
gauge field.

In the large- limit, the leading contribution from the fermionic
determinant comes from its quadratic part, namely,
 
where
 
The exact form of the quadratic functional  is well known;
it may be written as follows:
 
The operator , which has a nonlocal
kernel in coordinate space, may be thought of as being defined by its
Fourier representation:
 
where it is obviously local.

Thus, in the large- limit, the gauge field average of
() has a purely Gaussian weight. The evaluation of the
gauge field average may be further simplified by using a convenient
gauge-fixing term:
 
where  is a real constant. Then
 
where the quadratic functional  may be written explicitly as
 
with
 
and
 



In order to evaluate , in particular its self-energy part, we
follow the approach of , although with a
difference that turns out to be crucial in our case, namely, keeping
the fermion determinant contribution to the effective gauge field
action. We remark that it is totally justified to ignore the
determinant in , since the fermions are assumed
to have a non-vanishing renormalized mass, and that mass sets up a
scale where to make the relevant IR approximations. In our case,
however, the only scale appears in the one-loop contribution.
Moreover, there will also be a non-vanishing fermion mass, but here it
will appear in a self-consistent way. This self-consistency depends
upon the inclusion of the full one-loop gauge field propagator.
Indeed, this is known to be important in any study of chiral symmetry
breaking in  , and this calculation is no
exception, as it will become clear in what follows.

Following , we represent the fermionic
propagator in an external field in terms of a path integral over
trajectories, as follows





 
where  denotes path ordering, and the functional
integral over  is taken over paths with the boundary condition
 and . There is no boundary
condition for the values of  at  and .  It is clear
that the functional average over  will only affect the last factor
in (). Indeed,




 
where  is a functional of the trajectories  and
a function of , and is defined by the average:
 
with
 
Being  quadratic, the integral over  can of course be
performed exactly. The result for  may then be written
as follows
 
where we have introduced the current  associated to the
particle's worldline:
 
with . Taking into account the
fact that the worldline begins at  and ends at , we see that
 
and because of this, we may evaluate the contribution of 
 due to the longitudinal part of  exactly.
Namely, the longitudinal part of the propagator, which is where all
the gauge-dependence is contained, will contribute to a term, which we
denote , in the following expression for 
:
 
where
 
and
 
Each separate term in (), when written in momentum space,
is divergent. However, their sum may be evaluated by combining the two
integrands under a common momentum integral, what yields a convergent
result. The reason is, of course, that the first term in ()
exactly kills the logarithmic divergent of the second.

The momentum integration can then be performed, obtaining:
 
where




 
where  is the Euler's constant, , and
 () denotes the integral sine (cosine) function.

Since  does not depend on the trajectories ,
it is clear that the only contribution relevant to the fermion mass
will come from  in (). To calculate
, we follow the procedure described
in .  After the approximations are implemented,
and a 'ribbon' regularization with a small-distance cutoff  is
introduced , we end up with
 
where .  The kernel
 in coordinate space can be computed, yielding
 
where . It is evident that, if we use the exact
expression for  in (), we cannot evaluate the
integral over  and  analytically, something that we do
need in order to obtain the fermion self-energy.  One can easily check
that the small- behaviour of () corresponds to the case
of a pure Maxwell gauge field action, namely,
 
while it yields the pure one-loop action dependence for large-:
 
It is possible to use a simple analytic approximation to
(), which however captures both () and
() exactly and does not differ significantly from the
exact function in between. We use an approximant to , which
we denote by , and is given by the expression:
 
Inserting this expression in place of the exact one,  in
(), one can evaluate exactly the integral over  and
. Of course, not all the dependence in  is interesting,
since, in the end, we will renormalize and take the limit .
Thus we may just collect the leading terms when . Then
 
where terms that tend to zero when  have been neglected.
It is then possible to insert () and () into
(), and integrate over , to obtain:




 
where
 
and  is a numerical constant.

It should be evident from the above that , modulo a
renormalization that we shall explain in what follows, signals the
existence of a mass for the fermionic field. It may be argued that a
fermion mass appears just because the ribbon regularization breaks
chiral symmetry. However, this only explains the existence of a
perturbative mass, and in fact can (and will) be taken into account by
a careful choice of the finite counterterms. The situation is
analogous to the one in  with a non gauge-invariant regulator:
in general, a mass counterterm is usually required in order to have a
gauge invariant renormalized theory.

On the other hand, a non-zero (renormalized) mass which is
non-perturbative in the coupling constant shall be an a
  posteriori  justification for the use of this IR approach.

 determines the position of the singularity in momentum space,
and it is evident from () that it needs a
renormalization, since it diverges when . The renormalized
mass, which we shall denote by , will differ from  by a
subtraction corresponding to a mass counterterm:
 
where  is the counterterm. Now such a divergence in this
superrenormalizable theory does only occur for the self-energy diagram
which is of order .  Noting on the other hand that  may
be rewritten as
 
where  is a mass scale, we see that the divergent part
  is indeed of order
, as expected in this superrenormalizable theory. Then
we fix the divergent part of the mass counterterm to be such that
 
so that
 
where  is a finite  counterterm, which has to be fixed by
a normalization condition. It should of course be of the form:
 
where  is a number of order . We do not want to introduce an
extra mass, scale into the theory, so we have to use 
 as the renormalization scale:
 
The reason why  cannot be just equal to  is the following:
 has to be one of the possible solutions to equation
(), so that chiral symmetry is not explicitly broken. But
setting  in () certainly requires a non vanishing
:
 
what determines the relation between  and . This is in
fact the renormalization condition that guarantees that the chiral
symmetry is not explicitly broken by the renormalization procedure.
Using relation (), we may finally write the expression for
 as a transcendental equation:
 
where  cannot be determined within the approximation made in
obtaining (). Indeed, in this approximation the induced
mass is a constant rather than a momentum dependent function.
Therefore it impossible to decide which is the value of the constant
, related to the dynamical cutoff (), which
is observed in the Schwinger-Dyson equations
approach .

However, from a simple analysis of (), we see that besides
the trivial solution , there will be a non-vanishing mass as long
as  remains smaller than a critical value , given by:
 
This result is consistent with the ones obtained in more standard
settings; for example, the value 
of , corresponds to .  It
is interesting to compare this result with the one one would have
obtained by ignoring the one-loop correction to the photon propagator.
As already mentioned above, there is no induced mass term in such an
approximation, since one finds no term linear in  in
().

We conclude by stressing that this IR approximation scheme looks
promising as a tool to study the chiral phase transition in 
like models, in a gauge invariant setting.  However, in order to
obtain the full momentum dependence of the fermion mass, a higher
order approximation than the one used here may be required. Indeed, it
is plausible that fermion recoil effects are necessary to sense that
momentum dependence. This effect can not be appreciated in the
approximation used here since the motion of the fermions is not
perturbed by their interaction with photons.

Acknowledgements 
We thank Prof. Dmitri Khveshchenko por pinpointing a typographical 
error in Eq. (37), in a previous version of this manuscript.
The authors acknowledge the kind hospitality of the members of the
Department of Physics of the University of Oxford, and the support of
CONICET (Argentina).  C. D. F. was supported by a Fundacion
Antorchas grant.





 bib 
 W. Rantner, and W. G. Wen, arXiv: cond-mat/0105540;
  W. Rantner, and W. g. Wen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 , 3871
  (2001); J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 227003 (2001);
  M. Franz, and Z. Tesanovik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 257003
  (2001); I. F. Herbut, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 , 047006 (2002);
  D. V. Khveshchenko, Phys. Rev. B 65 , 235111 (2002); V. P. 
  Gusynin, D. V. Khveshchenko, M. Reenders, Phys. Rev. B 67 ,
  052502 (2003).



 R. D. Pisarski,

  Phys. Rev. D 29 , 2423 (1984).



 T. Appelquist, D. Nash and
  L. C. Wijewardhana,

  Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 , 2575 (1988).



 D. Nash,

  Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 , 3024 (1989).




 N. Dorey and N. E. Mavromatos,

  Nucl. Phys. B 386 , 614 (1992).



 N. Dorey and N. E. Mavromatos,

  Phys. Lett. B 266 , 163 (1991).



 I. J. Aitchison, N. Dorey,
  M. Klein-Kreisler and N. E. Mavromatos,

  Phys. Lett. B 294 , 91 (1992) [arXiv:hep-ph/9207246].



 I. J. Aitchison and M. Klein-Kreisler,

  Phys. Rev. D 50 , 1068 (1994) [arXiv:hep-ph/9402213].



 I. J. Aitchison,

  Z. Phys. C 67 , 303 (1995).



 D. J. Lee,

  Phys. Rev. D 58 , 105012 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9803115].






 E. Dagotto, J. B. Kogut and A. Kocic,

  Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 , 1083 (1989).



 E. Dagotto, A. Kocic and J. B. Kogut,

  Nucl. Phys. B 334 , 279 (1990).



 S. Hands and J. B. Kogut,

  Nucl. Phys. B 335 , 455 (1990).



 V. Azcoiti and X. Q. Luo,

  Mod. Phys. Lett. A 8 , 3635 (1993) [arXiv:hep-lat/9212011].



 S. J. Hands, J. B. Kogut, L. Scorzato and
  C. G. Strouthos,

  arXiv:hep-lat/0209133.





 R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, Phys. Rev. D 23 , 10,
  2291 (1981).
  
 S. Templeton, Phys. Rev. D 24 , 12, 3134 (1981).





 A. I. Karanikas, C. N. Ktorides and
  N. G. Stefanis,

  Phys. Rev. D 52 , 5898 (1995).



