





165mm 220mm -13mm 2mm







equation section 




           


 
CERN-TH/2003-035

IFT-UAM/CSIC-03-03

UG-03-01

hep-th/0303113 




 





  Domain Walls of  Gauged Supergravities and their 
 Origin   





Natxo Alonso-Alberca 

,
Eric Bergshoeff 

,
Ulf Gran 

, 

Roman Linares 

,
Tomas Ortin 

and 
Diederik Roest 

1truecm


 Instituto de Fisica Teorica, C-XVI,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid 

E-28049-Madrid, Spain 
 Departamento de Fisica Teo rica, C-XI,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid

Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain 
 Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Groningen,

   Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands. 
 Theory Division, C.E.R.N., CH-1211, Geneva 23, Switzerland 







Abstract 


 

Performing a Scherk-Schwarz dimensional reduction of  supergravity on a 
three-dimensional group manifold we construct five  gauged maximal
supergravities whose gauge groups are the three-dimensional (non-)compact 
subgroups of . These cases include the Salam-Sezgin  
gauged supergravity. We construct the most general half-supersymmetric domain 
wall solutions to these five gauged supergravities. The generic form is a 
triple domain wall solution whose truncations lead to double and single domain 
wall solutions. We find that one of the single domain wall solutions has zero 
potential but nonzero superpotential.

Upon uplifting to 11 dimensions each domain wall becomes a purely 
gravitational 1/2 BPS solution. The corresponding metric has a  split 
with a Minkowski 7-metric and a 4-metric that corresponds to a gravitational 
instanton. These instantons generalize the  metric of Belinsky, 
Gibbons, Page and Pope (which includes the Eguchi-Hanson metric) to the other 
Bianchi types of class A.








Introduction 






Gauged supergravities have become the focus of recent research due to a 
variety of reasons. Most applications are related to the fact that gauged 
supergravities contain a nonzero potential for the scalar fields. This 
potential, which behaves as an effective cosmological constant, allows for 
interesting vacuum solutions such as de Sitter and anti-de Sitter spacetimes 
or (half-supersymmetric) domain wall solutions. The anti-de Sitter vacua are 
important in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence 
while the possibility of a de Sitter vacuum is of interest due to recent 
astronomical observations. This has triggered a search for de 
Sitter vacuum solutions in string theory (see, e.g., 
). Domain wall solutions have applications to 
the DW/QFT correspondence, the 
braneworld scenario and cosmological 
models (see, e.g.,).


We are particularly interested in domain wall solutions in  dimensions in 
connection with the search for a supersymmetric braneworld scenario. Finding 
the most general 1/2 BPS domain wall solution in  dimensions is a 
difficult task due the fact that the scalar potential is a complicated 
function of the many scalars that are present in the theory. To learn more 
about the  situation, it is instructive to study the simpler case of 
general 1/2 BPS domain wall solutions of maximal supergravities in higher 
dimensions . The first nontrivial example is  and this case was 
already discussed in 
. The 
aim of this paper is to study the situation in  dimensions.


The standard  gauged maximal supergravity is the
-gauged theory of Salam and Sezgin. They
constructed this theory by applying what we will call a 
Scherk-Schwarz 2 (SS2) reduction procedure to  
supergravity. The SS2 procedure corresponds to a reduction on a group manifold
where one uses a symmetry of the compactification manifold 
to give a 
specific dependence of the  fields on the compactification 
coordinates. This dependence is such that, although the  fields depend 
on them, the resulting  action does not. 
In contrast, there is also a so-called
SS1 procedure where the higher-dimensional fields 
acquire a dependence on the compactification coordinates by using a 
global, internal symmetry  of the higher-dimensional theory, such as the 
 symmetry of Type IIB supergravity.

In this paper we repeat and generalize the analysis of to 
a group manifold corresponding to an arbitrary Lie algebra, instead of  
only. We will show that the standard Bianchi classification of 
three-dimensional Lie algebras, see e.g. , leads to five 
cases, including the  group manifold used in. 
Performing a SS2 reduction of  supergravity with respect to these five 
distinct group manifolds we construct five gauged maximal 
supergravities where the gauge groups are the three-dimensional (non-)compact 
subgroups of . These cases include the Salam-Sezgin  
gauged supergravity. The other four cases, which involve the gauge groups 
 and the Heisenberg group, can be obtained by 
analytic continuation and/or generalized 
Inonu-Wigner contractions of the Salam-Sezgin theory.

We point out that the Bianchi classification allows for five more cases where 
the gauge groups are three-dimensional non-compact subgroups of 
. Due to the extra 
-factor, the group manifold isometries are only symmetries of the 
equations of motion but not of an action. Therefore the SS2 procedure leads in 
these cases to gauged supergravities whose equations of motion cannot be 
integrated to an action. Two of these theories contain a free mass parameter. 
In the limit that this mass parameter goes to zero one recovers two of the 
gauged supergravities that do have an action. To distinguish between 
supergravities having an action or having no action we will denote the ones 
with an action as class A supergravities and the ones without an action as 
class B supergravities, in accordance with the Bianchi classification.

We will present a 1/2 BPS triple domain wall solution that solves the 
equations of motion corresponding to each of the different class A  
gauged supergravities. The truncation of this triple domain wall solution to a 
single domain wall solution reproduces results that partly are already 
available in the literature. In particular, we find a new domain wall solution 
with zero potential but nonzero superpotential. We discuss the uplifting of 
the triple domain wall solution to  dimensions and show that, after 
uplifting, it becomes a purely gravitational 1/2 BPS solution. In each case 
the  metric has a  split with a Minkowski 7-metric and a 4-metric 
that can be identified with a  gravitational instanton 
. These instantons generalize the metric of Belinsky, 
Gibbons, Page and Pope (which includes the Eguchi-Hanson metric) to the other 
(class A) Bianchi types.

The organization of this paper is as follows: in Section 2 we perform the SS2 
reduction of  supergravity leading to the two classes of  gauged 
supergravities mentioned above. In Section 3 we give the action and 
transformation rules of the five different  class A gauged 
supergravities. The triple domain wall solution is presented in Section 4. 
Subsequently, in Section 5 the triple domain wall solution is uplifted to 
 dimensions and linked to known solutions in the literature. 
Finally, in the Conclusions we discuss several extensions 
and open issues. This paper contains four Appendices. Our conventions are 
given in Appendix . In Appendix B we give a few details 
of  supergravity. Appendix  contains the details of 
the (bosonic) action and supersymmetry rules of the class A  gauged 
supergravities. Finally, in Appendix D we collect some basic material on the 
classification of three-dimensional Lie algebras.





Reduction on a Group Manifold 







In this Section we perform the reduction of  supergravity over a 
three-dimensional group manifold to  dimensions. The group manifold reduction procedure 
generally gives rise to gauged supergravities, where the structure constants 
of the gauge group  are provided by the group manifold.

In the case at hand the group manifolds are three-dimensional. The prime 
example is the reduction over the three-sphere , which gives rise to the 
Salam-Sezgin  gauged supergravity. By choosing 
other structure constants, corresponding to other three-dimensional Lie 
algebras, one can choose other group manifolds, some of which give rise to 
non-compact gaugings. In this section we describe the  supergravity 
theory and the reduction Ansatz that leads to the  gauged supergravity 
theories. We discuss the classification of the different  Lie algebras in 
appendix  and return to the issue of different  
supergravities in Section .

The fields of  supergravity are the
Elfbein, a three-form potential and a 32-component Majorana
gravitino (Our conventions are given in
  appendix .) :
 
The bosonic part of the action and the supersymmetry up to bilinear fermions
are given in appendix .

To perform the dimensional reduction it is convenient to make an  split of the
11-dimensional space-time:  with
 and .  We use the convention that
space-time indices are  while the tangent
indices are .  Using a particular Lorentz frame
the reduction Ansatz for the 11-dimensional fields is
 
and 
 
for the bosonic fields and
 
for the fermions.  Thus the full 8-dimensional field content consists
of the following 128 + 128 field components (omitting spacetime
indices on the potentials):
 
All these  fields are taken to be independent of . We will now 
describe the quantities appearing in this reduction Ansatz.

The matrix  describes the five-dimensional 
scalar coset of the internal space. It transforms under a global  acting from 
the left and a local  symmetry acting from the right.  We take the
following explicit representative, thus gauge fixing the local  symmetry:
 
which contains two dilatons,  and , and three 
axions (We call the scalars  and  
axions and the scalars  and  dilatons since (in the 
ungauged case) the axions only occur with a  spacetime derivative whereas 
the dilatons also occur without such a derivative.) ,  and 
. It is useful to define the local  invariant scalar matrix
  
where  is the internal flat metric. Similarly, the 
two-dimensional  scalar coset is parameterized by 
the dilaton  and the axion  via the local  invariant scalar 
matrix
 

The only dependence on the internal coordinates  comes in
via the  matrices .  These can be
interpreted as the components of the 3 Maurer-Cartan 1-forms
 of some 3-dimensional Lie group. 
By definition they satisfy the Maurer-Cartan equations
 
where the  are independent of  and form 
the structure constants of the group manifold.  

A subtlety which is not obvious from the analysis by Scherk and Schwarz is 
that only for traceless structure constants () one can reduce 
the action. These cases lead to the class A gauged 
supergravities. For structure constants with non-vanishing trace (
) one has to resort to a reduction of the field equations. These cases 
lead to the class B gauged supergravities. Note that the embedding of the 
gauge group  is described by
 
where  are the parameters of the gauge transformations.
Therefore, in the
case of a non-vanishing trace, 
the gauge group  is a subgroup of 
 and not just .

Using a particular frame in the internal directions,
the explicit coordinate dependence of the 
Maurer-Cartan one-forms 
corresponding to class A is given by 
 
where we have used the following abbreviations (): 
 
This gives rise to structure constants 
 with 
. In Section  we will explain
that this actually suffices to study all class A gauged supergravities
we obtain.  

Note that the -matrix is independent of . It is always possible to 
choose a frame where  is a manifest isometry. We distinguish the following three 
different cases:


 
(1) 
The matrix  is non-singular. In this case  is the only manifest
isometry. In the compact case we are dealing with the Salam-Sezgin case 
in which  
the group manifold is equal to . The presence of the manifest -isometry 
direction is related to the fact that  can be viewed as a Hopf fibration 
over . One consequence of this fact is that the  class A 
supergravities can also be obtained by reduction of the massless IIA theory. 
For instance, the Salam-Sezgin theory can alternatively be obtained by 
reduction of the massless IIA theory over . The latter reduction 
naturally occurs in the context of the DW/QFT correspondence 
. In the non-compact case the  gauging gets 
replaced by an  gauging. This case can be understood as an analytic 
continuation of the Salam-Sezgin theory or as a 
"non-compactification" (As we will see in the next Section in a 
non-compactification we have to discard an infinite factor in front of the 
action. Nevertheless, the procedure leads to a well-defined  gauged 
supergravity and, furthermore, can be used as a solution-generating 
transformation of  supergravity.)  of  supergravity.

(2) 
The matrix  is singular, e.g. 
. In this case there is an additional isometry in the 
-direction:
 
with . This means that the resulting 
 class A gauged supergravities can also be obtained by a reduction of the 
massless 9D theory.

(3)  The matrix  is doubly-degenerate, e.g.. In this case the -matrix is 
given by
 
and again the resulting  class A gauged supergravity has its origin in 
the massless 9D theory.


The g.c.t.'s in the internal space generate symmetries in 
dimensions.  These g.c.t.'s are generated by the Killing vector
 
Upon reduction these correspond to 
 

 transformations with parameters
  . These can be decomposed into 
  rotations, that act in the obvious way on all the fields that have
   indices, and  rescalings.

Gauge transformations with parameters  or

that act on all the fields that have  indices e.g. 
 
except for the Kaluza-Klein vectors  that transform as gauge 
vectors,
 
of the gauge group .

Performing the reduction of the 11-dimensional bosonic action
eq:11dtruncaction  and supersymmetry variation of the gravitino
eq:11Dsusy  with the above reduction Ansatz, restricted to traceless
structure constants, we find the class A  gauged supergravities described 
in the next Section. Although in principle straightforward, we will not 
perform the explicit reduction for the class B theories in this paper.


Gauged Supergravities in   

As discussed in the previous Section, the different gauged supergravities can 
be obtained by a reduction of the 11-dimensional supergravity over different 
group manifolds. We restrict ourselves to gauge groups with traceless 
structure constants: .
For simplicity, we will only reduce the bosonic part of the action and consider the supersymmetry 
rules up to bilinears in the fermions. We give the full bosonic 8D action in Appendix 
. Here we consider the truncation that the  three-form 
potential is equal to zero. In this truncation the reduction of the 11D 
Einstein-Hilbert term gives rise to
 
where the  scalar matrix  is defined in
Mscalar , the potential  is given by
 
and  is defined by
 
The integral that defines the factor  generally converges. It only 
diverges in the non-compact version of the Salam-Sezgin theory. The resulting 
 -gauged supergravity action is a "non-compactification" of 
 supergravity, see also the discussion in the previous Section.

The covariant derivative  is always with respect to the gauge group  
defined by the structure constants  and the gauge vectors . Thus
the gauge vector field strengths and the covariant derivative of the scalar coset read
 

The supersymmetry variations of the fermions read (in the truncation
we are considering here)
 
where we have used the abbreviations  and
 
where  is symmetric and traceless and  is antisymmetric.

We observe that the massive deformations  come from the
reduction over the group manifold.  The choice  is
the ungauged case and corresponds to reduction over  leading to
the trivial gauge group .  The full
supergravity theory has a global 
 symmetry group in the massless case.  The
 symmetry acts in the obvious way on the indices
, while the  symmetry is not a manifest
symmetry of the action.  Choosing non-vanishing structure constants
modifies this symmetry group in the following way.  The
 symmetry is fully broken, while the
 symmetry generically is broken due to the structure
constants.  Performing an  transformation has the
effect of changing the structure constants via
 
Only transformations that leave the structure constants invariant
() are unbroken by the massive
deformations.  This includes the infinitesimal gauge transformations
8dgaugetransf .

The structure constants of all 3-dimensional Lie algebras can be parameterized 
by a symmetric matrix that we denote by  and which will play 
the role of mass matrix, and by a vector  satisfying 
 (see, e.g.,):
 
The trace of the structure constants vanishes if and only if the
vector vanishes, i.e. . Restricting to the class A gauged
supergravities we can take 
and all the different cases that we are going to consider will be
characterized by a choice of mass matrix .

In terms of the mass matrix the potential reads
 
The symmetric mass matrix   has six different mass parameters.
However, by applying symmetries of the massless 8D theory one can
relate different choices of  by field redefinitions,
via transformations as structtransf .  We would like to use the
 symmetry of the massless 8D theory.


Employing these symmetries we can transform 
 with 
.  Now consider an arbitrary symmetric matrix
 with eigenvalues  and orthogonal
eigenvectors .  Taking 
 with  we
find that
 
which is a minor extension of the Principal Axes theorem.  Thus
all cases with the same signature are related by field redefinitions.
Without loss of generality we will use the freedom of field redefinitions 
to take
 
The different 8D massive supergravities will arise from choosing all possible
ranks and signatures for the mass matrix . 



 
 
The different mass matrices and corresponding Bianchi classifications and gauge groups. 
The  result was previously obtained in. 
 

Actually, this diagonalization plus the choice  is
the basis of the Bianchi classification of all real 3-dimensional Lie
algebras from Bianchi type I to Bianchi type IX. Thus, each choice of
mass matrix corresponds to a choice of Lie algebra and therefore of
gauge group. Restricting to the class A theories we only consider the
algebras with  (The sub-index  in Bianchi type 
 and Bianchi type  indicate that these class A
  Lie algebras can be obtained as the limit  of the
  class B Bianchi type  and Bianchi type 
  Lie algebras (see appendix D).) :
 
All algebras with  are subalgebras of the
Lie algebra of . For useful details about the
Bianchi classification, see appendix D.
The five nontrivial cases with  are given in Table while Bianchi type I corresponds to the massless case  and thus
is an ungauged supergravity. This case corresponds to the Abelian 
Lie algebra .





The Domain Wall Solutions  





Having obtained the bosonic action and supersymmetry transformations of the 
 gauged maximal supergravities with gauge groups of class A, we now look 
for domain wall solutions that preserve half of the supersymmetry. For an 
earlier discussion of such solutions, see 
. We consider the following Ansatz:
 
Our Ansatz only includes the metric and the scalars. 
All other fields are vanishing except the  scalar 
which we have set constant. It turns out that there 
are no half-supersymmetric domain walls for non-constant .


We need to satisfy the Killing spinor equations
 
where the Killing spinor satisfies the condition
 
The indices  refer to the internal group manifold
directions. 

The domain wall solutions we present below are valid both for a
non-singular and a singular mass matrix . We
find the following most general class A solution:
 
where the dependence on the transverse coordinate  is governed by
 
The corresponding Killing spinor is quite intricate so we will not give it here.
Note that the solution is given by three harmonic function ,  and 
. For this reason we call the general solution a triple domain wall.

The general solution has six integration constants . Note 
that the constants  and  should not be considered as parameters 
of the solution. They only serve to specify which of the five supergravities 
we are dealing with. The constants ,  and  are related to the 
positioning of the domain walls in the transverse space and ,  and 
 are their respective charges. The domain walls form a threshold bound 
state of  parallel domain walls, where  equals the rank of the mass 
matrix. It turns out that, provided that one of the charges  or 
 is non-zero, one can eliminate one of the constants  or  
by a redefinition of the variable . Therefore we effectively always end up 
with at most two constants.


The first three constants ,  and  can be understood to come 
from the following symmetry. The mass deformations do not break the full 
global ; indeed, they gauge the 3-dimensional subgroup of 
 that leave the mass matrix  invariant. Thus one 
can use the unbroken global subgroup to transform any solution(
  Note that one can not use the unbroken local subgroup of  
  (the gauge transformations) since this would induce non-vanishing
  gauge vectors and thus would be inconsistent with our Ansatz Ansatz .) 
, introducing 
three constants. In our solution these correspond to ,  and  
and thus these can be set to zero by fixing the  frame. From 
now on we will always assume the frame choice  unless 
explicitly stated otherwise. This results in
 
This structure is very similar to that found in, upon 
which we will comment in the Conclusions. In this  frame the
expression for the Killing spinor simplifies considerably and reads
.


The triple domain wall can be truncated to double or single domain walls when 
restricting the constants  and . The single domain walls 
correspond to the situation where the positions of the parallel domain walls 
coincide. In Table  we give the three possible truncations 
leading to single domain walls and the corresponding value of  as 
defined in. The Bianchi II case was given in 
 and the Bianchi IX case in (up to 
coordinate transformations). Note that the Bianchi VII case can not be 
assigned a -value since it has vanishing potential. The domain wall is 
carried by the non-vanishing massive contributions to the BPS equations. The 
same mechanism occurs in  gauged  supergravity 
.


 
 
The single domain walls as truncations of the triple domain wall 
solution. We give the three possible truncations and the corresponding value 
of . Note that there exists no -value in the 
Bianchi VII case due to the vanishing of the potential. In the last column 
we indicate the equation where the uplifted solution to 11D is given.  

The triple domain wall solution we found in this Section can be interpreted as 
follows. One can view the  solution, having one harmonic function, as 
the basic solution. The other solutions can then be obtained as threshold 
bound states of this solution with the -rotated solutions 
 and . This is clear at the level of the charges. We now see 
how, similarly, a composition rule at the level of the solutions can be 
established. One can thus view the solutions with a rank-1 mass matrix as 
building blocks for the general solution.







Uplifting to 11 Dimensions 






In this Section we consider the uplifting of the triple domain wall solutions 
() to eleven dimensions. We find that upon uplifting, using the 
frame of (), the triple domain wall solutions becomes a purely 
gravitational solutions with a metric of the form 
, where
 
Here ,  and  are the Maurer-Cartan 1-forms 
defined in MC ,  and the three harmonics  and 
 are defined in harmonics . The uplifted solutions are all 1/2 BPS.

The solutions () are cohomogeneity one solutions of different 
Bianchi types. The  expression of this 4-dimensional metric was 
obtained previously in the context of gravitational instanton solutions as 
self-dual metrics of Bianchi IX type with all directions unequal 
. We find that the metric of is 
related to a triple domain wall solution of 8-dimensional -gauged 
supergravity. More recently, the Heisenberg,  and  cases and 
their relations to domain wall solutions were considered in 
, whose results are related to ours via
coordinate transformations.

It is remarkable that in all cases the uplifted solutions have metrics that 
contain a 7D Minkowski metric as a factor. This does 
not happen for the uplift of domain walls in 4D and 7D gauged maximal 
supergravities. In the following discussion we will focus 
on the 4-dimensional part of the eleven-dimensional metric since it 
characterizes the uplifted domain walls.

In Section  we argued that for ,  or  non-zero 
one of the three constants ,  or  in the harmonic functions can be 
eliminated by a redefinition of the variable . Without loss of generality 
we can take . In that case the constant  can be eliminated by the 
change of variables  in the metric 
(). If we also rescale the three charges by  
we obtain
 
where  for ,  
and . As anticipated, the metric 
() depends only on two constant parameters  and , 
which are restricted by the gauge group dependent condition 
, with , in order to satisfy the requirement . 

In general the metrics () have 
curvatures that both go to zero as  for large  and diverge at 
,  and , producing incomplete metrics 
. There are two exceptions to this behavior. 
The first one corresponds to the case in which . The constants 
can take these values because  and  are non-zero and 
therefore this solution can be reached only for the non-degenerate cases. It 
is easy to see that for the  gauging (
) the metric is locally flat space-time
 
where  is the radius of the 3-dimensional spheres. Notice that this is 
precisely the uplifting of the Bianchi IX single domain wall. This should 
correspond to the orbifold limit of the K3 manifold and therefore it is still 
only 1/2 BPS upon uplifting.


The second exception corresponds to the  gauging with 
, and is known as the Eguchi-Hanson (EH), or Eguchi-Hanson II, metric 
 (
),
 
In fact, the EH metric is the only complete and non-singular hyper-Kahler 
4-metric admitting a tri-holomorphic  action. Its generic orbits are 
.

Another case that we want to emphasize, although it is singular, is obtained 
in the  gauging by choosing  and . This 
metric is called the Eguchi-Hanson I (EH-I) metric(
)
 
It is possible to give similar expressions for the  gauging.

The uplifted metrics for the singular mass matrices can be
 obtained directly from 
().
As an example of a contraction we take  in 
() and consider the special cases of the
EH metrics 
() and (), i.e. we take 
 (EH-II) or  (EH-I).
We thus obtain the contracted EH metrics with 
 isometry in which the  orbits are flattened to  
orbits. We find that the expression for the contracted EH-I metric is
given by ()
 
while the expression for the contracted EH-II metric reads
()
 
Notice that the 
contracted EH-I metric with  isometry is precisely the 4-dimensional 
part of the uplifted metric for the Bianchi VII single domain wall. 


The metrics with Heisenberg isometry are obtained by a further contraction 
 in the metric (). Again, among these metrics 
there is one special case that can also be obtained by a contraction of the 
contracted EH metric with isometry . Notice that it is not possible to 
have a contracted EH-I metric with Heisenberg isometry since 
we must satisfy the condition .
The expression for the contracted EH metric with Heisenberg isometry is
()
 
where . This is the 4-dimensional part of the 
uplifted metric for the Bianchi II single domain wall 
This contraction was considered in.







Conclusions 






In this paper we have considered two classes, A and B, of  gauged maximal 
supergravity theories. Class A contains supergravities with an action while 
the supergravities of class B only have equations of motion. Class A contains 
5 supergravities corresponding to the following five different subgroups of 
:  and the Heisenberg 
subgroup. We have constructed a general half-supersymmetric triple domain-wall 
solution to these theories. It can be viewed as a threshold bound state of 
three parallel single domain walls. The uplifting of this solution to  
dimensions leads to a purely gravitational solution whose metric is the direct 
product of a 7-dimensional Minkowski metric and a non-trivial 4-dimensional 
Euclidean Ricci-flat metric. The 4-metrics are 
solutions of 4-dimensional Euclidean gravity. Among them we find 
generalizations of the Eguchi-Hanson solution to different (class A) Bianchi 
types.

The results of this paper are similar to the  case 
: in both cases a  group (
) and its subgroups are the main characters. The group  
appears naturally in (ungauged) maximal supergravities in  dimensions as 
part of its duality group since they can be obtained by toroidal 
compactification of 11-dimensional supergravity. It is natural to expect the 
existence of gauged supergravities associated to the subgroups of 
. Some cases are already well known, for instance the 
 maximal supergravities with gauge groups  (all of them 
subgroups of ) constructed in 
 (Other theories in different 
dimensions can also be constructed with an explicit symmetric mass matrix 
 present.) . Gauged maximal
supergravities in diverse dimensions have recently been investigated 
from a somewhat different point of view in.

An interesting outcome of our analysis is the existence,
in  dimensions, of the generic triple 
domain wall solution triple . It can be interpreted as  parallel 
single domain walls where  is the rank of the mass matrix. For the gauging 
of , this result is similar to that of. There the 
scalar content was the coset  while we have the 
product of  with an additional  coset. Note that, in the gauged cases, 
our coset can not be reduced to the  by truncation of the 
 scalars. It is interesting that the 
structure of extends to more general scalar contents and 
to the other Bianchi classes. It leads one to expect a similar -tuple 
domain wall result in other dimensions. In fact, we verified that in  
with scalar content  the earlier 
results on domain wall solutions in gauged  supergravity 
 can be written as a generic double domain wall 
solution via coordinate transformations.


The relation between  domain wall solutions and gauged supergravities 
that we have discussed fits naturally in the domain wall/QFT correspondence 
scheme. As discussed in 
, taking the near-horizon limit of the D6-brane leads to 
the   gauged supergravity. Taking the near-horizon limit of the 
direct reduction of the D6-brane to  dimensions leads to the  
-gauged supergravity. A further direct reduction to a 6-brane in  
dimensions leads to the  Heisenberg gauged supergravity.


In this paper we mainly concentrated on the construction of the  class A 
gauged supergravities. We plan to investigate the class B theories as well. 
One difference with the class A theories is that the Maurer-Cartan 1-forms for
traceful structure constants probably have no additional isometry. Therefore, 
in contrast to the class A case, these reductions cannot be reproduced by any 
known reduction of the massless IIA theory. Cohomogeneity one solutions of 
class B Bianchi type have been considered in the literature 
. It would be interesting to see whether these solutions 
can be reduced to 1/2 BPS domain wall solutions of the corresponding class B 
 gauged supergravity.


It is interesting to note that the uplifting of the triple domain wall
solution () does not lead to the most general 4-metric with
 isometry. The complete non-singular -invariant hyper-Kahler 
metrics in four dimensions are the Eguchi-Hanson, Taub-NUT and Atiyah-Hitchin 
metrics (for a useful discussion of these metrics see). 
The absence of the Taub-NUT and Atiyah-Hitchin metrics in our analysis is 
related to the fact that only the (generalized) Eguchi-Hanson metric allows a 
covariantly constant spinor that is independent of the  isometry 
directions. In performing the SS2 reduction we have 
assumed that our spinors are independent of the group manifold coordinates and 
this assumption is thus not compatible with the Taub-NUT and the 
Atiyah-Hitchin metrics. It would be interesting to see whether we can relax 
the SS2 procedure such that the Taub-NUT and Atiyah-Hitchin metrics also 
obtain a half-supersymmetric domain wall interpretation in  dimensions or 
whether we should view them as  domain walls with fully broken 
supersymmetry.

In the same spirit one can hope to extend the SS1 reduction, for example as 
applied in. In that paper the spinors generally were 
transforming under the  duality symmetry and, consequently, 
the spinors were given dependence on the internal direction. However, for 
contracted group manifolds, our Ansatze with dependence on  only, 
see q2q3 ,
can be interpreted as a reduction from the massless 9D theory. In 
this case we have taken the spinors to be independent of the internal 
direction. We therefore have two reduction Ansatze that only differ in the fermionic sector.
Therefore, both the SS1 and SS2 reduction procedure might be amenable to extension 
and it would be 
desirable to understand the differences between the resulting 
gauged supergravities.







Acknowledgments 






T.O. would like to thank the CERN Theory Division for its hospitality
and financial support and M.M. Fernandez for her continuous support.
This work is supported in part by the European Community's Human
Potential Programme under contract HPRN-CT-2000-00131 Quantum
Spacetime, in which the University of Groningen is associated with the
University of Utrecht.  The work of U.G. is part of the
research program of the "Stichting voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der
Materie" (FOM). The work of R.L. is partially supported by the Mexico's 
National Council for Science and Technology (CONACyT) under grant 010085. 
The work of N.A.-A. and T.O. is partially supported by the Spanish grant
FPA2000-1584.









Conventions 





Greek indices  denote world tensor indices while 
Latin  indices are tangent space indices.  We use hats for
11-dimensional objects and no hats for 8-dimensional objects. We
symmetrize and antisymmetrize with weight one.  Sometimes we use the
following convention: when indices are not shown explicitly, we assume
that all of them are world indices and all of them are completely
antisymmetrized in the obvious order. This is similar to
differential forms notation but the numerical factors differ.

We use mostly minus signature (
  All formulae in this paragraph are valid both without and with hats.) . 
 is the Minkowski
spacetime metric and the spacetime metric is . Lorentz and world
indices are related by the Vielbeins  and inverse
Vielbeins , that satisfy
 
The spin connection  is defined by
 
The Riemann curvature tensor is given in terms of the spin connection by
   

The 11-dimensional gamma matrices satisfy the anticommutation relations
 
We choose them to satisfy
 
and thus are completely imaginary.
With the definition  
we can derive the properties
 
and so the above bilinear is symmetric for  and antisymmetric for
.





 Supergravity  




The bosonic part of the full  supergravity reads in our conventions
 

where  and  is the
eleven-dimensional Newton constant.
This action is invariant under the local supersymmetry transformations
with parameter  
 
up to bilinears in fermions.





The 8-Dimensional Bosonic Action  




Restricting to gauge groups with traceless 
structure constants, , the full bosonic 8-dimensional action reads
 
where we have made the following field strength definitions:
 2 
  G & = 4 C + 6 F^m  B_m  , &   F^m  & = 2A^m  -_np  ^m A^n A^p  , 

  H_m  & = 3D  B_m  + 3 _mnp  F^n  V^p , & 
  F ^m & = 2D  V^m - ^mnp  f_np  ^q  B_q  ,
The two vector field strengths form a doublet 
with . The  and 
scalar cosets are defined in Wscalar  and Mscalar ,
respectively. The potential  reads
 
The supersymmetric transformation rules in eight dimensions are
 





The Bianchi  Classification  




In this Appendix we will discuss the Bianchi classification of 
three-dimensional Lie algebras. We will also show how different algebras are 
related via analytic continuation or group contraction. We compare our 
results with the  notation which is often used in the supergravity 
literature.

We assume that the generators of the three-dimensional Lie group
 satisfy the commutation relations ()
 
with constant structure coefficients  subject to the Jacobi 
identity . For three-dimensional Lie groups the 
structure constants have nine components and can be conveniently parameterized 
by
 
Here  is a symmetric matrix. The Jacobi identity implies 
. Having  corresponds to an algebra with 
traceless structure constants: .

Of course Lie algebras are only defined up to changes of basis 
. This can always be used
 to transform  into a diagonal form and 
 to have 
only one component. We will take 
 and . The commutation relations then 
take the form
 
The different three-dimensional Lie algebras have been classified and are 
given in Table . There are 11 different algebras, two of which 
are a one-parameter family. Of these only  and  are simple 
while the rest are all non-semi-simple. Note 
that for  the rank of  can not exceed two due to the 
Jacobi identity.


 
 
The different three-dimensional Lie algebras in 
terms of components of their structure constants and the Bianchi and 
 classification. Note that there are two one-parameter families 
VI and VII with special case VI, VII and VI=III.  

We will now show relations between all algebras of Class A, i.e. having . 
Our starting point will be . Its generators take, in our basis with 
, the form
 
One can obtain the other algebras with  from these  generators by 
the analytic continuation and/or contraction. Define the operations  
(analytic continuation) and  (contraction) by
 
with  for  and  for . Its effect 
on the parameters of the algebra reads
 
Thus from  one can obtain  by an  operation and  
by a  operation. Similarly, the other Class A algebras are related by 
various analytic continuations and contractions, as shown in Figure 
.



  file=reductions.eps,width=.65  
  Relations between groups associated to the 3D Class A
    Lie algebras. The boxes give the groups and the components
     of the
    structure constants. The arrows give the operations: the dashed
    arrow corresponds to the reversible analytic continuation, the
    solid arrow to the irreversible group contraction. These analytic
    continuations and contractions are defined in C7  and
    C8 .   


It is instructive to compare the discussion of the previous paragraph
with the  notation which is often used in the supergravity
literature, see e.g. . In our case
 but the  classification of contracted algebras
is valid more generally. The  group is a group contraction
of  and can be obtained as follows. One defines the
starting point . The effect of analytic
continuation in one of the  directions is
 
while the effect of contraction is
 
This defines all Class A algebras in terms of the  classification, 
as shown in Table . These can all be obtained from the 
semi-simple algebras  or  by various contractions. Using the 
fact that  one can see that Class A exhausts the 
possibilities of distributing  subject to .






toine 


