










lem Lemma 
thm Theorem 
conj Conjecture 
notn Notation 
cor Corollary 
rem Remark 
defi Definition 






 
3cm

 
0.5cm
Gap Condition and Self-Dualized  Super Yang-Mills Theory for  Gauge Group 
on  
1cm
Toru Sasaki  
0.5cm
Department of Physics,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan 

and 

Graduate School of Mathematics,
Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan 
 
 sasaki@particle.sci.hokudai.ac.jp 


1cm
 
 We try to determine the partition function of 
 super Yang-Mills theory for  gauge  group on 
by self-dualizing our previous  partition function.
The resulting partition function satisfies gap condition.
Introduction 
 

SUSY duality has been giving a deep understanding
of non-perturbative phenomena
not only in physics but also in mathematics,
with fundamental connection to string duality.
 super Yang-Mills theory is most suitable laboratory
to study this duality,
since  is maximal SUSY in 4-dimentional theory without gravity,
and conformal invariant.
Indeed, many concrete and precise
calculations of  SUSY models were carried out 
and contributed to the deep understanding of duality. 

Vafa and Witten first attempted to test duality conjecture
of  super Yang-Mills theory on 4-manifold by determining the exact partition function.
To determine the exact partition function,
some additional condition must be considered.
Firstly we need to use
the twisted  super Yang-Mills theory
instead of  super Yang-Mills theory itself.
To include the contribution from the strongly coupled region,
it is convenient to consider topologically twisted theory.
Secondly we need to consider this twisted  super Yang-Mills theory
on  Kahler 4-manifold
so that this twisted  theory can be reduced to 
theory by adding mass term proportional to the section of the canonical bundle.
As far as we are only interested in observables (such as correlation functions
or partition functions), it reproduces the same results completely. 
 theory is 
easier than 
 or  theory
to determine the partition function.
Thus we consider the twisted  super Yang-Mills theory on
Kahler 4-manifold such as  and . 
It is well-known that duality conjecture
of  super Yang-Mills theory on 4-manifold is believed to be Montonen-Olive duality. Montonen-Olive duality is a kind of strong/weak duality(-duality). 
In addition to this duality, Montonen-Olive duality accompanies 
an exchange of gauge group ( ).
Here  is the dual gauge group of .

As for  theory on , Vafa-Witten derived
the exact partition, which satisfies the sharpened version of 
Montonen-Olive conjecture.

On the other hand, there has been almost no attempt to determine
the partition function of  gauge theory 
in spite of the fact that -duality conjecture for these cases
has already been established. 
Thus we tried to derive the  partition function on 
in the previous article.
Fundamental strategy is the following:
We speculated a piece of  partition function on ,
which was derived by using the denominator identity of affine Lie algebra
for  group.
Next we produced a set of functions derived by
modular transformation of this piece.
Finally we constructed the  partition function on 
by combining these functions,
so that these functions 
reproduced Montonen-Olive duality.
The resulting partition function satisfied Montonen-Olive duality 
completely !

Our  partition function has serious problem.
This partition function does not satisfy the gap condition.
Roughly speaking the gap 
comes from the irreducibility of the connections,
and 
is necessary for  partition functions.
There is similar situation in  partition functions on .
In this case this problem was solved by holomorphic anomaly.  
In the technical sense, the success of
the solution of this problem
is based on the self-duality of  theory.
Then  partition function is described by quasi-modular forms.
In this case one only adds quasi-modular forms,
so that the partition function satisfies the gap condition.
On the other hand, since ,
 partition function is decomposed
into U(1) flux part and  part.
In this article,
we construct 
holomorphic part of  partition function on .
Strictly speaking, we construct self-dual  partition function,
by multiplying   partition function given by Vafa-Witten 
and  flux part together.
The resulting partition function is also described by modular forms.
Here we explain that it is possible 
to construct the self-dualized  partition function on  
from our previous results.
 partition functions are classified by 't Hooft flux . Furthermore on , these partition functions are classified by
,
which is called an orbit. 
Then  partition function on  have an orbit structure.
The orbit structure is equivalent to Montonen-Olive duality.
Our  partition functions on  also have this orbit structure.
Thus we construct the self-dualized  partition functions on ,
by multiplying the  partition functions
by  flux part.
The resulting self-dualized  partition functions are
also described by modular forms.
What kinds of modular forms can we add to this partition function ?
Again we get back to the  theory on .
In analyzing the holomorphic part of  partition function
on  in : odd prime case,
we observe that the holomorphic part of 
 partition function can be expressed by Hecke transformation of
order  of  partition function
plus (polynomial of  function  partition function.
This form is very suggestive.
We apply this decomposition to  on  case
and construct gapful self-dualized  partition 
functions,
by adding (polynomial of  function  partition function
on .
At last we find out that the resulting gapful  partition functions
have the same form as  partition functions with the same top  term.
That is, we lose the characteristics of Montonen-Olive duality of each groups.
However we expect that we can reconstruct  
 partition functions with each Montonen-Olive duality,
if we 
separate  flux part from total  gapful  partition functions.
Separation of  flux part is remaining problem.


The organization of this article is the following:
In Sec.2 we review the Vafa-Witten theory 
mainly concentrated on the  theory.
Important gap condition is also introduced. 
In Sec.3 we briefly sketch our previous results.
In Sec.4 we introduce the concept of the self-dualization,
by using 
the orbit structure of  theory on .
We also discuss the  theory on 
in this context.
In Sec.5 we construct the self-dualized  partition function on .
Then we solve the gap condition for these 
self-dualized  partition function on .
In Sec.6 we conclude and discuss the remaining problems.


Review of Vafa-Witten Theory 
We believe that -duality of the twisted  super Yang-Mills theory 
is Montonen-Olive duality like  super Yang-Mills theory itself.
According to Montonen-Olive duality,  theory is dual to 
theory. As for  gauge theory, .
Here  is the center of this group and given by the following table.

 
 
 

For the theory with dual gauge group ,
one can introduce 't Hooft flux  to  classify  theory.

Vafa-Witten conjecture and Gap Condition 
In this subsection we denote celebrated Vafa-Witten conjecture
concerned with partition function of twisted  super Yang-Mills theory
on 4-manifold .
Vafa and Witten pointed out that
the partition function of twisted  super Yang-Mills theory
can have remarkable simple form,
if  is a Kahler 4-manifold and vanishing theorem holds.  
In this situation, its partition function has the form of 
the summation of the Euler number of the moduli space of the ASD equations.
More precisely,  for twisted  theory
with 't Hooft flux  on ,
the partition function of this theory is given by the formula 
 
where  is the moduli space of ASD connections 
associated to -principal bundle with 't Hooft flux  and fractional instanton number .
In (),  is the gauge coupling constant including theta angle,
 is Euler number of  and  is the rank of .
 factor is required by modular property like 
the case of  function.
For later use, we introduce 
the following form
corresponding to  
theory itself
for : 
.
 is the number of the elements of .
Furthermore we also introduce 
the following form
corresponding to 
 for its dual pair :
.

With this result, Vafa and Witten
conjectured the behavior of the partition functions under the action of  on  .They started with 't Hooft's work in mind. 
In, the path integral with -valued electric flux and 
that with magnetic flux 
are related by Fourier transform.
Vafa and Witten combined the conjecture of strong/weak duality to this
't Hooft's result. Their conjecture is summarized by the following formula:  

 

In  case
 is  the moduli space of irreducible 
ASD connections associated to -principal bundle with instanton number .
Its dimension  is given by
Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer dimension formula:
 
M ^G _k=4h(G )(k-r)-4r.

where  is the dual Coxeter number,  is the dimension
of  and  is the instanton number. 
 means .
That is, the moduli space of irreducible ASD connections with 
 gauge group on  can exist only for  except for  trivial case.
This condition restricts the form of the partition function. 
This condition is called gap condition.

 partition function on  
In this section we review Vafa-Witten's results for  theory on 
.
As mentioned above,  is a good manifold
to determine the partition function.
Especially there is a brane picture of  gauge theory on .  
By using the picture that  gauge theory is given 
by single  brane wrapped around ,
one can understand that  partition function on 
is given by: 

1 ^24 () :=G().
Here we ignore the contribution from the  flux.

To obtain  gauge theory on ,
we consider  coincident  brane wrapped around .
Furthermore by fixing 't Hooft flux with trivial ,
we obtain   gauge theory on .
In this picture, Hecke transformation naturally appears
as the effect of summing up all the ways of wrapping 
in  by  in  brane.
Based on this idea we define the following  partition function: 
Z_SU(N) ()&:=&1 N Z_t()


&=&
1 N^3 _0a,b,d Z  ad=N,b<d 
dG(a+b d ).
This is almost Hecke transformation of order  of .
Total  partition function based on this picture are derived in
.
But the formula () is not true Hecke transformation. 

This subtle difference is the origin of Montonen-Olive duality
for  as will be explained later. Next
its dual pair  partition function on 
is simply obtained by modular transformation 
and combined with Montonen-Olive duality ().
Throughout this section we avoid to mention the notion of orbit
which corresponds to Hecke transformation.
In forth section we show this notion in detail.
Furthermore we explain the trick to produce
Montonen-Olive duality from ().
Finally we note that the partition function
trivially satisfies the gap condition.
Our Previous Results 

 has many special properties.
One is its orbifold construction.
 can be constructed by the following processes.
First we divide 4-torus  by  and obtain 
quotient space .
Next we blow up its sixteen singularities by  curve
and obtain smooth Kahker surface .
 has the following data:
(K3)=24, K_K3 =O ,Intersection form of   K3  is  (-E_8)^2 H^3 .
Here  is canonical bundle of  and  stands for trivial.






We tried to reproduce the above geometrical processes in the partition function
level for . The trial was successful, that is,  partition on 
has the product of two factors.
The first one is the contribution from  and has the form:
Hecke transformation of order  of .
The second one is the contribution 
obtained from blowing up sixteen singularities
and the form
is given by
the blow-up formula. 
These two factors are summed up so that the resulting partition function
satisfies Montonen-Olive duality.
Our partition function is consistent to the fact that
 partition function on  is the Hecke transformation of order 
of .
Key point of this verification is  that eta function 
can be interpreted as blow up formula   
which has typically the form .
Fortunately there are beautiful identities:
1 ( N ) =_A_N-1  () ^N() .
These identities are already verified by celebrated denominator identity.


In the next work, we tried to determine the  partition function
on .
Using the generalization of () to , 
we define the  blow-up formula:
 _G _r () ^r+1 () =eta product ,
 where we note that these blow-up formula also have the form of eta product
and this fact is also verified by denominator identity.
By requiring the duality conjecture to these eta product,
we want to construct  partition on .
Before moving to concrete construction,
we explain why it is reliable to adopt  blow-up formula
to construct  partition on .
There is a stringy picture:

 




First line is IIA/Hetero duality. To second line in IIA side, we compactify
 and obtain  on .
To the second line in Hetero side, we compactify 
and obtain  on .
The origin of  is explained by 
the compactification of 
in IIA side.
Thus each side of 
the second line is equivalent and their partition functions 
in both side are the same.
On the other hand, the partition function of  on 
was already obtained by Nakajima.
His results are very similar to ours in ().
Thus we adopt  24-th power of () as a piece of 
 partition function on .
To construct   partition function on  from (),
we introduce 24-th power of (),which we call primary function.
First we generate a set of functions,
by modular transformation of the primary function
(and adding to  transformation in some cases).
Next we request Montonen-Olive duality to appropriate
liner combination of these functions
and determine the coefficient of these functions.
In practice, it is difficult to produce the partition functions
directly from these functions.
We use the following observation.
We think of 
a subset of the functions.
Appropriate liner combination of functions of this subset 
has the same modular property 
that a
piece of 
partition function has.
Here  and  have the same Montonen-Olive duality.
We call a piece of 
partition functions as 
and appropriate liner combination of functions of this subset as .
Then modular property of  and 
is completely the same.
For , we use the same coefficient
as that of  in  or .
Finally we obtain the  partition function
satisfying Montonen-Olive duality.
Unfortunately the resulting partition functions does not satisfy
the gap condition.
We have to solve this problem.

 Theory on  and  

Orbit, Hecke and Montonen-Olive duality 
In this part, we will explain the orbit structure of ,
by using examples of  or .

On ,  partition function with
't Hooft flux 
is classified by  mod  or 
instead of  itself in :prime case 
,
because instanton number  is given by  
in  case.
We call  as an orbit.
In  or  case) for instance,
's are classified into three types
 mod  or .
The numbers of these types of orbits are counted as   
In  or  case) for instance,
's are first classified into five types
 mod  or .
Next we think of  case.
Then  are trivially classified into  mod ,
but we furthermore think 2 types  mod .
Totally there are 7 types of orbits, and the numbers of orbits are counted as 

We will show how  work in the determination of the partition function.
We pick up  case as an example.
These numbers 's  come into duality conjecture
Z_t(-1  )=^-12 2^-11 Z_SU(2)/Z _2 (),

in 
Z_SU(2)/Z _2 ()=_v Z_v()=n_t Z_t()+n_0Z_0()+n_1Z_1().
If we think of the form
Z_t()=a1 ^24 (2) +1 2 (
1 ^24 ( 2 ) +1 ^24 (+1 2 ) ),
Z_j()=1 2 (
1 ^24 ( 2 ) +(-1)^j ^24 (+1 2 ) ),
and request the modular property (), then
we have  and 
can determine the partition function
Z_t()=1 4 1 ^24 (2) +1 2 (
1 ^24 ( 2 ) +1 ^24 (+1 2 ) ).
This is the formula as we have already seen in ().
But this is not true Hecke transformation of order  of  with modular weight .
Here we introduce true Hecke transformation of order  of  with modular weight :
T_N ^k():= N^k-1 _0a,b,d Z  ad=N,b<d 
d^-k ^k(a+b d ).
Using this, we can introduce,
2^11 T_2 1 ^24 () =1 4 1 ^24 (2) +2^11  2 (
1 ^24 ( 2 ) +1 ^24 (+1 2 ) ).() has  times degeneracy of 
and

.
 has the same origin of  in (). 
If we change true Hecke () into (),
then the degeneracy is resolved and 
the partition function of 
each orbit acquires the property of Montonen-Olive duality of  theory on .




 on  

Hereafter we consider
the partition function of self-dualized  theory on .
This is nothing but  partition function on .
For this purpose, we multiply  partition function of each orbit
by the corresponding  flux part and obtain  partition function. 
In  case, the  flux part is given by:
_^19,3  (, )=_P_L,P_R^19,3  
q^1 2 P_L^2 q ^1 2 P_R^2 ,
where  is 
the even, self-dual, integral lattice with signature  (Narain lattice)
and  are polarization on it.
The total partition function with the  flux part
is given by:
Z_1(, )=_^19,3  (, )G().

Modular weight of this partition function is .
For the following reason, we want to remove -dependence 
from this partition function. In the next section, we discuss the gap condition
of self-dualized  partition function with  flux part.
In this case if we multiply 
our previous  partition function by
-dependent  flux part
and intend to fulfill the gap condition,
then we must consider the possibility for these partition functions to include 
-depnedent terms.
But -depnedent terms request large ambiguity 
to cancel the negative -powers except for top  term.
So in technical reason,
we want to restrict the holomorphic functions
to cancel the negative -powers.
Thus before discussing the gap condition,
we consider the  flux part 
by keeping the partition function holomorphic.
We remove -dependence from ().
The following derivation is the generalization of  on  in.
Remembering  and ,
we separate -dependence from (),
_^19,3  (, )=_P _L,P _R^3,3  q^1 2 P _L^2 q ^1 2 P _R^2 _P_L^^16  q^1 2 P_L^2  ,
where we note that  
and  and introduce
 
Here in general 
 is -th Eisenstein series with modular weight .
Remembering  is elliptic surface, we put the size of this elliptic fiber .
Then choosing a metric, we can put
(P ^j_L,P ^j_R)=(m^j+n^j 2R +(m^j-n^j)R 2 ,m^j+n^j 2R -(m^j-n^j)R 2 ) ,j=1,2,3.
 is given by
_H(, )=_m,nZ  q^1 2 (m+n 2R +(m-n)R 2 )^2 q ^1 2 (m+n 2R -(m-n)R 2 )^2 .
We take the limit ,where the size of the elliptic fiber shrinks to zero. Then  only contributes to () and the summation of  ()
can be carried out as:
_H(, )=R 2 Im   .

Note that modular weight of  is .
In the limit ,we can extract holomorphic part  from .
We redefine the total  partition function by
Z _1():=_^8 ^2()G()=E_4^2() ^24 () .
We proceed to  theory. In this case we multiply  partition function with  by the corresponding  flux part,
where we introduce  corresponding to .
In the same way as  case, if we take the limit , then
only  contribute to the partition function and the partition function
only depends on . This yields  times degeneracy 
to be compared with 
original  partition function. Thus we change  partition function
Z_t()=1 4 G(2)+1 2 (G( 2 )+G(+1 2 ))
into
Z _t()=1 4 G(2)+2^3 2 (G( 2 )+G(+1 2 )).
 is also done.
Since , 
 times degeneracy of
 in () 
is resolved into (). Indeed corresponding Montonen-Olive duality is
Z _t(-1  )=^-12 2^-8 Z _SU(2)/Z _2 ().
What about  flux part of  ? These are given by
 
Refer to  flux part on  in.
To obtain  partition function, we multiply  flux part by the corresponding  partition function, so that  partition function is self-dual. We finally obtain
 
Indeed .
The final expression is natural, since  partition function is 
the true Hecke transformation. 
The Hecke transformation changes modular form into modular form.  
We also note that this partition function trivially 
satisfies the gap condition.
This situation is true for any  case.

Generalization to  is straightforward not only in  ;prime case,
 but also in ; non-prime case. That is
Z _N()=N^3 T_N Z _1().
For later use, we give explicit  partition function:
 
Z _4(-1  )=^-4 Z _4().
In this subsection we derived holomorphic part of  partition function on ,
by multiplying  partition function and holomorphic part of  flux part together.
The final results are described by the Hecke operator.
While the standard  partition function on  includes
-dependence, this partition function is also described by
the Hecke operator.
 on  

In this subsection, we investigate the holomorphic part of
 partition functions
on 
to derive the self-dualized  partition function
satisfying the gap condition in the next section.
There are already results of  partition functions on .
In 
the authors thought the same kind of limit 
as in the previous subsection
and removed 
the contribution of 
from that of . 
Their partition function is formally 
a holomorphic
function. In fact their  partition function in is given by
G_1()=E_4() ^12 () .
Here we note that () is quasi-modular instead of self-dual.
That is
G_1(+1)=-G_1().

This situation always occurs in ; odd case.
However from one method of their derivation of  partition functions;
the holomorphic anomaly equations and the gap condition,
the holomorphic anomaly or -depnedence comes
in the  partition functions except for  case.
Their explicit results for  and  in are given by 

G_3()=E_4 576^36  (54E_2^2E_4^2+109E_4^3+216E_2E_4E_6+197E_6^2),
 
These results of course have   terms.
But we are only interested in the holomorphic part or -independent terms.
In our interpretation, we expect that 
the holomorphic part of
 (odd prime) contains
Hecke transformation of 
and top  term only comes from Hecke transformation.
This expectation comes from the fact that
 Hecke transformation changes quasi-modular forms 
into quasi-modular form in ; odd prime case.
Then, what about residual of Hecke transformation of  in holomorphic part of  ?
We expect that these parts are expressed as
(polynomial of  function) 
from the modular weight without no ambiguity.
Here .
Note that  and  have the only singularity at 
on the upper half plane ().
Finally we express the holomorphic part  and 
in as follows:
G_3^hol ()=51 32 T_3G_1()-495 8 G_1(),
G_5^hol ()=913945 497664 T_5G_1()-1994875 41472 jG_1()+1617948125 27648 G_1(),
 
The above expression are natural,
since we use Hecke transformation of  
and  function instead of 
as independent modular forms.
But we want to use Hecke transformation of ,
which corresponds to the self-dualized  partition function.


Self-dualized  Theory on  
To solve the problem of gap condition of 
partition function on ,
it is 
the best to treat  partition function itself
and intend to cancel negative  powers except for top  term. 
But by now we have no guiding principle. 
So we self-dualize our  partition function,
and concentrate on a gap condition
at the sacrifice of non-trivial Montonen-Olive duality.

Self-Dualizing Our Original  Partition Function on   
For , it is straightforward to self-dualize 
the original

partition function. As we have mentioned in Sec.3,
modular property of  and 
is the same.
Thus we simply replace  by 
and follow the process in Sec.4.
Then we obtain self-dualized  partition function.
We write down general process for  case.
 
Z _UE_8 ():=E_4^2()Z_E_8 ().
See explicit forms of
 and  in.

To self-dualize  partition function, we have to 
remind of
the discussion in.
In, the numbers of orbits of 
is the same as those of  on the manifold with .
To self-dualize  partition function
by  etc,
we have to make degeneracy of original
 partition function 
by  times.
Taking this point into consideration, we self-dualize  partition function as follows:
Z _UD_2N  ():=E^2_4(2)H _0()+2^16 
(
E_4^2( 2 )G _0()
+E_4^2(+1 2 )G _1()
).
 factor reflects to the above point.

Here we list up several explicit self-dualized  partition functions
by using the results in:

 

 

 

 


 


 
Above results suggest that self-dualized  partition functions
does not satisfy the gap condition, except for  and .
For , since  and  series satisfy the gap condition,
this fact is natural. For , we have to give some comments.
 partition function in ()
seems to satisfy the gap condition.
From the previous discussion, 
the top  term of  partition function
must be .
Thus this partition function in () does not satisfy the gap condition 
in true sense.
Further analysis of  suggests that
the top  term of the partition function
starts from .
Thus the top  term of  partition function
may vanish.
This phenomenon
is interesting, but we have no interpretation for this by now.

Fulfilling the Gap Condition of Self-Dualized  Partition Function 

We assume that holomorphic anomaly does not appear in  partition function
because of the following reason.
Holomorphic anomaly comes from the failure of the reduction .
Typically in  case, this failure happens.
By using the mass perturbation proportional to the section of the canonical bundle,
we reduce  .
But in  case, there is a locus where
the section of this canonical bundle vanishes.
In this locus, the holomorphic anomaly or -depndence comes in
the partition function.
On the other hand,  has trivial canonical bundle,
that is, there is no locus where the section of this canonical bundle vanishes.
This situation is the same, whether self-dualization is done or not.
We think of the self-dualized  partition functions
and intend to satisfy 
the gap condition of these partition functions .
We want to cancel the negative  powers
of the previous partition functions
except for top  term, by using meromorphic modular forms.
In the previous section, we observed that the holomorphic
part of  and  are Hecke transformation of  plus (polynomial of  function.
In the same way as this observation,
we expect the total  partition functions has the following form.
The total  partition function contains
the self-dualized  partition function as a core part
and (polynomials of  function  as 
a residual part.
That is,
we assume that top  term only comes from the self-dualized  partition function.
These two parts are both holomorphic.
Finally we derive the following results:
Z_UD_2 ^tot ()=Z _UD_2 ()+24jZ _1()-30732Z _1()=Z _3()=q^-3 +122976+,
 
Z_UD_5 ^tot ()=1 48 Z _UD_5 ()=Z _4()=q^-4 +532728+,
 
 
Resulting gapful partition function are all coincident with
the  partition functions, which 
have the same top  terms.
The characteristics of groups are lost.
This phenomenon is interpreted as universality of gapful partition functions.
If we separate the corresponding  flux part
from the total gapful
 partition functions,
we find the difference from the  partition functions.
Unfortunately we have no technique to separate 
 partition functions 
from the total gapful
 partition functions.


Conclusion and Discussion 
In this article, we derived the self-dualized  partition functions,
which satisfy the gap condition.
The self-dualization was first introduced to construct the holomorphic 
partition function
from the  flux part and  partition functions, 
by using close relation between 
the orbit structure and
modular forms.
By using the self-dualization,
we self-dualized our  partition functions on 
and canceled its negative  powers except for top  term.

Remaining problem is to invent the technique
to separate the orbit structure from general modular forms.
If we can invent this technique,
we can separate 
the true  partition functions on 
from gapful self-dualized  partition functions.
Ultimate aim is to obtain gapful  partition functions
without self-dualization.
We hope to find out the technique to do this and
to find
guiding principle like Seiberg-Witten curve or holomorphic anomaly equation 
in   on  case.

In fact we had been writing the another article concerned about 
partition function parallel to this article.
In we revealed a close relation between Hecke operator and -duality of  Super Yang-Mills on .
There are advantages and disadvantages in either article.
We hope that these works are incorporated and we approach to our goal
of the determination of  partition function on . 

Acknowledgment 

We would like to thank M.Jinzenji
for simulating discussions and collaborations.
We also thank Prof.N.Kawamoto for carefully reading our manuscript.

 99 
 M.F.Atiyah, N.H.Hitchin and I.M.Singer. Self-duality in four dimensional Riemannian Geometry ,
Proc.R.Soc.Lond A362(1978)425.
 G.Bonelli. The geometry of M5-branes and TQFTs ,
hep-th/0012075.
 T.Eguchi and K.Sakai. Seiberg-Witten Curve for the E-String Theory ,JHEP 0205 (2002) 058.
K.Fukaya.  Topology, geometry and field theory 
, World Scientific 1994.
J. A. Harvey, A. Strominger.
The Heterotic String is a Soliton ,
Nucl.Phys. B449 (1995) 535-552



 M.Jinzenji and T.Sasaki.
  Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory on Orbifold- ,
Mod.Phys.Lett. A16 (2001) 411-428.
 M.Jinzenji and T.Sasaki.
  Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory on Orbifold-:Higher Rank Case ,
JHEP 0112 (2001) 002.
 M.Jinzenji and T.Sasaki.
An Approach to  = 4  Gauge Theory on  ,
JHEP 0209 (2002) 002.
 V. G. Kac.
 Infinite dimensional Lie algebras ,
 Cambridge 1990.
 M.Kapranov.
 The Elliptic Curve in the -Duality Theory and Eisenstein Series for
Kac-Moody Groups ,
 math.AG/0001005.
J. M. F. Labastida, Carlos Lozano.
 Mathai-Quillen formulation of twisted  supersymmetric gauge theories in four dimensions, 
 Nucl.Phys.B502(1997)741. 
 J. M. F. Labastida, Carlos Lozano.
 The Vafa-Witten Theory for Gauge Group SU(N) 
 hep-th/9903172. 
I.G.Macdonald.
 Affine root systems and Dedekind's -functions ,
 Invent. math. 15  (1972), 91-143.
J. A. Minahan, D. Nemeschansky, N. P. Warner.
 Partition Functions for BPS States of the Non-Critical  String 
 Adv.Theor.Math.Phys.1 (1998) 167-183.
J. A. Minahan, D. Nemeschansky, C. Vafa, N. P. Warner.
 E-Strings and N=4 Topological Yang-Mills Theories 
 Nucl.Phys. B 527 (1998) 581-623.






C.Montonen and D.Olive,Magnetic monopoles as gauge particles ? , Phys.Lett.B 72 (1977) 117;

P.Goddard, J.Nyuts and D.Olive,Gauge theories and magnetic charge ,  Nucl. Phys. B125 (1977) 1.
S.Mukai,Symplectic structure of the moduli space of sheaves on abelian or  surface , Inv.Math. 77 (1984) 101;

L.Gottsche,The Betti numbers of the Hilbert scheme of points on a smooth projective surface , Math.Ann. 286 (1990) 193.
H.Nakajima.
Lectures on Hilbert schemes of points on surfaces ,
to appear.
H.Nakajima.
Instantons on ALE spaces, quiver varieties, and Kac-Moody algebras ,
Duke Math. J. 76 (1994);

Gauge theory on resolutions of simple singularities and simple Lie algebras. , Internat. Math. Res. Notices 1994.
T. Sasaki.
Hecke Operator and -Duality of  Super Yang-Mills for 
Gauge Group on  , hep-th/0303121.
G.'t Hooft.
On the Phase Transition towards Permanent Quark Confinement. ,
Nucl.Phys.B138(1978)1;

A Property of Electric and Magnetic Flux in Nonabelian Gauge Theories.  
Nucl.Phys.B153(1979)141.
 C.Vafa and E.Witten.
A strong coupling test of S-duality , 
Nucl. Phys. B431 (1994) 3.
 C.Vafa.
Geometric Origin of Montonen-Olive Duality , 
Adv.Theor.Math.Phys. 1 (1998) 158-166.
E.Witten. 
Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory on A Four Manifold. 
J. Math. Phys. 35 (1994) 5101-5135.
K.Yoshioka. The Betti numbers of the moduli space of 
stable sheaves of rank  on .  
J. reine angew. Math. 453  (1994), 193-220.
K.Yoshioka.
Euler characteristics of SU(2) instanton moduli spaces 
on rational elliptic surfaces 
Commun.Math.Phys. 205 (1999) 501-517.
K.Yoshioka. Irreducibility of moduli spaces of vector bundles on K3 surfaces 

math.AG/9907001. 
K.Yoshioka.
On Euler characteristics of moduli space of vector bundles ,
talk given in Kyoto Workshop on "Modular Invariance, ADE, Subfactors,
and Geometry of Moduli Spaces", Nov 26-Dec 02(2000).

