



equation section 


0mm
-15mm
164mm
241mm
-2mm


 





hep-th/0303153 



9mm
 
Type IIA Supergravity Excitations

in Plane-Wave Background 


6mm

 
  O-Kab Kwon(okwon@newton.skku.ac.kr)  and
  Hyeonjoon Shin(hshin@newton.skku.ac.kr) 
  

  BK 21 Physics Research Division and Institute of Basic
    Science 
 Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea 

    School of Physics, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul
    130-012, Korea  



 
Abstract 
We study the low-lying excitations of Type IIA superstring theory in a
plane wave background with 24 supersymmetries.  In the light-cone
gauge, the superstring action has  supersymmetry and
is exactly solvable, since it is quadratic in superstring coordinates.
We obtain explicitly the spectrum of the Type IIA supergravity
fluctuation modes in the plane wave background and give its
correspondence with the spectrum of string states from the zero-mode
sector of the light-cone superstring Hamiltonian.




6.5mm

Introduction 

Recently, much attention has been paid to the M theory on the
maximally supersymmetric eleven-dimensional pp-wave background after
the work by Berenstein, Maldacena and Nastase.  The
formulation of the theory has been given in the framework of Matrix
model and the resulting Matrix model has turned out to have intriguing
properties.  One may take two basic properties,
which may be regarded as the sources of the other.  One is the removal
of flat directions because of the presence of bosonic mass terms and
another is the time dependent supersymmetry making the bosons and
fermions have different masses.  The Matrix model with these
properties shows a peculiar perturbative aspect such as the protected
multiplet and has various kinds of non-perturbative BPS states
-.  The discussions on other aspects of the
model may be found in-.

In addition to the Matrix model description of the M theory, there is
another possible way of studying the M theory by going down to the ten
dimensional Type IIA superstring theory through the strong-weak
duality between M and Type IIA superstring theory.  In this approach,
there is an advantage that one may use the rather well-developed
machinery of string theory compared to that of Matrix theory.

To obtain the IIA superstring theory from the M theory, one should
pick up an isometry direction on which the M theory is compactified.
As for the eleven-dimensional maximally supersymmetric pp-wave
geometry, there are various spacelike isometries, along which the M
theory can be compactified.  One choice of the compact
direction leads to the following ten-dimensional pp-wave background
:
 
where the quantities with bar mean that they are background and we have
defined
 
It has been shown in that this background admits
only 24 Killing spinors.

The various aspects of the Type IIA Green-Schwarz (GS) superstring
theory have been studied in.  In
particular, in the light-cone gauge formulation, the Type IIA GS
superstring action in this background has been shown to be quadratic
in terms of the string coordinates indicating the exact solvability of
the theory.  Furthermore, the light-cone gauge superstring action has
the interesting linearly-realized worldsheet supersymmetry identified
as .  The situation is similar to the
Type IIB case except that the IIB background is maximally
supersymmetric.  We note that rather general
discussions on the superstring in the pp-wave background have been
given in- .

Having the solvable superstring theory, it may be a natural step to
investigate the spectrum of quantized string states and their
dynamics.  In this paper, we concentrate on the low-lying perturbative
string states and study their spectrum in the field theoretic way.
That is, we obtain the physical excitation modes of the Type IIA
supergravity in the pp-wave background, (), and give
their correspondence with the low-lying string states from the
zero-mode sector of the string theory.  As alluded above, the study of
IIA string theory is motivated by a hope to understand the M theory in
a controllable way.  In the situation that we have the Matrix model as
another way of studying the M theory, it may be expected that the
low-energy perturbative study of the IIA string theory is helpful in
uncovering the physics related to the perturbative spectrum of the
Matrix model in the pp-wave.  The work in this paper may be regarded
as the first step in this direction of study.

The organization of this paper is as follows.  In section
, following Refs. , we review the
derivation of Type IIA GS superstring action in the pp-wave
background, (), which is given in the light-cone gauge
formulation, and then the quantization of the superstring.  After the
review, we give the low-lying spectrum of string states.  In section
, we consider the fields of Type IIA supergravity in the
pp-wave background and obtain the physical supergravity excitation
modes around the background.  We shall see how the spectrum of the
supergravity modes corresponds to that of low-lying string states
obtained in section .  Finally, the conclusion and
discussion follow in section .




Type IIA superstring in plane-wave background 

In this section, we review the light-cone gauge fixed Type IIA GS
superstring action in the pp-wave background and its quantization
following.

It is very complicate to get the full expression of the GS superstring
action in the general background (see, for example,
).  However, in the case at hand, we can use the
fact that eleven-dimensional pp-wave geometry can be thought as a
special limit of  geometry on which the full
supermembrane action is constructed using coset method.
The full IIA GS superstring action on this geometry can be obtained by
the double dimensional reduction of the supermembrane
action of in the Penrose limit.  The
superstring action is simplified drastically in the light-cone gauge
chosen as
 
where  is the total momentum conjugate to  and  is the
worldsheet time coordinate.  In this light-cone gauge, IIA string
action is given by( is the flat worldsheet metric
  with  taking values of .) 
 
where
 
is a mass parameter which characterizes the masses of the worldsheet
fields, and the Majorana fermion  is the combination of
Majorana-Weyl fermions  and  with opposite ten
dimensional  chiralities, that is, 
. (1 (2) is for positive (negative) chirality.)  Therefore
the light-cone gauge-fixed action  is quadratic in bosonic as
well as fermionic fields and thus describes a free theory much the
same as in the IIB string theory on the pp-wave geometry
.

The characteristic feature of IIA string theory in pp-wave background
is the structure of worldsheet supersymmetry.  Sixteen spacetime
supersymmetries with transformation parameter  satisfying
 are non-linearly realized on the worldsheet
action.  As is typical in light-cone GS superstring, the remaining
eight spacetime supersymmetries, combined with appropriate kappa
transformations, turn into worldsheet (4,4) supersymmetry of
Yang-Mills type.  In order to see this more clearly, we
rewrite the action  in the 16 component spinor notation.  We
should first introduce the representation for  gamma matrices
which we take as





 
where 's are Pauli matrices, and  the 
 unit matrix.  are the  symmetric real
gamma matrices satisfying the spin Clifford algebra 
, which are reducible to the 
 representation of spin.  We note that, since
the pp-wave background () has been obtained by
compactifying the eleven dimensional pp-wave along the  direction
,  is the  chirality operator and
 becomes  chirality operator,
 
Then, with the spinor notation 

 satisfying the light-cone gauge ()
(Superscript  denotes the  chirality.), the action 
becomes
 
where .  Here the sign
of subscript in  represents the eigenvalue of
.  In our convention, fermion has the same 
and  chirality measured by  and ,
respectively.

Thus, among sixteen fermionic components in total, eight with
 have the mass of  and the other eight with
 the mass of , which are identical with the
masses of bosons. Therefore the theory contains two supermultiplets
 and  of
worldsheet (4,4) supersymmetry with the masses  and ,
respectively.

Let us now turn to the quantization of closed string in the pp-wave
background and consider the low-lying string states
constructed by acting the zero-mode creation operators on the vacuum
which should correspond to the Type IIA supergravity excitations in
the pp-wave background.

We first consider the bosonic sector of the theory.  The equations of
motion for the bosonic coordinates  are read off from the action
() as
 
where the fields are subject to the periodic boundary condition,
 
The solutions of the above equations are given in the form of mode
expansion and found to be
 
where  and  are center-of-mass variables defined in the
usual manner, coefficients for the zero-modes, and  and
 are the expansion coefficients for the non-zero
modes.  The basis functions for the non-zero modes are given by
 
with the wave frequencies
 
We note that the reality of  requires that 
 and 
.

We promote the expansion coefficients in the mode expansions
() to operators.  By using the canonical equal time
commutation relations for the bosonic fields,
 
where  is the
canonical conjugate momentum of , we have the following
commutation relations between mode operators:
 

Let us next turn to the fermionic sector of the theory. The fermionic
fields are split into two parts according to the 
supersymmetry;  and .  We
first consider the former case.  The equations of motion for
 and  are obtained as
 
The non-zero mode solutions of these equations are given by using the
modes, (). For the zero mode part of the solution, we impose
a condition that, at , the solution behaves just as that of
massless case.  The mode expansions for the fermionic coordinates are
then
 
where  and 
 for all , and  are the
normalization constants given by





Promoting the expansion coefficients to operators and using the
canonical equal time anti-commutation relations,
 
the following anti-commutation relations between mode operators are
obtained.
 

The quantization of fermionic coordinates in the other 
supermultiplet proceed along the same way.  The equations of motion
for  and  are respectively
 
whose solutions are found to be
 
where , 
, and





Then the equal time anti-commutation relations, (), lead us
to have
 

We now consider the light-cone Hamiltonian of the theory, which is
written as( From now on, we set 
 for notational convenience.) 
 
The  is the Hamiltonian density obtained from
Eq. () as
 
By plugging the mode expansions for the fields, Eqs. (),
(), and (), into Eq. (), the
light-cone Hamiltonian becomes
 
where  is the zero mode contribution and ,  are the
contributions of the non-zero modes:
 

In the quantized version, the modes in the expression of Hamiltonian
become operators with the commutation relations, (),
(), and (), and should be properly normal
ordered.  For the string oscillator contributions,  and
, we place operator with negative mode number to the left
of operator with positive mode number as in the flat case.  The normal
ordered expressions of them are then given by
 
Here we note that there is no zero-point energy because bosonic
contributions are exactly canceled by those of fermions.

The zero mode contribution is the Hamiltonian for the simple harmonic
oscillators and massive fermions.  For the bosonic part, we introduce
the usual creation and annihilation operators as
 
whose commutation relations are read as, from Eq. (),
 
As for the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, we take the
following combination of modes.
 
where  and 
.  From Eqs. () and (), the
anti-commutation relations between these operators become
 
In terms of the operators introduced above, Eqs. () and
(), the normal ordered zero mode contribution to the
light-cone Hamiltonian is then given by
 
which has vanishing zero-point energy as in the case
of string oscillator contributions.

Though the string physics is described by the light-cone Hamiltonian,
(), there is a constraint constraining the string states,
which is the usual Virasoro constraint imposing the invariance under
the translation in  direction.  In the light-cone gauge, the
Virasoro constraint is given by
 
The integration of the first integrand vanishes trivially since 
is constant, and the remaining parts give us the following constraint.
 
where  and  are defined as
 

The normal ordered expressions Eqs. () and ()
now constitute the quantum light-cone Hamiltonian, which implicitly
defines the vacuum  of the quantized theory as a state
annihilated by string oscillation operators with positive mode number,
that is , and zero mode operators , , and 
defined in Eqs. () and ().  Actually, the vacuum
defined in this paper, especially the vacuum state in the zero mode
sector, is not unique but one of the possible Clifford vacua, since
our theory is massive and there can be various definitions for the
creation and annihilation operators.  This is also the case for the
IIB superstring in pp-wave background and has been discussed in
.  However, considering the regularity of states at 
 that has been pointed out in, our
definition is a natural one.

The low-lying string states are obtained by acting the fermionic and
bosonic zero-mode creation operators on the vacuum  and
correspond to the excitation modes of Type IIA supergravity fields
expanded near the plane-wave background.  Among the string states,
those constructed by using only the fermionic zero-modes, that is,
 with 
, correspond to the supergravity excitation modes with the
minimal light-cone energies, and the string states obtained by acting
the bosonic zero-modes on them are related to the supergravity modes
with higher light-cone energies.  In table , we
list the states 
according to their light-cone energy , which is simply 
of Eq. (), in units of .  We shall see in the
next section how these string states correspond to the supergravity
excitation modes.

 
 
 
Low-lying string states constructed by acting fermionic
zero-mode operators on the vacuum; 
 with . The
states are characterized by .  is the
number of bosonic (fermionic) degrees of freedom.  is
the light-cone energy in units of , that is,
. 



Supergravity excitation spectrum 

The equations of motion for the Type IIA supergravity fields expanded
to linear order in fluctuations on the plane-wave background can be
used to determine the light-cone energy spectrum of the fluctuating
fields. The equations for fluctuations in the plane-wave
background () has the following typical form
 
with
 
where  and  is an
arbitrary constant.  In the light-cone description where  is the
evolution parameter of the system, the fluctuation field  can
be expressed by using the Fourier transformation as follows
 
where  satisfies
 
From the Eq. (), we obtain the light-cone Hamiltonian,
 
where , .  To obtain
the light-cone energy spectrum, we introduce two sets of creation and
annihilation operators,
 
Then the normal ordered expression of the light-cone Hamiltonian is
given by
 
From this relation (), we see that the fluctuation field which
satisfies the Eq. () has the minimal light-cone energy
 defined as
 
which will be used to characterize the excitation modes of the IIA
supergravity in the pp-wave background.


Bosonic excitations 

In the bosonic sector of the Type IIA supergravity, we have five
fields, which are dilaton , graviton , NS-NS
two-form gauge field , and two R-R gauge fields 
and .  The equations of motion for these bosonic
fields are, in the Einstein frame,
 
where  is the Levi-Civita symbol
chosen by , and the field strengths are
defined as
 

To obtain the linearized equations of motion for the fluctuation
fields, we expand the fields near the pp-wave background given
in Eq. () as follows
 
where the fields with bar denote the background fields.  And we
shall choose the usual light-cone gauge for the fluctuations,
 such as
 

The linearized form of the equation of motion () for
dilaton is the following coupled equation
 
And the equations of motion (), () and ()
for the gauge fields have the following linearized forms respectively,
 
where the raising and lowering of the Lorentz indices are
performed by the plane-wave metric .

The (),(),() components of the Eqs. (),
() and () give constraints implying that the modes
,  and  are non-dynamical.  We can express these
non-dynamical modes in terms of physical modes , ,
 as follows,
 
where .

The linearized form of Einstein equation () has rather
complicated form,
 
with
 
where the covariant derivative  is defined by using
the background pp-wave metric  and the non-vanishing
connection and curvature quantities are given by
 
The () component of the Eq. () gives the following
zero-trace condition for the transverse modes of the graviton
 
And the () components of the Eq. () lead to the
expressions for non-dynamical modes ,
 
Under the conditions () and (), the trace for
the space-time indices of the Eq. () gives an additional
condition,
 

Now let us consider the linearized equations for physical modes which
determine the light-cone energy spectrum.  There are four sets of
decoupled modes and seven sets of coupled ones which we need to
diagonalize to determine the light-cone energy spectrum for the
physical modes.  The linearized equation for dilaton, (4)-component of
the Eq. (), (123)-component of the Eq. (), the
trace for  indices and (44)-component of the Eq. ()
are coupled each other and given by(From now one, the index
  of the type  is taken to run from  to , while the range of
   is not changed.) 
 
These coupled equations form  scalar multiplet.
Then we obtain the following diagonalized equations
 
where we define
 
According to Eqs. () and (), these equations in
Eq. () mean that the minimal light-cone energies of the
fields in Eq. () are given by
 

There are two sets of  vector multiplets. One is decoupled
multiplet and the other is coupled one. The decoupled one comes from
the ()-components of the Eq. () and given by
 
where  and their
minimal light-cone energies are
 
The coupled  vector multiplets come from the (), (),
() and ()-components of the Eqs. (),
(), () and () respectively and
written by
 
These coupled equations are diagonalized as
 
where we define the diagonalized physical modes as
 
whose minimal light-cone energies are given by
 

There are two kinds of coupled multiplets in  vector
multiplets. The () and ()-components of Eqs. () and
() form one set of coupled equations
 
and the () and ()-components of Eqs. () and
() give the other set
 
where  are Levi-Civita symbols and we choose
.  By introducing two sets of complex 
vectors
 
we can diagonalize the Eqs. () and () as
 
Thus we obtain the minimal light-cone energies of the diagonalized
modes as
 

The ()-components of the Eq. () and the
()-components of the Eq. () form a coupled set of
equations as follows,
 
By defining the complex tensors
 
the equations in Eq. () are diagonalized as
 
so that the minimal light-cone energies are
 

The ()-components of the Eq. () and ()-ones of
the Eq. () are coupled also and form anti-symmetric 2-form
field multiplets. The coupled equations are
 
and these are diagonalized by defining the anti-symmetric complex
2-form fields,
 
where we used the (anti-)self-dual tensors which are irreducible
tensors of the  algebra and defined by
 
Then the equations in Eq. () are diagonalized by
 
thus the minimal light-cone energies are
 

There is remaining one mixed multiplet. The ()-components of the
Eq. () and ()-ones of the Eq. () give
 
By defining the complex tensors
 
we can diagonalize the equations in Eq. () as
 
so that the minimal energies are
 

The ()-components of the Eq. () are decoupled and
the linearized equations and minimal energies are given by
 
where .

From () and ()-components of the Eq. (),
we can extract two sets of traceless gravitons which belong to
 and  graviton multiplets respectively. Then the
equations and minimal light-cone energies are given by
 
where we have defined
 




Fermionic excitations 

The fermionic fields of Type IIA supergravity are spin-1/2 dilatino
 and spin-3/2 gravitino , each of which has real 32
components and is decomposed into two pieces of opposite 
chiralities.  Though it is usual to decompose the fermionic fields
based on  chiralities, it will be convenient to take a
different decomposition in this paper in a way that the 
 symmetry structure of the pp-wave background manifests.

If we do not take any decomposition for a while, the equations of
motion for  and  are as follows:
 
 
where the dots on the right hand sides represent the terms of cubic in
fermionic fields, which describe the interactions between excitations
and hence are not our concern, and the covariant derivative for spinor
is given by(The indices  represent the flat tangent
  space indices.  The gamma matrices  satisfy the 
  Clifford algebra, , where
   is the ten dimensional flat metric. We note that all the
  indices of gamma matrices, which are not denoted by Greek
  characters, are flat indices.) 
 
whose explicit expression for the pp-wave background, (),
is
 
under the following choice of the zehnbein
 
For the study of the linearized equation of motion for gravitino, we
note that it is convenient to rewrite the Eq. () as
) 
where  and we have ignored the
interaction terms represented by dots in Eq. ().  For
the consideration of the physical modes, we should impose the gauge
condition for the gravitino, which we take as the following light-cone
gauge,
 

In the light-cone formulation, the fermionic fields are decomposed into
the dynamical (physical) and non-dynamical modes explicitly by using
.  For the spin-1/2 field, we
have the decomposition,
 
where
 
while for the spin-3/2 gravitino field,
 
where
 
As we will see,  and  correspond to non-dynamical
fields expressed in terms of the physical fields  and
 respectively.

Having the decomposition of the fermionic fields, Eqs. ()
and (), we first consider the equation of motion for the
spin-1/2 field , Eq. ().  The linearized
form of the equation of motion is
 
We see that the field  does not have the dependence on the
light-cone time  and is expected to be non-dynamical.  Indeed,
this equation leads to the expression of  in terms of 
as
 
Taking into account this expression, the linearized equation of motion
for the physical mode  becomes
 

We see that the gravitino appears in the equation of motion for the
dilatino, ().  This lets us turn to the equation of motion
for the gravitino and pick up the physical modes before going on
further analysis for the dilatino.  The explicit expressions for the
'current'  are first needed in the light-cone gauge,
().  The light-cone components are obtained as 
 and , where the detail of  is not
required in this paper except that it is proportional to ,
and, for the spatial components, we have
 
We note that the property of  in the light-cone gauge is that
, where the index of  is
the flat one.

Then the  component of Eq. () gives
 
which implies  and states that 
is non-dynamical.  For the  component, we have
 
with the decomposition, (), and the expressions of ,
().  Obviously, the  field is non-dynamical,
and is given in terms of  as
 
This relation leads us to the following linearized equation of motion
for the physical modes :
 
The remaining vector component of the gravitino is , which is
non-dynamical.  From Eqs. () and (), we have
 

As alluded at the beginning of this subsection, we now decompose the
physical modes to reflect the symmetry structure 
of the pp-wave background.  However, to avoid some complexity, we are
concerned only about the  structure.  The case of  will
be required at later stage.  Since the decomposition is performed in
the transverse eight dimensional space and the physical mode has 16
independent spinor components, it is natural to use the 
gamma matrices, , of Eq. ().  In addition to
this, from our convention and the Eqs. () and
(), we make replacements 

 and 
 to specify that the physical fields
have 16 components.  The decomposition of physical fields is then
 
where the sign of superscript indicates the  chirality in the
space spanned by , that is, 
 and .  We
note that , which will be useful in
the following formulation.

For each  chirality, the dilatino equation of motion,
(), leads us to have
 
For the case of gravitino, we first split the vector components as
, and decompose
the modes  and  into the transverse and
parallel parts with respect to the  matrices as follows:
 
From Eq. (), we see that the equations of motion for the
transverse parts do not include other modes and are given by
 
 in these equations now requires the modes to have
definite  structure.  Since , its
eigenvalues are , the  chirality.  For a generic spinor
, we introduce the following notation.
 
where the first superscript represents the SO(3) chirality and the
second the  chirality.  Then the equations for the transverse
modes, (), become
 
which state that, according to (), the minimal light-cone
energy for the respective physical gravitino modes are
 
The equations of motion for the other physical modes of gravitino are
grouped into two sets according to the  chirality.  As for the
positive chirality, we have
 
while for the negative chirality
 
We note that the modes  are not dynamical because
 as can be seen from Eq. ().  Thus
the equations of motion for them have not been considered.

We see that the physical modes , , and
 are linked with each other through their equations of
motion, Eqs. () and ().  This is also the case for
, , and  from Eqs. () and
().  Diagonalization procedure is thus required to obtain the
spectrum of normal excitation modes.  In order to do that, it is
convenient to introduce the following definitions:
 
For the modes with positive  chirality, we then have from
Eqs. () and ()
 
The diagonalization of these equations is done by defining
 
whose equations of motion are then obtained as
 
If we split the modes in a way that respects the 
structure and follow the notation of Eq. (),
these equations lead to
 
from which we have the following minimal light-cone energy
spectrum for the diagonalized physical modes:
 

We now turn to the modes with negative  chirality, that is,
,  and .  With the redefinitions,
(), Eqs. () and () lead to
 
The diagonalized equations of motion are obtained as
 
where the normal excitation modes are defined by
 
After taking into account the  structure with the notation of
Eq. (), the above set of equations, (), leads us to
have
 
According to Eq. (), we then have the minimal light-cone
energy for the modes as
 


 
 
 
Type IIA supergravity excitation modes.   means
  the number of degrees of freedom.   () is the number of
  bosonic (fermionic) degrees of freedom at each light-cone energy. 




Conclusion and discussion 

We have obtained the Type IIA supergravity excitation modes and their
spectrum in the pp-wave background, which are summarized in table
.  The supergravity modes have been arranged such
that they respect the  symmetry structure of the
background.  We see that there is mismatch between the bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom at each light-cone energy, basically due
to the fact that the supersymmetry preserved by the pp-wave background
is time-dependent. (More precisely, 16 among 24 supersymmetries depend
on the light-cone time .)

The result we have obtained shows how the low-lying string states
listed in table  correspond to the supergravity
modes of table .  This implies that we can associate
the vertex operator for a certain low-lying string state to a definite
supergravity excitation mode in the pp-wave background.  It may be
expected that the study of string amplitudes with such vertex
operators gives useful insight into the structure of the M theory in
the maximally supersymmetric eleven-dimensional pp-wave background.

Concerning the eleven dimensional origin of the ten dimensional
supergravity excitation spectrum, it would be interesting to uncover
the structure of the spectrum obtained in this paper.  The eleven
dimensional perturbative spectrum from the Matrix model in the eleven
dimensional pp-wave background has intriguing features such as the
protected multiplet and the indication of the presence of the
transverse five-brane.  Since the Type IIA
supergravity inherits most of its features through the dimensional
reduction, the structure in eleven dimensions would be encoded in the
spectrum of ten dimensional supergravity.  Thus the eleven dimensional
perturbative spectrum would lead us to have the deeper understanding
of the ten dimensional spectrum.  What we would get from the physics
related to the transverse five-brane is particularly interesting.  We
hope to return to this issue in the near future.




Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Seungjoon Hyun and Jeong-Hyuck Park for helpful
discussions.  This work of O.K. is the result of research activities
(Astrophysical Research Center for the Structure and Evolution of the
Cosmos (ARCSEC) and the Basic Research Program, R01-2000-000-00021-0)
supported by Korea Science  Engineering Foundation.  The work of
H.S. was supported by Korea Research Foundation Grant
KRF-2001-015-DP0082.




 99 

 D. Berenstein J. Maldacena and H. Nastase, "Strings
  in flat space and pp waves from  Super Yang Mills,"
  JHEP 0204  (2002) 013, hep-th/0202021.

 K. Dasgupta, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, M. Van Raamsdonk,
  "Matrix Perturbation Theory For M-Theory On a PP-Wave," JHEP     0205  (2002) 056, hep-th/0205185.

 M. Blau, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, C. Hull and G.
  Papadopoulus, "A new maximally supersymmetric background of IIB
  superstring theory," JHEP 0201  (2001) 047, hep-th/0110242.

 S. Hyun and H. Shin, "Branes from Matrix Theory in
  PP-Wave Background," Phys. Lett. B543  (2002) 115,
  hep-th/0206090.

 D. Bak, "Supersymmetric Branes in PP-Wave
  Background," hep-th/0204033.

 N. Kim and J. Plefka, "On the Spectrum of PP-Wave
  Matrix Theory," Nucl. Phys. B643  (2002) 31, hep-th/0207034.

 K. Dasgupta, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and M. Van
  Raamsdonk, "Protected Multiplets of M-Theory on a Plane Wave,"
  JHEP 0209  (2002) 021, hep-th/0207050.

 J.-H. Park, "Supersymmetric objects in the M-theory
  on a pp-wave," JHEP 0210  (2002) 032, hep-th/0208161.

 N. Kim and J.-H. Park, "Superalgebra for M-theory on
  a pp-wave," Phys. Rev. D66  (2002) 106007, hep-th/0207061.

 N. Kim, K. M. Lee and P. Yi, "Deformed Matrix
  Theories with  and Fivebranes in the PP Wave
  Background," JHEP 0211  (2002) 009, hep-th/0207264.

 K. Sugiyama and K. Yoshida, "Supermembrane on the
  PP-wave Background," Nucl. Phys. B644  (2002) 113,
  hep-th/0206070.

 I. Bena and R. Roiban "Supergravity pp-wave
  solutions with 28 and 24 supercharges," hep-th/0206195.

 J. Michelson, "A pp-Wave With 26 Supercharges,"
  Class. Quant. Grav. 19  (2002) 5935, hep-th/0206204.

 S. Hyun and J.-H. Park, "5D action for longitudinal
  five branes on a pp-wave," JHEP 0211  (2002) 001,
  hep-th/0209219.

 S. Hyun, J.-H. Park and S.-H. Yi, "3D N=2 massive
  super Yang-Mills and membranes/D2-branes in a curved background,"
  hep-th/0301090.

 J. Michelson, "(Twisted) Toroidal Compactification
  of pp-Waves," Phys. Rev. D66  (2002) 066002, hep-th/0203140.

 S. Hyun and H. Shin, " Type IIA
  String Theory on PP-Wave Background," JHEP 0210  (2002) 070,
  hep-th/0208074.

 K. Sugiyama and K. Yoshida, "Type IIA String and
  Matrix String on PP-wave," Nucl. Phys. B644  (2002) 128,
  hep-th/0208029.

 S. Hyun and H. Shin, "Solvable  Type
  IIA String Theory in Plane-Wave Background and D-Branes," Nucl.
  Phys.  B654  (2003) 114, hep-th/0210158.

 S. Hyun, J. Park and H. Shin, "Covariant Description
  of D-branes in IIA Plane-Wave Background," hep-th/0212343, to
  appear in Phys. Lett. B.

 R. R. Metsaev, "Type IIB Green-Schwarz superstring
  in plane wave Ramond-Ramond background," Nucl. Phys.  B625 
  (2002) 70, hep-th/0112044.

 R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin, "Exactly solvable
  model of superstring in plane wave Ramond-Ramond background," Phys.
  Rev. D65  (2002) 126004, hep-th/0202109.

 M. Alishahiha, M. A. Ganjali, A. Ghodsi and S.
  Parvizi, "On Type IIA String Theory on the PP-wave Background,"
  hep-th/0207037.

 S. Mizoguchi, T. Mogami and Y. Satoh, "Penrose
  limits and Green-Schwarz strings," hep-th/0209043.

 J.G. Russo, A.A. Tseytlin, "A class of exact pp-wave
  string models with interacting light-cone gauge actions," JHEP     0209  (2002) 035, hep-th/0208114.

 M. Cvetic, H. Lu, C. N. Pope and K. S. Stelle,
  "Linearly-realised Worldsheet Supersymmetry in pp-wave
  Background," hep-th/0209193.

 J. G. Russo and A. A. Tseytlin, "On solvable models
  of type IIB superstring in NS-NS and R-R plane wave backgrounds,"
  JHEP 0204  (2002) 021, hep-th/0202179.

 M. Cvetic, H. Lu, C. N. Pope and K. S. Stelle,
  "T-Duality in the Green-Schwarz Formalism, and the Massless/Massive
  IIA Duality Map," Nucl. Phys. B573  (2000) 149,
  hep-th/9907202.

 S. Hyun and H. Shin, "Supersymmetry of Green-Schwarz
  Superstring and Matrix String Theory," Phys. Rev. D64  (2001)
  046008, hep-th/0012247.

 B. de Wit, K. Peeters, J. Plefka and A. Sevrin, "The
  M-theory two-brane in  and ,"
  Phys. Lett. B443  (1998) 153, hep-th/9808052; P. Claus, "Super
  M-brane actions in  and ,"
  Phys. Rev. D59  (1999) 066003, hep-th/9809045.

 M. J. Duff, P. S. Howe, T. Inami and K. S. Stelle,
  "Superstrings in  from supermembranes in ,"
  Phys. Lett.  B191  (1987) 70.

 R. Penrose, "Any space-time has a plane wave
  limit," in Differential Geometry and Gravity , Reidel,
  Dordrecht 1976, pp. 271.

 J. Maldacena, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and M. Van
  Raamsdonk, "Transverse Fivebranes in Matrix Theory," JHEP     0301  (2003) 038, hep-th/0211139.

 O-K. Kwon and H. Shin, in progress.




