





















       Ays e Hu meyra BILGE 

        Department of Mathematics, Istanbul Technical University 

        Istanbul, Turkey 

        e-mail: bilge@itu.edu.tr 

        Tekin DERELI 

        Department of Physics, Koc  University 

        Istanbul, Turkey 

        e-mail: tdereli@ku.edu.tr 

        S ahin KOC AK 

        Department of Mathematics, Anadolu University 

        Eskis ehir, Turkey 

        E.mail : skocak@anadolu.edu.tr 

         

Seiberg-Witten Type Monopole Equations 
 on 8-Manifolds with 
Holonomy 
as Minimizers of a Quadratic Action  

 
We obtain an elliptic system of monopole equations on
8-manifolds with Spin(7) holonomy
by minimizing an action involving negative spinors coupled to an
Abelian gauge field. 

Introduction 

In Seiberg-Witten theory over a 4-manifold, a  connection is
coupled to a spinor field.
The Seiberg-Witten equations are the minimizers of
an action involving the curvature 2-form 
and a positive Dirac spinor  (see Eq.(2.7)),









where  is the scalar curvature of the 4-manifold 
 and  and  are respectively the connection and
curvature of a line bundle associated
with the spin structure on .
In the coupling of a Dirac spinor to the Yang-Mills action, the key is the
Weitzenbock formula which relates the covariant derivatives 
to , where  are Dirac operators
(see Eqs.(2.15-17)), compensating for the scalar curvature term and
bringing in the  coupling .

In 4 dimensions,  is a  traceless, hermitian matrix
such that   is identically zero.  If , the action
(1.1) can be written as






Writing



and using , the second integrand in
Eq.(1.2) is written as
 





It can be seen that the vanishing of this term gives the second part of the
Seiberg-Witten equations



where the subscript  denotes the trace-free part of a matrix.


From Eq.(1.4), it is clear that the  term
 is added just to complete the square.
Choosing 
as in Eq.(1.5), reduces the
action to its topological lower bound.
In a sense, the spinors  are chosen
in such a way
that the coupling is independent of the  part of  of which it is expected to be free.
This will be our idea in looking for Seiberg-Witten type monopole equations
on 8-manifolds.

If one expects to get linear field equations as absolute minimizers of an
action, the
topological  lower bound
for the Yang-Mills functional would be an integral of the second Chern class
,
which is proportional to .  For an arbitrary 8-manifold, there is no
canonical way of obtaining a topological invariant, either by  integrating
 over a submanifold,
or by multiplying  with an appropriate (dimensionless) 4-form and
integrating over . Nevertheless, for  eight  manifolds with
Spin(7) holonomy, there
is a globally defined 4-form, called the Bonan
4-form ,, which  determines a topological
 lower bound
for the Yang-Mills action 

The Bonan 4-form  
 belongs to
the class of forms called calibration forms .
The 4-form  acting on 2-forms defines a "-duality" by Eq.(A.2)
(see Appendix A).
This determines
a splitting of the curvature  2-form  into 7 and 21 dimensional
subspaces as

The requirement that  leads to a set of 7
equations, proposed originally by Corrigan et.al,. 
 Together with the Coulomb gauge condition, these equations from an elliptic system
. Gauge theories in higher dimensions in general were  studied 
in,,.
The coupling of a spinor field to the gauge fields in
8-dimensions
may follow different paths. A direct generalization of the Seiberg-Witten
theory in 4-dimensions to 8-dimensions  has led to trivial
results. In our previous paper, we defined a 
generalization of the monopole equations by interpreting the right hand sides 
of the Seiberg-Witten equations as a
projection onto a subspace determined by the map  and coupled
positive spinors to the curvature.  However, it was not possible to
express these equations as absolute minimizers of an action.
Another set of monopole equations in 8-dimensions is proposed by Gao and Tianwith the suggestion that it may provide  the S-dual of non-Abelian instantons.

In the present paper, we define monopole equations  via a
projection by the map , thus coupling the curvature to negative
spinors.  This new set of monopole equations are absolute minimizers of an
action, provided that the real and imaginary parts of the negative spinor
belong to  certain complementary subspaces of
 determined by .



 Preliminaries. 
Notation. 
We define a Hermitian inner product on  by

for ,  in .
In particular, if , and ,



Furthermore if  is skew-symmetric, then

The pointwise norm of a real differential form
 is defined as


where  denotes Hodge dual.
We also note that if , where  is real, then


Spin structures. 
A detailed summary of the spin structures was given in. We remind that
a spin-structure on a -dimensional real inner-product
space  is
a pair , where  is a  dimensional hermitian vector
space and  is a linear map
satisfying




for .
Globalization of this construction on each fiber to the tangent bundle of a
 -dimensional
oriented manifold  will be possible if  and only if
 the second Stiefel-Whitney class
 has an integral lift.
The spin structure on the manifold  will  then be given by the map
 
, where  is now a -dimensional
complex Hermitian vector bundle on .
The  eigenspaces of  determines a
splitting

and the elements of  and  are called respectively "positive" and
"negative" spinors.

Restriction of  to  determines a linear map
 which satisfies
 for all .
The linear map can be recovered from  via

To define a spin structure on  it is thus enough to give a linear map
 satisfying
 for all .

In our case of an 8-manifold  with Spin(7)-holonomy, we will instantly
construct such a map. But first we want to comment on the spinor bundle(s)
of such a manifold. The holonomy condition means that the structure group of the
frame bundle of the oriented manifold can be reduced from SO(8) to Spin(7)
and, since Spin(7) is simply connected, the bundle group can be lifted to the
double cover Spin(8) of SO(8). Thus, Spin(7)-holonomy implies that the
manifold is Spin(8) and consequently, Spin(8).


Remark. 
The manifold , being a Spin(8) manifold, possesses a real spinor bundle of
dimension 16 and a complex spinor bundle of the same dimension, which is
simply the complexification of the former. The above-mentioned complex spinor
bundle  in the context of the Spin(8) structure on  is nothing else
than the complex spinor bundle related to the Spin(8) structure on , if the
Spin(8) structure is the one canonically associated with the Spin(8)
structure. Thus there are real spinor half-bundles  with
, so that we can talk about real and
imaginary parts of complex spinors.


The extension of  to the even forms on  leads to a
map 
given by


With  as given in Eq.(2.8),  will be  block
diagonal, and one can define the maps

for  in .

The matrices  are characterized by




In 8-dimensions, the 's are real, skew-symetric
matrices and the set



is orthonormal.
The effects of the  maps are given by









The image of the volume form of 
allows to define duality identifications.
The  matrices satisfy the relations


which allows the duality identifications





 The Dirac operator and the
Weitzenbock formula. 
A Hermitian connection on , compatible with the Levi-Civita
connection of the manifold induces an imaginary valued connection
on a certain associated
line bundle called the virtual line bundle 
. The
corresponding connection 1-form is denoted by  and its curvature
2-form by
.
The Dirac operators  corresponding to  are the maps


defined by




where

is any local
orthonormal frame.



The Weitzenbock formula is the key in writing the action
integral for the Seiberg-Witten equations. One has
 

 

where  is the scalar curvature of  and
 is the -adjoint of , i.e.,


Taking the inner product of Eq. (2.17)  with 
and integrating over , we obtain




Hence if ,
 we have








The topological lower bound. 
The expression of the Bonan 4-form  in an orthonormal basis and its
eigenvectors are given in Appendix A.  The eigenvectors  and
 for  are
a basis for local sections of , and the curvature
2-form  has the splitting
, where
,
.
It can be seen that

hence


As  is pure imaginary,


Hence


It follows that


Note that we can also write




The Monopole Equations 


We have previously given an elliptic set of monopole equations using a projection
with , where we denoted  as ,
and  by .
 The same formula (Eq.(26) in)
can be applied as well using a
projection with . Hence we can write



where 's are an orthonormal basis for the subspace .
We may choose the 's as in (A.3).
With respect to this basis we can write

then

and the monopole equations are




We now discuss the effects of the maps .
In the equations that follow, the 's are determined via the
Spin(7) invariant Bonan 4-form. The
first terms at the right hand sides of the equations are the
 the expressions of 's for an arbitrary spin
structure, while the second set of terms are the expressions corresponding to
the spin structure given by .  Here we remind
that there is an abuse
of notation, as  denotes the skew symmetric matrix corresponding
to the 2-form. Similarly in Eqs.(3.5,6), 's are skew symmetric
matrices. We use the notation . Then
  



 


We shall not give the explicit expression of the
's, but we indicate the method of computation.
 As an example,
we compute 
for .  For , 
belongs to the  dimensional  subspace.
We have chosen the labeling of the 's so that
if , then the matrix

is the skew symmetric matrix corresponding to the 2-form
.
Then using Eqs.(A.3-4) we have











Note that for  in the  dimensional subspace,
the coefficient of  is zero.
With similar computations it can be seen that the coefficients of
 vanish for each , whenever  belongs to
the 21 dimensional space.
It follows that the 6th row and the 6th column of  are
zero. This will be the key fact in constructing the action integral.


For the specific spin structure above,
our monopole equations  corresponding to the coupling to a positive
spinor are
























































while for the coupling to a negative spinor here we give
the monopole equations






































The Action Integral 


We prove now that the monopole equations (3.9) for  and  
can be derived from an action principle.  However, this is not possible
for any ,   but for a  special one given by Eq.(4.1) below. The
subtle point here is the choice of a real section of ,
which is possible as discussed
in the "Remark" in Section 2. 


We recall that  is an 8-manifold with Spin(7) holonomy, with scalar
curvature  and Bonan 4-form . Given any spin structure 
, the subspace  and the map  are defined by (2.7) and (2.10),
 is a  connection on the "virtual line bundle" 
(as in Section 2) and  is the curvature of . The Bonan 4-form determines
an orthogonal direct sum decomposition of the 2-form  by the map (A.2), and
 and  are the projections of  onto these subspaces.




Proposition 4.1.  Let ,  and  be as above and define a section
 of  by

where  is a real section of  and

Then the monopole equations



are absolute minimizers of the action







and .

Proof.   We first use Eqs. (2.25) and (2.20) to express the action as








Next we show that .
For this note that  is of the form
 (see Eqs.(3.6))
with distinct set of indices. The orthonormality of the set (2.12) implies that
.  On the other hand
from (A.3), , hence the  map is an
isometry. It follows that








The main difficulty is to show that  for 
given by Eq. (4.1). For this we first prove the following Lemma.

Lemma 4.2.   Let  be as in Eq. (4.2). Then


Proof of Lemma 4.2.  Let .  For
 given by Eq.(A.1),  is the symmetric matrix given by










Using the duality relations (2.14), it can be seen that , hence the
minimal polynomial of  is

Let the dimension of the eigenspaces corresponding to the eigenvalues  and
 be  and .  The orthogonality of the set (2.12)
implies that  is
traceless. On the other hand, , hence . If we set
, then    has rank 1 and

hence  is a projection onto a 1-dimensional subspace of . To prove
Eq.(4.7) we need to compute the relevant expressions for each basis element.
We give the details of the computation for

which will prove the result for ,  ,
 and  .  We rewrite  four times with
appropriate duality identifications and multiply with .
We use below the notation .
 

If  belongs to the  dimensional subspace then , and hence
. On the other hand if  belongs to the
7-dimensional subspace, , but it can be seen that


and as , , it follows that
 and we obtain Eq.
(4.7).


Remark 4.3.  For the specific choice of the spin structure
corresponding to ,  is the diagonal matrix with the
only nonzero entry, .  From the remark after Eq.(3.7) we see that the
6th row and the 6th column of 's are zero while in
's non-zero elements are only in the 6th row and the 6th
column.

We now continue with the proof of Proposition 4.1.  First note that as  is
pure imaginary and the representation is real,  is hermitian but
skew-symmetric.  Now using , we have


where the second equality follows from hermiticity  and the third from
skew-symmetry.

Then from Eq.(2.3),


and Eq.(4.6) reduces to







which can be written as






which gives the monopole equations.

As the left hand side of the matrix equation 
 belongs to a 7-dimensional subspace, we
need to check its compatibility. Given any skew-symmetric matrix , there is
an orthogonal  decomposition

The orthogonality of the summands can be seen from

From Eq.(4.7), . Hence we need
to show that the right hand side satisfies the same relation. It can be seen
that


But


so both sides of the equation belong
to the same linear subspace. This
completes the proof of Proposition 4.1.

For , the explicit form of the monopole equations can be
obtained by putting


in Eqs.(3.9).




Finally, we shall show that the new set of equations are elliptic.
In a system of  first order partial differential equations in the
independent variables  and the dependent variables 
, the replacement of  by ,
where 's are indeterminates, one obtains (see e.g.) a linear homogeneous
system of equations for the 's. The characteristic determinant of the system is the
determinant of  the coeficient matrix of the corresponding linear system.
The system of partial differential equations is called elliptic, if the
characteristic determinant has no real roots. The ellipticity property of a
system is independent of its inhomogeneous part.

Proposition 4.4.   The system of
equations (4.3) is elliptic.

Proof.   It is known that the
system  of equations  together with the Coulomb gauge condition
 are elliptic [9].  If , as
's are linearly independent,  if and
only if .  Thus the inhomogeneous system
 
 together with the Coulomb gauge condition
is elliptic.
To prove the ellipticity of the system , let    and
 be the characterisitic determinant of the system . It can be
seen that the characteristic determinant of the system  is
.
Hence we need to show that  is nonsingular. Using the minimal polynomial of
 it can be checked that
the minimal polynomial of  is

which shows that it is nonsingular and completes the proof.

Appendix A:  



We recall that, in an orthonormal basis , ,  the Bonan
4-form  can be written as

 

where .
The form  is Spin(7) invariant, hence it can be extended to the manifold.
 is self-dual and it defines a linear map on 2-forms as

with eigenvalues  and . This map has 7 and 21 dimensional eigenspaces
and a basis consisting of the corresponding  eigenvectors are given below.

Eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalue : 
 

The labeling of the eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalue  is
done as follows.  By abuse of notation, let 
be the skew-symmetric
matrix corresponding to the 2-form . Then  is the
2-form corresponding to the matrix .

Eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalue : 
 


 99 

  J. W. Morgan, The Seiberg-Witten Equations and Applications to
the Topology of Smooth Four-Manifolds , (Priceton University Press, 1996)

 D. D. Joyce, Compact Manifolds with Special Holonomy ,
(Oxford University Press, 2000)

 E. Bonan, Sur les varietes riemanniennes a groupe
d'holonomie  ou Spin(7) , C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 262 
(1966) 127

  R. Harvey, H. B. Lawson Jr., Calibrated geometries , 
Acta Math. 148  (1982) 47

 H. B. Lawson Jr., M-L. Michelsohn, Spin Geometry ,
(Princeton University Press, 1989)

 E. Corrigan, C. Devchand, D. Fairlie, J. Nuyts, 
First-order equations for gauge fields in spaces of dimension greater than four 
Nucl. Phys.B214 (1983)452

 A. H. Bilge, Solution and ellipticity properties of the
self-duality equations of Corrigan et al. in eight dimensions , 
Int. J. Theor. Phys., 35 (1996)2507

 S. K. Donaldson, R. P. Thomas, Gauge theory in higher dimensions , 
in The Geometric Universe  edited by S. A. Huggett, L. J. Mason. K. P. Tod, S. T. Tsou, 
N. N. J. Woodhouse, (Oxford University Press, 1998) 

 L. Baulieu, H. Kanno, I.M. Singer, Special quantum field theories 
in eight and other dimensions , Comm. Math. Phys. 194  (1998) 149 (hep-th/9704167)

 B. S. Acharya, M. O'Loughlin, B. Spence, Higher dimensional
analogues of Donaldson-Witten Theory , Nucl. Phys. B 503 (1997) 657
(hep-th/9705138)

 A. H. Bilge, T. Dereli, S . Koc ak,
Seiberg-Witten equations on   in the
Proceedings of 5th Go kova Geometry-Topology Conference 
Edited by S. Akbulut, T. O nder, R. Stern (TUBITAK, Ankara, 1997) p.87
(hep-th/9707178)

 A. H. Bilge, T. Dereli, S . Koc ak, Monopole
equations on 8-manifolds with Spin(7) holonomy , Commun. Math. Phys.
203  (1999) 21 (hep-th/9811161)

 Y. Gao, G. Tian,   Instantons and the monopole-like
equations in eight manifolds , JHEP05 (2000) 036 (hep-th/0004167)

 E. Witten, Monopoles and four manifolds , 
Math. Res. Lett. 1  (1994) 769

 F. John, Partial Differential Equations , 
(Springer-Verlag, 4th edition, 1982)










