


theorem Theorem [section]
definition Definition [section]
lemma Lemma [section]
proposition [theorem]Proposition 

 [2].7 0pt  1    
 C  
 R  
 H  
 Z  
 N  
 d  
 d  
 i  
 j  
 k  
 O  
 tr  
 s u (2) 
 s o  (4) 

 

Classification of 't Hooft instantons over

multi-centered gravitational instantons  


Gabor Etesi

 Renyi Institute of Mathematics, 

 Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 

Realtanoda u. 13-15,  

H-1053 Budapest, Hungary  

 etesi@math-inst.hu  

G. Etesi: Classification of instantons over Gibbons-Hawking
spaces   


 
This work presents a classification of all
smooth 't Hooft-Jackiw-Nohl-Rebbi instantons over Gibbons-Hawking
spaces. That is, we find all smooth  Yang-Mills instantons over
these spaces which arise by conformal rescalings of the metric with
suitable functions. 

Since the Gibbons-Hawking spaces are hyper-Kahler gravitational
instantons, the rescaling functions must be positive harmonic. 
By using twistor methods we present integral formulae for the kernel of
the Laplacian associated to these spaces. These integrals are
generalizations of the classical Whittaker-Watson formula. By the aid 
of these we prove that all 't Hooft instantons were
already found in a recent paper. 

This result also shows that actually all such smooth 't
Hooft-Jackiw-Nohl-Rebbi instantons describe singular magnetic
monopoles on the flat three-space with zero magnetic charge moreover the
reducible ones generate the full  cohomolgy of the Gibbons-Hawking
spaces. 

PACS numbers: 02.40.Ma, 02.30.Jr, 11.15.Tk, 04.20.Jb 
Keywords: Gravitational and Yang-Mills
instantons, harmonic functions, twistors  

Introduction 
The simplest non-flat geometries in four dimensions are
provided by non-compact hyper-Kahler spaces. These spaces also appear
naturally in recent investigations in high energy physics. For
example, physicists call these spaces as "gravitational instantons"
because hyper-Kahler metrics are Ricci flat hence solve Einstein's
equatios and have self-dual curvature tensor. 

Moreover, on the one hand, motivated by Sen's S-duality conjecture
 from 1994, recently there have been some interest in 
understanding the  cohomology of certain moduli spaces of magnetic
monopoles carrying natural hyper-Kahler metrics. Probably the 
strongest evidence in Sen's paper for his conjecture was
an explicit construction of an  harmonic -form on the universal 
double cover of the Atiyah-Hitchin manifold. Sen's conjecture also
predicted an  harmonic -form on the Euclidean Taub-NUT space. 
This was found later by Gibbons in 1996. He constructed
it as the exterior derivative of the dual of the Killing field of a
canonical  action. In a joint paper with T. Hausel we imitated
Gibbons' construction yielding a classification of  harmonic forms on
the Euclidean Schwarzschild manifold.
Recently Hausel, Hunsicker and Mazzeo classified the  harmonic forms
over various spaces with prescribed infinity, including gravitational
instantons. 

On the other hand, it is natural to ask wether or not the ADHM
construction, originally designed for finding
Yang-Mills instantons over flat , is extendible for hyper-Kahler
spaces. Kronheimer provided an ---type classification of the
so-called ALE (Asymptotically Locally Euclidean) hyper-Kahler spaces in
1989. Later Cherkis and Kapustin went on and constructed
- sequences of so-called ALF (Asymptotically Locally Flat) and five
 type ALG (this shortening is by induction) gravitational instantons
. These are also non-compact hyper-Kahler
spaces with different asymptotical behaviour. The question naturally
arises what about the ADHM construction over these new gravitational
instantons.

Kronheimer and Nakajima succeeded to extend the ADHM construction
to ALE gravitational instantons yielding a classification of Yang-Mills
instantons over these spaces in 1990. In the above scheme
the Gibbons-Hawking gravitational instantons appear as the  ALE and
 ALF spaces and are distinguished because  the metrics are
known explicitly on them. In our papers we
could construct  Yang-Mills instantons over these spaces via the
conformal rescaling method of Jackiw-Nohl-Rebbi.
Moreover it turned out that finding the reducible instantons among our
solutions we could describe all the  harmonic forms on them in a
natural geometric way yielding a kind of unification of the two above,
apparently independent problems.

In this paper, as a completion of these investigations we prove that we
have already found all instantons which can be constructed by the
conformal rescaling method. The proof is based on a
standard twistor
theoretic construction of the kernel of the Laplacian. 

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we recall the
't Hooft-Jackiw-Nohl-Rebbi construction in the form of the
Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer theorem. This enables us to
conclude that the scaling functions we are seeking must be harmonic
with respect to the Gibbons-Hawking geometries. 

In Sec. 3 first we construct all solutions of the Laplace equation over
 via a classical harmonic
expansion. This is possible because the metric collapsed to this
space possesses a large  isometry. From here we can see that only
those harmonic functions give rise to everywhere non-singular instantons
which are positive everywhere with at most pointlike singularities.

In Sec. 4 we go on perturb the above singular solutions into regular
ones by constructing integral formulae for harmonic functions
in the non-singular case based on twistor theory. These
integral formulae are generalizations of the classical
Whittaker-Watson formula for harmonic functions over flat 
. 

In light of these investigations we can conclude that all 't Hooft
instantons have in fact been found in our earlier paper.
Since all these functions are invariant under the natural  action on
the Gibbons-Hawking spaces the resulting smooth Yang-Mills instantons
describe singular magnetic monopoles on the flat , as 
it was pointed out by Kronheimer in his diploma thesis. We
also can see that the reducible solutions generate the full 
cohomology of the spaces in question. All these theorems are collected in
Sec. 5. 

Finally, we take conclusion and outlook in Sec. 6 and argue that our
methods work for the above mentioned "exotic" gravitational instantons,
too.

The Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer theorem 

First we recall the general theory from.
Let  be a four-dimensional Riemannian spin-manifold. Remember that
via Spin we have a Lie algebra isomorphism
. Consider the Levi-Civita connection
 which is locally represented in a fixed gauge by an
-valued 1-form  on  for . Because  is spin
and four-dimensional, we can consistently lift
this connection to the spin connection , locally given by
, on the spin bundle  (which is a complex bundle of rank
four) and can project it to the  components denoted by
. The projected connections loacally are given by
-valued 1-forms  and live on the chiral spinor bundles
 where the decomposition  corresponds to the
above splitting of Spin. One can raise the question what are the
conditions on the metric  for either  or  to be
self-dual (seeking antiself-dual solutions is only a matter of
reversing the orientation of ).

Consider the curvature 2-form  of
the metric. There is a standard linear isomorphism
 given by  with 
 for all . Therefore we may regard  as a 2-form-valued 2-form 
in  i.e. for vector fields 
over  we have . Since the space
of four dimensional curvature tensors, acted on by , is 20
dimensional, one gets a 20 dimensional
reducible representation of  (and of Spin, being 
spin). The decomposition into irreducible components is (see,
pp. 45-52)
 
where  is the scalar curvature,  is the traceless Ricci tensor,
 are the Weyl tensors. The splitting of the Weyl tensor is a
special four-dimensional phenomenon and is related with the above 
splitting of the Lie algebra . There are two Hodge operations which
can operate on . One (denoted by ) acts on the 2-form part
of   while the other one (denoted by ) acts on the values 
of  (which are also 2-forms). In a local coordinate system, these
actions are given by




It is not difficult to see that the projections 
 are given by 
, and  are self-dual with respect to  if
and only if . Using the
previous representation for the decomposition of  suppose  acts
on the left while  on the right, both of them via
  
In this case the previous self-duality condition looks like
()




From here we can immediately conclude that  is self-dual if and
only if  i.e.  is Einstein  while  is self-dual if
and only if  i.e.  is half-conformally flat (i.e. self-dual) with vanishing scalar
curvature . Hence we have proved:
  [Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer] Let
 be a four-dimensional Riemannian spin manifold. Then 

(i)   is the curvature of
an self-dual -connection on  if and only if  is Einstein,
or

(ii)   is the curvature of a self-dual
-connection on  if and only if  is half
conformally flat (i.e. self-dual) with vanishing scalar
curvature. 

Remember that both the (anti)self-duality equations

and the action


are conformally invariant in four dimensions; consequently if we can
rescale  with a suitable  function  producing a metric
 which satisfies one of the properties of the previous theorem
then we can construct instantons over the original manifold . This
idea was used by Jackiw, Nohl and Rebbi to construct instantons over the
flat . Consequently we find it convenient to
make the following
 
Let  be a four dimensional Riemannian spin manifold and
 be a smooth self-dual  connection of finite action on
the chiral spinor bundle . If there is a smooth function
 such that the projected Levi-Civita
connection of  is gauge equivalent to  then this
connection is called an 't Hooft instanton  over .

First consider the case of , i.e. part (i) of the above theorem
. Let 
 be a Riemannian manifold of dimension . Remember that 
 is a conformal isometry  of
 if there is a function  such that
. Notice that being  a diffeomorphism,  cannot be
zero anywhere i.e. we may assume that it is positive, . Ordinary
isometries are the special cases with . The
vector field  on , induced by the conformal isometry, is
called a conformal Killing field . It satisfies the conformal
Killing equation  (, pp. 443-444) 

where  is the Lie derivative while div is the divergence of a
vector field. If  denotes the dual 1-form
to  with respect to the metric, then consider the following conformal Killing data :
 
These satisfy the following equations (see):
 
Here  is understood as the -curvature tensor while

 
with  being the
Ricci-tensor. For clarity we
remark that 
 i.e., tr is the only non-trivial contraction.
If  is a smooth curve in  then fixing conformal Killing data in
a point  we can integrate () to get all the
values of  along . Actually if  is a conformal Killing field
then by fixing the above data in one point  we can determine the
values of  over the whole  , provided that  is connected. 
Consequently, if these data vanish in one point, then  vanishes over
all the . 

Furthermore a Riemannian manifold  is called irreducible  if 
the holonomy group, induced by the metric, acts irreducibly on each
tangent space of . 

Now we can state:

  
Let  be a connected, irreducible, Ricci-flat Riemannian
manifold of dimension . Then  with
 is Einstein if and only if  is a
non-zero constant function on . 

Remark.  Notice that the above proposition is not true
for reducible manifolds: the already mentioned Jackiw-Nohl-Rebbi
construction provides us with non-trivial Einstein metrics,
conformally equivalent to the flat . 


Proof . If  is a 1-form on  with
dual vector , then the -tensor
 can be decomposed into antisymmetric, trace and traceless
symmetric parts respectively as follows (e.g., p. 200,
Ex. 5.):
 
where  is the exterior codifferentiation on 
satisfying . Being  an Einstein metric, it
has identically zero traceless Ricci tensor i.e.  from 
decomposition (). We rescale
 with the function  as
. Then the traceless Ricci part of the new
curvature is (see, p. 59)

  
Here  denotes the Laplacian with respect to . From here we
can see that if , the condition for  to be again Einstein
is

However, if  is the dual vector
field then we can write by () that




We have used  and  for functions. Therefore
we can conclude that  is Einstein if and only if

i.e.  is a conformal Killing field on  obeying 
. The conformal Killing data
() for this  are the following:
 
Now we may argue as follows: the last equation of
() implies that 

over the Ricci-flat . By virtue of the irreducibility of
 this means that actually  (cf.
e.g., p. 282, Th. 10.19) and hence 
const. over the whole . Consequently, the second equation of
() shows that for all  we have

Taking into account again that  is irreducible, there is a point
where  is non-zero. Assume that the previous equality holds for all
 but . This is possible only if a
subspace, spanned by  in , is invariant under the
action of the holonomy group. But this contradicts the irreducibility
assumption. Consequently . Finally, the first equation of
() yields that  
i.e. . Therefore we can conclude that in that
point all the conformal data () vanish implying .
In other words  is a non-zero constant. 


In light of this proposition, general Ricci-flat 
manifolds cannot be rescaled into Einstein manifolds in a non-trivial
way. Notice that the Gibbons-Hawking spaces (see below) are
irreducible Ricci-flat manifolds. If this was not the
case, then, taking into account their simply connectedness and geodesic
completeness, they would split into a Riemannian product 
 by virtue of the de Rham theorem
. But it is easily checked that this is not the case. We just
remark that the same is true for the Euclidean Schwarzschild manifold. 

Consequently constructing instantons in this way is not very
productive. 

Construction of singular Laplace operators 
Therefore we turn our attention to the condition on the  part of
the metric curvature in the special case of the Gibbons-Hawking spaces.

First we give a brief description of the Gibbons-Hawking spaces denoted
by . These spaces can be understood topologically as follows
(cf., e.g.). Take an  and
consider the cyclic group  acting on 
induced by the  action. The resulting quotient  is
singular at the origin and looks like  at infinity.
If  then the monomials  are invariant under
. If we denote them by  then they satisfy an algebraic
equation 

This gives an isomorphism between  and the complex surface
 in . We can look at deformations of this singularity.
As it is well known, this surface is singular because the monomial 
contains multiple roots i.e., its discriminant is zero. This can be
removed by adding lower order terms in  such that the resulting
polynomial in  is of nonzero discriminant ("blowing up"):
 
These complex surfaces still have the required topology at infinity but
are nonsingular. We shall take  to be the underlying
four-dimensional differentiable manifold of such a surface. 

One also can construct  intuitively.
Start with  acted on by  along the circles.
Consider  distinct points  along the  axis of 
for example and shrink the  circles over them. The resulting space is
 with  the exceptional divisor
consisting of  copies of 's, attached to each
other according to the  Dynkin diagram. From here we can also see
that there is a circle action  on  with  fixed points
, called NUTs. 
The quotient is  and we denote the images of the fixed points also
by . Then  is
fibered over  with  fibers. The
degree of this circle bundle around each point  is one. 

The metric  on  looks like (cf. e.g. or p. 363
of)
 
where  parametrizes the circles and
; the smooth function 
 and the
1-form 
are defined up to gauge transformations as follows:


Here  is a parameter with values 0 or 1 and  refers to the
Hodge-operation with respect to the flat metric on . We can see
that the metric is independent of  hence we have a Killing field on
. This Killing field provides the above mentioned
-action. Furthermore it is possible to show that, despite the
apparent singularities in the NUTs, all things extend analytically over
the whole  providing a real analytic space . 

Notice that for a fixed manifold  we have two 
different metrics on it corresponding to the two possible values of .
Take  then for  we just find the flat metric on 
while  gives rise to the Eguchi-Hanson space on . If
 and  we recover the Taub-NUT metric on . All these
spaces posses an  isometry. For higher 's the resulting spaces
are the multi-Eguchi-Hanson and multi-Taub-NUT spaces respectively.
These metrics admit only an  isometry coming from the circle action
mentioned above. 

These two infinite sequences of metrics are hyper-Kahler
spaces i.e. for their curvature  and 
holds (using another terminology they are half conformally flat with
vanishing scalar curvature). Consequently part (ii) of the
Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer theorem can be applied for them. Our aim is to
find metrics  (as much as possible), conformally equivalent to
a fixed Gibbons-Hawking metric , such that 's are
self-dual and have vanishing scalar curvature: in this case the metric
instantons in 's provide self-dual connections on them, as we
have seen. Taking into account that the -Weyl tensor  is
invariant under conformal rescalings i.e. , the condition
 for the
's settles down for having vanishing scalar curvature
. Consider the rescaling 
where  is a function. In this case
the scalar curvature transforms as  where 
satisfies (see, pp. 58-59):

Taking into account that the Gibbons-Hawking spaces are Ricci-flat, our
condition for the scaling function amounts to the simple condition
 
i.e. it must be a harmonic function (with respect to the Gibbons-Hawking
geometry). In other words we have to analyse the kernel of the Laplacian
for our aim.

To analyse harmonic functions in these geometries, first we construct
Laplacians on the collapsed spaces  because
these operators and their associated harmonic functions can be constructed
explicitly.

Assume therefore that all the NUTs are pulled together in
() i.e. we return to the singular quotient . If we
remove the singular origin the resulting space is topologically a lense
space: . We
shall denote this space by . 
Regarding it as a plane bundle over  and denoting by 
the spherical coordinates while by  polar coordinates on the
fibres we simply get

under this blowing down process. Consequently the Gibbons-Hawking metric
() reduces to a metric  of the local form



on  where 



We remark that for  this metric extends as the flat metric for
 and as the Taub-NUT metric for  over . 
One easily calculates  
and by using the local expression


where  are the components of the inverse matrix, the singular
Laplacian looks like









This apparently new Laplacian can be rewritten in old terms as follows.
The lense space with its standard metric induced from the round 
has an associated Laplacian




in Euler coordinates. By the aid of this we obtain 






Now we wish to solve () in its
full generality in this case. To this end we introduce an orthonormal
system of bounded smooth functions on  by the (three
dimensional) spherical harmonics  with  and
 (for a fixed , there are  independent
spherical harmonics on ). In Euler coordinates these take the
shape



with , , being an associated Legendre polynomial
defined by the following generating function:


Consequently, using the decomposed Laplacian the general solution can be 
written in the form 
 
where  are complex numbers and  are
smooth radial functions. Notice that the spherical harmonics obey


yielding that the solution of () reduces to the ordinary
differential equations 
 
if  and
 
if , , . From here we can see that
 hence  can have an isolated singularity only in the
origin of 

If () is real and converges, by projecting the
corresponding Levi-Civita connections of the rescaled metrics onto the
 part we can produce self-dual connections via the
Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer
theorem. To get regular  solutions however, we have to propose
further regularity conditions on the rescaling harmonic functions. 
The Uhlenbeck theorem guarantees that generally in a given
gauge only pointlike  singularities can be removed from
self-dual connections. Therefore we have to study the
singularities of the rescaled Levi-Civita connections. The natural
orthonormal system to , associated to the gauge () is
 
Since  we have  consequently in
our gauge the Levi-Civita connection  with
respect to the rescaled metric obey the following Cartan equation on
:

 
As it is proved in in this gauge the original connection
 is self-dual hence cancels out if we project
 to the  component consequently all 
singularities of the self-dual connection  must come from
the  term in our gauge. Hence if we can understand the
singularities of the function  then
we can find the required regularity condition for the rescaling harmonic
functions. Notice that if  is zero somewhere then 
 diverges consequently an acceptable harmonic function
must be positive and bounded everywhere, except isolated points. 

Taking into account that 
, a real basis for the solutions is given by


hence, via , if we have
 we get real
solutions in ().

For  (hence ) both () and ()
yields .
Moreover  hence separating the  term in
() we can write a harmonic function  over
 as


if . The radial function  in
 is invariant under  hence we can talk about lense spaces of
radius  centered at the origin of . Now take such a lense
space. By the aid of the explicit expressions for the
spherical harmonics it is not difficult to show that for  



holds (integration is with respect to the induced metric on the lense
space in question) hence these real functions must change sign somewhere
on any lense space showing that in fact  also changes sign i.e.
vanishes along three dimensional subsets in the above decomposition.
 
Furthermore the coefficients of () and () are
real analytic in  hence any solution of them must be also real analytic
in . In fact the general solution to () and
() with  is  if . It is
also not difficult to see that any non-trivial solution of ()
with ,  behaves either as 
if  or  if
. This implies  that in both cases  dominates
 for small or large values of  hence the total solution  is
also plagued by small codimensional zero sets. For later
convenience we formulate this in the following
 
Let  be the intersection of a ball of radius  centered
at origin with the complement of a small ball of radius 
also centered at the origin of . Let 
 be its quotient. Then for a harmonic function




holds unless  in its decomposition. 
 
Consequently we must have 
 
with  for a generic acceptable harmonic
function on  i.e.,  admits the full 
symmetry. This solution was found in andfor the Taub-NUT metric. We remark that the  harmonic expansion on
Eguchi-Hanson space is treated in e.g..

Our aim is to find the appropriate generalization of the above classical
expansion () in the general case by regarding the
Gibbons-Hawking metric as a perturbation of the singular metric . To
achieve this, we have to construct the twistor spaces of the 
Gibbons-Hawking spaces.

Regularization 

As it is well-known, Penrose' twistor theory, originally  
designed for flat Lorentzian  can be generalized to self-dual
four-manifolds. From our viewpoint this is important because the
Gibbons-Hawking spaces are self-dual (or half conformally flat) and by
the aid of their twistor spaces various differential equations can be
solved over them.

Let us recall the general theory. Let  be a
Riemannian spin four-manifold and consider the projective bundle
 of the complex chiral spinor bundle  over it.
Clearly,  admits a fiber bundle structure  with
's as fibers. By using the Levi-Civita connection on  we
can split the tangent space  at any point  and the
horizontal and vertical subspaces can be
endowed with natural complex structures hence , as a real six-manifold,
carries an almost complex structure, too. A basic theorem of Penrose or
Atiyah, Hitchin, Singer states that this complex structure is integrable,
i.e.  is a complex manifold if and only if  is half conformally
flat (, p.380, Th. 13.46).  is called the twistor space 
of . The fibers of  are
then holomorphic projective lines in  with normal bundle 
and belong to a family parameterized by a complex
four-manifold . (We denote by  () the
powers of the tautological line bundle  on  while their induced
sheaves of holomorphic sections are  respectively.) If one endows
 with a real structure 
with Id such that the fibers are kept fixed by the real
structure then  is encoded in  as the family of
these "real lines". The basic example is , the
round sphere,  the Klein quadric and .

If  is Ricci flat then  with its induced connection is a
flat bundle. Hence if  is moreover simply connected then  can be
contracted onto a particular fibre  via parallel transport.
Consequently in this case we have another fibration 
 with fibers the copies of . Hence if a holomorphic
line bundle  is given on  then it can be pulled
back to line bundles  over . Consider the sheaf
cohomology group  of the line bundle . Take
an element  and consider for a representant
 the complex valued real analytic function
 given by the restriction 
where  () is a real line. Then we have
 (with respect to ) and there is a natural bijection

onto real analytic soutions, called the Penrose transform . In
fact if the original metric  is real analytic then this isomorphism
gives rise to all  solutions to the Laplace equation in question. For
a proof and the more general statement see e.g.. Taking into
account the isomorphism  and
that -forms can be integrated over  we can see that
the above transform is nothing but integration of forms over the real
lines, that is,


In what follows we construct the above objects explicitly in case of
the Gibbons-Hawking spaces  based on Hitchin's works.

First consider the multi-Eguchi-Hanson spaces  i.e. the  cases
. Since we have topologically 
 the twistor space  can be described analogouosly to
() but instead of a single copy of  we need a collection
of them, parameterized by a projective line. Therefore we have to replace
locally the constants  with functions  depending
holomorphically on a complex variable . Hence, as a first 
approximation of  we define  by the equation

Since there are no nontrivial holomorphic functions on  we have to
assume that  is a holomorphic section of a bundle which implies that
the independent variables are also to be interpreted as elements of
various line bundles over . The natural real structure
 


is induced by the -invariant extension to 
of the natural antipodal map  on  with 
. This map to be well-defined and the requirement that
the real lines have normal bundle  implies that  and
 and finally  is defined as a three dimensional complex
hypersurface  in the complex four-manifold 
 where ,  and  is an holomorphic
section of  obeying the algebraic equation 

given by
 
Here we use the factorization

and ' are interpreted as holomorphic sections of  in this
case. Unfortunately  is not a manifold because generically
there are points  for which  hence the
discriminant of  vanishes. Consequently
the fiber over this point is singular. More precisely, there is a singular
point   on the fiber
over .

These singularities can be removed by deforming  within a
family of non-singular surfaces.
During the course of this deformation typically we have to take a branched
cover of  over the singular points  hence the
resolved  would by first look fibered over a higher genus Riemann
surface. However in our special case we know a priori  that the
twistor manifold  exists hence the resolved model is still fibered over
. For our porposes it is enough to work with the singular model
.

Now we construct the real lines explicitly, following.
Remember that these are invariant sections of the holomorphic 
bundle  with respect to the real
structure . If we take  and
 then the holomorphic sections 
 are given by polynomials  and
 obeying (). Consequently we ought to solve
it. However this equation can be solved by a simple
factorization yielding
 
where  and  are
roots to the equations .
The reality condition provided by the -invariance gives 
,  and ,
 hence the roots explicitly look like
 
The reality condition also yields
 
(In these equations the square root is understood as the positive  
square root to avoid ambiguity.) From here we can see again that any real
section  i.e. a point  away from the NUTs is parameterized
by  and the angular variable
arg.

Now we are ready to present integral formulae for the Laplacian over the
multi-Eguchi-Hanson spaces. Pick up a particular fibre  of , not
identical to any of the NUTs  and denote it by . 
Take an  with 
. Since this is holomorphic we can Taylor expand it. Denote
by  and  the tautological sections of the two copies of
 (as pulled back over ) and let  be the tautological
section of  (as pulled back over ). Hence we can write


where for 


Since by definition the image of the tautological section is the zero
section of the corresponding line bundle, we can write over
 that  


and now  etc., i.e. they vanish exactly on the
image  of the section . Consequently, by using
the isomorphism 
 we can write




Putting () into the above expression
we find the following expansion for a harmonic function on the
multi-Eguchi-Hanson space with possible singularities in the NUTs:

 
where ,  are given by () and 
via ().

Now we turn our attention to the case of multi-Taub-NUT spaces . The
situation is similar. In this case the twistor space
topologically is the same as in the previous case but the complex
structure on it is different. This difference is realized by twisting the
previous line bundles with a new one. Consider the line bundle
 over  defined as follows. Let  be the standard
covers of  and  be the induced covers of
. Hence the coordinates on  are . The line
bundle  is defined by the transition function

on . Here  is the inverse of the constant
term of . Consider a section  of  as
follows:






This  is well defined because it is regular at  i.e., on
; moreover around zero it behaves as



hence is bounded for  as well.

By using this fixed section of  the space
 is defined by 


Again, by the a priori  knowledge of the existence of the
multi-Taub-NUT metric, this space can be deformed into a complex
analytic twistor space with holomorphic fibration 
. 

This time the real sections are of the form




The corresponding integral formula, again with possible
singularities over the NUTs looks like

 
together with () and (). We may regard
() and () as generalizations of the
classical  symmetric harmonic expansion () to the
general  symmetric case. Harmonic functions invariant under this
 isometry arise by taking .

After these preliminarities, we are ready to complete the analysis to find
the acceptable harmonic functions. Fix an  and consider
the space  with NUTs . If 
we can smoothly shrink the NUTs into the origin of  by taking
,  yielding a one-parameter family 
 of Gibbons-Hawking spaces and associated Laplacians  
which are regular for  and blow down to the singular space
 with  if .
Define the corresponding smooth functions
 and  by () and
() respectively and consider the family of harmonic
functions  constructed this way via () and
(). These satisfy  and the flow
 is continuous  in the following sence. Note that for a
fixed , the blow-up
map, restricted to the complement of the exceptional divisor , induces
a biholomorphic mapping 
. Hence write  for  for all
 and . Then there is a constant , such that
 
Moreover for fixed  and  this flow provides a 1:1 correspondence
between the solutions for  and ; however the latter case is
explicitly known from the
previous section. There we have seen that the only acceptable solutions
are of the form () whose perturbation for  is (cf.
) 
 
All other harmonic functions  are zero along three dimensional
subsets of  close to either infinity or the
singularity. Consequently there is an
 such that if  their continuous
perturbation  has the same property because of Lemma . 
 
Therefore we can conclude that a general acceptable harmonic
function on a Gibbons-Hawking space is of the form ().
In the next section we summarize our findings. For this we introduce
notations, also used in. Consider the quaternion-valued
1-form  assigned to the basis () and the imaginary
quaternion valued function assigned to () with  (we denote
it by ) as follows:



The theorems 
By collecting all the results from, and
the present work we can state:
 
Let  be a Gibbons-Hawking space with
 where  denote the
NUTs of it. Then any smooth, finite action  't Hooft instanton
lives on the negative chiral bundle
 and such an  over this
space is given by 

with 
 in the gauge () over . 

The action of this connection is zero if  () otherwise







where  refers to the number of NUTs while  is the
number of non-zero ' ().

All these instantons are  invariant hence dividing by this action we
have
  
Furthermore such an instanton corresponds to a  magnetic
monopole  over flat  where



with singularities in the NUTs. All such magnetic monopoles have zero
magnetic charge.

In we found all reducible connections and identified their
curvatures with  harmonic 2-forms. Via a result inthese generate the whole  cohomology of  hence:
  
A 't Hooft instanton  over 
 is reducible if and only if for an  we have

and  for ; in this case it can
be gauged into the form


where  with .
The curvature  of these connections generate the full 
cohomology of the Gibbons-Hawking space .

Concluding remarks 
In this paper we have classified all  Yang-Mills instantons over
the Gibbons-Hawking spaces which arise by conformal rescalings of the the
metric (we called these instantons as 't Hooft instantons). During the
course of this we encountered the twistor manifolds of the
Gibbons-Hawking spaces which enables us to take an outlook.

Firstly at this point we remark that () and
() are generalizations of the classical formula of
Whittaker and Watson for solutions of the three dimensional Laplacian to
the Gibbons-Hawking spaces 
. This is because
dividing a Gibbons-Hawking space via its  isometry we recover the
flat . Indeed, taking  in () or
() they cut down to


Pulling all NUTs into the origin of  we can write this as



Writing  and performing the radial integration this
eventually yields 


for some function  which is the classical Whittaker-Watson formula
(also cf.). 

Secondly, our method applies to more general gravitational instantons of 
Kronheimer as well as of Cherkis and Kapustin
. Taking into account that
 is connected and simply connected, by a
theorem of Buchdahl we can see that 


and via Serre duality 

Hence the  terms of our series indeed can be
interpreted as "coefficients" of a Taylor expansion yielding a
decomposition


Hence  has an obvious element,
namely the pullback of one of the generators of 
 i.e. the term corresponding to . Exactly this element
gives the solutions (). This distinguished element
exists because the twistor space  is holomorphically fibered over 
. However this is a consequence of the fact that our
gravitational instantons are not only self-dual but Ricci-flat, too.
Because the same is true for the new "exotic" ALE, ALF and ALG spaces,
without knowing the metric explicitly on them we can be shure that 't
Hooft instanton type solutions of the  self-duality equations exist
over them. Identifying the reducible solutions as above we can construct
explicitly the  cohomology of these spaces.

Finally we remark that we certainly cannot solve the self-dual 
Yang-Mills equations in their full generality with the conformal
rescaling method even in the simplest Gibbons-Hawking space. This
observations calls for
the generalization of the ADHM construction to all gravitational
instantons.



 99 

 Atiyah, M.F., Hitchin, N.J., Singer, I.M.: Self-duality in four-dimensional Riemannian geometry ,
Proc. Roy. Soc. London A362 , 425-461 (1978);

 Besse, A.L.: Einstein Manifolds, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
(1987);

 Buchdahl, N.: On the relative de Rham sequence , Proc.
Am. Math. Soc. 87 , 363-366 (1983);

 Cherkis, S.A., Kapustin, A.: Singular monopoles
and gravitational instantons , Comm. Math. Phys. 203  713-728 (1999);

 Cherkis, S.A., Kapustin, A.: Hyper-Kahler  
metrics from periodic monopoles , Phys. Rev. D65  084015 (2002);  

 Eguchi, T., Gilkey, P.B., Hanson, A.J.: 
Gravity, gauge theories and differential geometry , Phys. Rep. 66 
No. 6, 213-393 (1980);

 Etesi, G., Hausel, T.: Geometric interpretation of 
Schwarzschild instantons , Journ. Geom. Phys. 37 , 126-136 (2001);

 Etesi, G., Hausel, T.: Geometric construction of
new Yang-Mills instantons over Taub-NUT space , Phys. Lett. B 514 ,
189-199 (2001), arXiv: hep-th/0105118 v2 ;

 Etesi, G., Hausel, T.: On Yang-Mills-instantons
over multi-centered gravitational instantons , Comm. Math.
Phys. 235 , 275-288 (2003), arXiv: hep-th/0207196 v2 ;

 Garfinkle, D.: Asymptotically flat space-times have no
conformal Killing fields , Journ. Math. Phys. 28 , 28-32 (1987);

 Gibbons, G.W.: The Sen conjecture for fundamental
monopoles of distinct types , Phys. Lett. B382 , no. 1-2,
53-59 (1996);

 Gibbons, G.W., Hawking, S.W.: Gravitational
multi-instantons , Phys. Lett. 78B , 430-432 (1978);

 Hausel, T., Hunsicker, E., Mazzeo, R.:
 cohomology of gravitational instantons , preprint, arXiv: math.DG/0207169 ;

 Hitchin, N.J.: Polygons and gravitons , Math. Proc.
Camb. Phyl. Soc. 85 , 465-476 (1979);

 Hitchin, N.J.: Linear field equations on self-dual
spaces , Proc. Roy. Soc. London A370 , 173-191 (1980);

 Hitchin, N.J.: Twistor construction of Einstein
metrics , in: Global Riemannian geometry (Durham, 1983), 115-125, Ellis
Horwood Ser.: Math. Appl., Horwood, Chichester (1984);

 Jackiw, R., Nohl, C., Rebbi, C.: Conformal
properties of pseudo-particle configurations , Phys. Rev. D15 ,
1642-1646 (1977);

 Kronheimer, P.B. : Monopoles and Taub-NUT metrics ,
M.Sc. Thesis, Oxford (1985) (unpublished); 

 Kronheimer, P.B: The construction of ALE
spaces as hyper-Kahler quotients , Journ. Diff. Geom. 29  665-683
(1989); 

 Kronheimer, P.B., Nakajima, H.: Yang-Mills
instantons on ALE gravitational instantons , Math. Ann. 288 , no.2., 
263-607 (1990);

 Malmendier, A.: The eigenvalue equation on the
Eguchi-Hanson space , preprint, ArXiv: math.DG/0210081 ;

 Murray, M.K.: A twistor correspondence for homogeneous
polynomial differential operators , Math. Ann. 272 , 99-115 (1985);

 Petersen, P.: Riemannian geometry, GTM 171 ,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1998);

 de Rham, G.: Sur la reducitibilite d'un espace de
Riemann , Comm. Math. Helv. 26 , 328-344 (1952);

 Sen, A.: Dyon-monopole bound states, self-dual
harmonic forms on the multi-monopole moduli space, and 
invariance in string theory , Phys. Lett. B329 ,  no.2-3, 217-221
(1994);

 Uhlenbeck, K.K.: Removable singularities in Yang-Mills
fields , Comm. Math. Phys. 83 , 11-29 (1982);
 
 Wald, R.M.: General relativity, Univ. of Chicago Press,
Chicago (1984).

 Whittaker, E.T., Watson, G.N.: A course of modern
analysis, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (1950).


