
 








18pt





































 
 
MCTP-03-10



 
  

 
   
   
 

Abstract   




= .16in 
= .30in 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
O  









 














GeV   
TeV   
d  
et al   
1 2  
Tr  
 
 
L    
NL    
L    
NL    
NL    
NL    
V_  
V_   
V_  
V_   
W_  
W_   
W_  
W_   
R_  
  



A/G             O   Z  
A   C   F   G  
L   H   I   U  
B   R   D   T  
M   P  
N   S    



Introduction 





	Inflationary cosmology was proposed as a solution to the
horizon, flatness, and monopole problems of the standard Hot Big Bang
scenario. Inflation requires a period of accelerated expansion,
, corresponding to a superluminal expansion of the
scale factor.  In the standard 3+1 dimensional universe, the 
Friedmann Robertson Walker (FRW) equations imply
.
Hence accelerated expansion is provided by a negative pressure.
In standard inflationary models, this negative pressure is
provided by a vacuum energy (a potential) with .

We have found an entirely different source of
negative pressure:  open strings on D-branes
at temperatures close to the string scale. 
Although Einstein's equations in higher dimensions take a different
form than the FRW equation above, negative pressure can still
drive inflation. Note that there is no potential of any kind
in our model; instead, open strings on branes drive the inflation.

At sufficiently high temperatures and densities 
fundamental strings enter a curious 'long string' 
Hagedorn phase .  A
classical random walk picture can be used
to model the behaviour of the strings in 
cosmological backgrounds. The particular systems we will focus on 
are D-branes in the weak coupling limit . 
In particular, we consider the scenario in which our observable
universe is confined to three spatial dimensions (a three-brane)
embedded in higher dimensions.  We will denote the
rest of the universe outside of our 3-brane as the bulk.  We can
separate the energy momentum tensor into two components:  a 
localized component corresponding to the D-brane tension, and 
a diffuse component that spreads into the bulk corresponding to 
open string excitations of the brane. 
We find an interesting type of cosmological effect of a
primordial Hagedorn phase of open strings on branes: 

 

Hagedorn inflation .  The transverse 
'bulk' components of the energy-momentum tensor can be negative. 
If all of the transverse dimensions have winding modes,
this negative 'pressure' causes the brane to 
power law inflate along its length with 
a scale factor that varies as 
even in the absence of a nett cosmological constant 
(see eq.()).
If there are transverse dimensions that are large (in the sense that 
the string modes are not space-filling in these directions),
then we can find exponential inflation (see eq.()). 
No potential is required here . Merely the existence of open strings
on D-branes drives the inflation.



We begin by discussing string thermodynamics of open strings on
D-branes at high temperatures near the string scale.  We derive the
energy-momentum tensor required for Einstein's equations from the
partition function, which in turn can be derived from the density of
states in a random walk approach.  Winding modes of the strings give
rise to a negative 'pressure' in the bulk (the directions
perpendicular to the three-brane on which we live).  Armed with the
energy-momentum tensor in Eq.(), we examine the resultant
cosmology. We can solve Einstein's equations with various ansatze in
the presence of this negative bulk component. Our primary result is
that we find Hagedorn inflation of our observable universe due to the
negative pressure in the bulk.

If one assumes  adiabaticity, the inflationary growth period 
drives down the temperature of the system; eventually
the temperature drop causes
the universe to leave the Hagedorn regime, and consequently
inflation ends automatically.  In fact our solutions are only
valid for small changes in the metric corresponding to small
changes in the volumes, i.e., we can demonstrate instability
to inflationary expansion but cannot follow the solutions further.
If one uses the solutions beyond
the region of their validity, the period of superluminal
growth ends too quickly to solve cosmological problems.
Hence we do also discuss how, in non-adiabatic systems,
inflation can be sustained.

An amusing result is that power law
inflation in the universal high energy system only 
takes place if the number of large dimensions on the brane
is . In addition, branes tend to 'melt' unless
. Hence one can speculate on the role of these
effects in the fact that our observable universe has three
large dimensions.

The Hagedorn phase and random walks  
 
We here derive the thermodynamic properties of D-branes
using a random walk approach.  The results
are independent of the details of the
compactification and the degree of supersymmetry,
and agree with previous work assuming toroidal
compactification in microcanonical and canonical ensembles.
The reader interested only in the result for the energy-momentum
tensor and the resultant cosmology should proceed directly
to Eq.().

String thermodynamics and the Hagedorn phase 

The Hagedorn phase arises in theories containing fundamental
strings because they have a large number of internal degrees of 
freedom. Because of the existence of many 
oscillator modes, the density of states 
grows exponentially with single string energy , 

, where the inverse Hagedorn temperature  
(where )
and the exponent  depend on the particular
theory in question (for example heterotic or type II) . 
For type I,IIA,IIB strings the numerical value of the 
inverse Hagedorn temperature
is  in string units.
Thermodynamic quantities, such as the 
entropy, diverge at the 
Hagedorn temperature.
The partition function  is obtained 
as the integral of the density of states times the
 usual Boltzmann factor ,

 which diverges at
 for . 

In the Hagedorn regime, fundamental strings can be described
as 'long strings' in a random walk analogy. 
The size of the random walk (the distance covered by the string)
is given by the length scale . The physical setup
is shown in Figure 1.  


 



ktplot3.eps 

We consider a volume, portrayed by the box,
containing a single brane embedded in the bulk.
The quantity 
indicates the size of the dimensions parallel to the brane 
(for cosmology, ) and 
indicates the size of the dimensions perpendicular to the brane.
The random walk of strings attached to the brane 
traverses a distance .
Figs. 1a represents the case .
Fig. 1b represents the case  
.  This latter case is our standard
high energy case in which all modes are space-filling
(effectively, "winding modes").    



We consider a volume, portrayed by the box,
containing a single brane.  The quantity 
indicates the size of the dimensions parallel to the brane 
(for cosmology, ) and 
indicates the size of the dimensions perpendicular to the brane.
The random walk of strings attached to the brane 
traverses a distance .
Figs. 1a and 1b show the cases  and 
 respectively.  
In this paper we are particularly
interested in the high energy case of fig. 1b, in which the strings
fill all the space; for the case of toroidal compactification
this corresponds to winding modes.  We will use the nomenclature
'winding modes' to encompass these space-filling modes regardless
of the type of compactification.  We define  to be the number
of dimensions transverse to the brane in which there are no windings .
As our standard 'high-energy' regime, we will take the case of , 
so that all dimensions have windings;
this is the system which is always reached provided that the 
the energy density is high enough.

Previously,  obtained
 the distribution function  for
open strings attached to 
a brane:

()_open  
^d_/2   (_H)  
R_     .

and


()_open     
(_H )  
R_    .

Here,  is the number of dimensions perpendicular to the brane,
and  and  are the volumes parallel and perpendicular to the brane
respectively.

One can now adapt the random walk to a cosmological background.
In the case of a non-trivial 
metric the most natural interpretation of the parameter  is that it is 
the proper length of 
a string in the bulk and certainly we can always go 
to the local inertial frame in which a small portion of the string 
has the usual Euclidean energy  length equivalence. 

We make the usual quasi-equilibrium approximation that equilibrium is
established much more quickly than any change in the metric so that
the metric may be taken to be approximately constant when evaluating
properties such as density.  We assume that the metric is expressed in
terms of parallel dimensions  and transverse ones  ds^2 =
-n^2 dt^2 + g_ij dx^idx^j +g_nm dy^ndy^m , with the
brane lying at .  We      define an averaging over the extra
dimension with an overbar, 

O  = dy g_  O(y)  dy'
g_    .

The density of states for the limiting systems is found
to be the same expression as in the flat space case of eq.
()
but with all volumes averaged over transverse dimensions as in 
eq.().

Partition Function 

Now that we have obtained a density of states of open strings attached
to branes near the Hagedorn temperature, we can find
the partition function at temperature ,

Z(,  , ) d
 ()  e^-  .

In the standard  case,


Z(, ,  ) = 
2  ^2 _H^2   (^2-_H^2)   
+ nonsingular   cutoff  terms  

which are the successive terms in a saddle point approximation.
In, we present the density of states and partition
function for arbitrary values of  as well.

Stress-energy tensor  in a bulk Hagedorn phase 

We now use these thermodynamic results to 
find the bulk energy momentum tensor during the Hagedorn regime.
We may find the energy momentum tensor from 


T^_= 2 g^  g   
Z(, , )   
g^  .

For now, we take a single extra dimensions,
so that  and  is the extra dimension.
We will treat the functional derivative with respect to 
in the following way.  We assume that small changes in the metric 
correspond to making small changes in the volumes in , 
for a single extra dimension


Z g_55   = dx' Z 
V _(x')  
V _(x') g_55    .

Then, in the case of only one extra dimension, we can write 


  = dy g_55   =
d^5x g_55   d^4x 
= 1   d^5x g_55    ,

and 


  g_55   = 1   2
g_55       .

Then from eqs.(-) we can determine
the functional derivative in eq.().
Our ansatz automatically means that 
and hence ; in other words we are not considering energy exchange
between the brane and the bulk. (In general there might
be energy flux between the two.)

We now summarize the results for the energy-momentum tensor.
We first drop the overline notation of the previous section 
and simply redefine  and  to be the transverse and parallel 
volumes covariantly averaged over the region
of the transverse dimensions covered by the strings.
We define an energy density  of strings 

= E  

where  is the total energy of the string system.
We define


d_o/2-1

where  is the number of dimensions with no windings.

We find that the 'bulk' components of 
the energy momentum tensor are given by


T ^0_0 & = & - 


T ^i_i & = & p _  

T ^m_m p_bulk  && 
 .


where  and 


p _  =   

 
.

wherever there are strings present, and zero otherwise.
In particular, for our standard high energy case of ,
the negative bulk pressure is:


p_bulk  - ^1/2 /^3/2  .


As expected  resembles the local energy density
of strings. The   represents a relatively small 
pressure coming from Kaluza-Klein modes in the Neumann directions and 
 is a negative  pressure coming from winding modes
in the Dirichlet directions. If we T-dualize the Dirichlet
directions these 'winding modes'  
also become Kaluza-Klein modes in Neumann-directions and  becomes 
positive. Thus negative  reflects the fact that we have 
T-dualized a dimension much smaller than the string scale thereby 
reversing the pressure. For this reason negative  is 
expected to be a 
general feature of space-filling excitations in transverse dimensions. 
The most important result of this section is the negative bulk
pressure found in Eqs.() and ().

Cosmological Equations in  

We now consider
a D-brane configuration that has 3 large parallel 
dimensions (the 'observable
universe') and only one transverse dimension  that supports winding 
modes.
For now, we also assume adiabaticity.


We use the metric, 


ds^2 = -n^2 dt^2 + a^2 dx ^2 + b^2 dy^2 ,

which foliates the space into
flat, homogeneous, and isotropic spatial 3-planes.
Here  are the coordinates on the
spatial 3-planes while  is the  coordinate
of the extra dimension.  For simplicity, we make a further
restriction by imposing  symmetry under 
.  
Without any loss of generality we choose the 3-brane
of the 'observable universe' to be fixed at .
We can associate a scale 
factor with the parallel dimensions  and one for the 
'extra' transverse dimensions .
We define  
as the scale factor describing the expansion
of the 3-brane where  is the
proper time of a comoving observer.

Several authors -  have
presented the bulk Einstein equations.
For illustrative purposes we restate the results for the 55 (yy) equation:

G _55  = 3a' a (a' a  +
n' n ) -b^2 n^2 [a  a 
(a  a -n  n ) +
a  a ] =  ^2T _55 , 



where ,
 is the five-dimensional Planck mass, and the dots and primes
denote differentiation with respect to  and , respectively.
As stated earlier, our ansatz implies that 
 in the bulk.  Shortly we will use the 
appropriate to the Hagedorn regime on the right hand side of
Einstein's equations.  

From Eqn.(),
one can see right away
the importance of negative components of the bulk energy momentum tensor.
In the case where time derivatives of  dominate on the left
hand side of the equation, 
one has 
.
One can see that accelerated expansion , which
is required for inflation, takes place with a negative 
such as that found in Eqns.() and (). 

In addition to the bulk Einstein equations, we have boundary
conditions (known as the Israel jump conditions)
due to the fact that our observable brane is embedded in the bulk.
We will assume that
the energy momentum tensor on the boundary can be written in a
perfect fluid form, 

and 
,
where  and  are the energy density and
pressure, respectively, measured by a comoving observer.
For the metric in eq.() and 
the brane at a  symmetry fixed plane, 
the Israel conditions become

3[a'/a]_0 &=& - ^2 b_0 _br  

3[n'/n]_0 &=&  ^2 b_0 (2_br +3 p_br )  .

Here, subscript  refers to quantities evaluated at the location
of the brane at , and 
indicates the "jump" in the quantity  as one crosses the boundary (brane)
at  (the value of  as one approaches the brane from one side
minus the value of  as one approaches it from the other side).

Results: Behaviour of scale factors  and :
Inflation without Inflatons 

Our results are obtained by solving 
Einstein's equations
together with the constraints provided by the Israel conditions. 
We use the energy momentum tensor derived above in Eq.()
 appropriate to a primordial Hagedorn epoch.
First we will consider the case where
the brane is energy/pressureless and that 
(where  is the scale factor of the extra dimension).
We then catalogue more general types of behaviour that
can occur for .

Case I: 
 

Let us first impose
 simply as an external condition; 
the extra dimension is fixed in time.  
We also set the cosmological constants  both on the 
brane and in the bulk to zero, 
. All other 
contributions to the energy momentum localized on the brane 
(for example massless Yang-Mills degrees of freedom)
have an entropy that is subdominant 
to the limiting bulk degrees of freedom as long as the string
energy density 
 (where  is a critical Hagedorn density of order 1
in string units). 
For the moment we will therefore neglect the brane energy-momentum
and set .
In this discussion the brane at  
is playing no role in determining the evolution of the
cosmology; the scale factor  changes purely as a result of the 
bulk equations. 
It is simple to solve the 55 equation
for the scale factor  on our brane (at ).

 Standard case with :   
In the high energy case with windings
in all transverse dimensions we 
see from Eqs.() and ()
that 
(where, again,  is the local energy density measured with 
respect to the volume )
and hence, 
   
power law inflation .
For the more general case of 'p' large parallel dimensions
in any number of extra perpendicular dimensions, we find
 and .  
Here adiabaticity has been assumed in taking .
We note the amusing
result that inflation requires  (for our brane
) and speculate on its role in our
three large extra dimensions.

 Case with :   
In the case of 2 dimensions with no windings,
we find a period of  
exponential inflation :


a_0(t) a_0(0)  = ( 

-t^2 ^2 
8^3 2    +t  ^2 6 
^3 2     ((0)e^3/4 )    ) 

where  is the initial density at . 
Initially the second term in the exponent dominates
and there is exponential inflation.
This solution has an automatic end to inflation 
when  (in string units), just 
as the system is dropping out of the Hagedorn phase. 

 Other systems:   
We summarize the energy momentum tensors and cosmological 
behavior of  for systems with 
perpendicular dimensions without windings
in Table 1, where  for our universe as a 3-brane. 
Superluminal expansion is found for systems with ,
i.e., no more than two perpendicular dimensions without windings.
In all cases, we have also found
solutions to the  and  equations.

In adiabatic systems the Hagedorn regime and hence the inflationary 
behaviour we have found eventually come to an end.  
For a system to be in the Hagedorn regime 
requires an entropy density higher than the 
critical Hagedorn density (of order 1 in string units).
Below this density the energy momentum tensor and hence 
the cosmology is governed by the massless 
relativistic Yang-Mills gas (the gas is
present on the brane even in the Hagedorn regime but is subdominant). 
Thus there is no problem exiting 
from the inflationary behaviour.  In fact the
main issue is how long inflation can last. We return to 
this question later when we discuss how inflation can be 
sustained.





 
  
Cosmological regimes for open strings in the Hagedorn phase
with  large parallel dimensions, where  for
our observable universe as a 3-brane. 
Here  is the number of dimensions transverse to the brane
in which there are no windings; in our standard "high-energy"
regime we take .  Here  is the energy density
of strings, , the  component of the bulk energy-momentum
tensor. In addition,  is the negative bulk pressure
that drives inflation of our scale factor . Note
inflationary expansion 
for , i.e., at most 2 directions without windings.
The constants 
 and  are given for  in eq.().   





Case II:  

 and  

We also studied the case where the extra dimension is not stabilized 
but there is still no nett cosmological constant. 
By 'nett' we mean that the contribution from  and 
 in  
cancels the bulk contribution on the RHS of the  equation.
The condition for this is 

_nett  = - ^2 12 _br ^2 + _bulk  =0.

Using the 55 equation, we catalogued
some possible types of behavior for  with different ansatze
for .
Since , for  (), 
the pressure is 
 

Taking , we find a family of power law 
solutions for  of the form 


a_0(t) && At^q

b_0(t) && Bt^r 

where subscript-0 indicates values at , 

q= 2   (43 -r)  ,

and  is arbitrary.
For our standard ,
we find superluminal solutions with  for .
Hence one can have an inflating brane with a shrinking
bulk () or with a growing bulk ().
We also find a family of hyperbolic solutions with

a_o(t) a_o(0)  = (sinh 2C(t+t_1) 
sinh 2Ct_1  )^1/2 .

These solutions can give an
exponentially increasing scale factor on our brane.
The proper choice of solution in Case II depends on the
initial value of .

Case III:

 and  

In
we also consider the case of additional cosmological constants
in the brane and bulk. The results can be found in our longer paper.
Not surprisingly we recover the usual cosmological constant driven
inflation when we set .



Sustaining inflation and solving the Horizon Problem 

In the previous sections we have found the onset of inflation
via superluminal growth of the scale factor.  We also know that
eventually, once the temperature drops out of the Hagedorn
regime, inflation ends.  This graceful exit from inflation
is an appealing feature of this scenario.  
However, we cannot calculate in between.
Once inflation begins, our calculations break down; our
interpretation of small changes in the metric corresponding
to small changes in volume no longer holds.  
At this point we can only speculate 
what happens in between, and suggest two possibilities. 

First, previous authors have argued that strings in a de Sitter 
background are unstable to fluctuations and 
that this instability can sustain a period of de Sitter 
inflation . This phenomenon is well known 
for strings once they are in the de Sitter-like 
phase(We qualify 'de Sitter' because the exponential 
solutions we have do not possess the full O(1,4) de Sitter symmetry.) . 
However the missing ingredient that the present study adds 
is an explanation for how the universe enters a de Sitter like phase 
in the first place.   Our mechanism gets the universe into
the locally de Sitter phase, whereupon the mechanism of
 keeps it there 
without  having to assume adiabaticity.

Second, our 3-brane sits in a bath of branes and bulk strings
with ongoing dynamics such as branes smashing into each other
and possibly annihilating.  The dynamics is likely to keep
the system hot.  Hence high temperatures near the Hagedorn
temperature may be sustained for a long period; inflation
continues during this period.  We note that the high
entropy of our brane  may originate from
the dynamics of this hot brane/string bath.   Eventually
the system cools, drops out of the Hagedorn regime, and inflation ends.

There is a slight difference between our study and 
the results of which we should comment on. 
In, the density never goes above 
a critical density, .
In our case, on the other hand, we must have  for the 
calculation to be valid (to be in the Hagedorn regime).
The difference arises
because was concerned with 
stretched  strings and 
introduced a cut-off in the momentum integral.
This 'coarse graining' put an artificial
upper limit on the amount of string that can be packed into the 
volume and effectively removed the Hagedorn behaviour.
Conversely, the present paper begins in the regime  
where the calculations of end.




Conclusion and discussion 

We have studied the possible cosmological implications of
the Hagedorn regime of open strings on D-branes in the weak coupling limit. 
Our main result is that a gas of open strings can exhibit negative pressure 
leading naturally to a period of power law or exponential inflation.
Hagedorn inflation also has a natural exit 
since any significant cooling can cause a change in the thermodynamics
if winding modes become  quenched or if the density drops 
below the critical density, , needed for the entropy 
of the Hagedorn phase to be dominant. 
To summarize, open strings on branes in the hot early Hagedorn phase
of the universe provide a mechanism to drive a period of
inflation, even in the absence of any potential. 


Acknowledgements 

We thank D. Chung, C. Deffayet, E.
Dudas, K. Olive, G. Servant and C. Savoy for discussions. 
S.A.A. and I.I.K. thank 
J. Barbon and E. Rabinovici for a previous collaboration
and discussions concerning this work.
S.A.A. thanks the C.E.A. Saclay for support during this work.
K.F. acknowledges support from the Department of
Energy through a grant to the University of Michigan.  K.F. thanks
CERN in Geneva, Switzerland and the Max Planck Institut fuer Physik in
Munich, Germany for hospitality during her stay. 
I.I.K. was  supported in part by PPARC rolling grant
PPA/G/O/1998/00567, the EC TMR grant FMRX-CT-96-0090 and  by the INTAS
grant RFBR - 950567. 




 99 

Phys. Reports #1 , #2 (#3) 
Phys. Rev. Lett. #1 , #2 (#3) 
Phys. Rev. D #1 , #2 (#3) 
Phys. Rev. C #1 , #2 (#3) 
Phys. Lett. #1B , #2 (#3) 
Nucl. Phys. B#1 , #2 (#3) 
Astrophys. J. #1 , #2 (#3) 
Astrophys. J. Lett. #1 , #2 (#3) 



A. Guth, 23 347 1981 


S.A. Abel, K. Freese, and I.I Kogan,
JHEP  0101  (2001) 039


R. Hagedorn, Suppl. Nuovo Cimento  3  (1965) 147;
S. Frautschi, 3 2821 1971 ; 
R.D. Carlitz, 5 3231 1972 


K. Huang and S. Weinberg,
25 895 1970 ;
E. Alvarez, 31 418 1985 ; 269 596 1986 ; 
M. Bowick and L.C.R. Wijewardhana, 54 2485 1985 ;
B. Sundborg, 254 883 1985 ;
S.N. Tye, 158 388 1985 ;
P. Salomonson and B. Skagerstam, 268 349 1986 ; Physica 
A158  (1989) 499; 
E. Alvarez and M.A.R. Osorio, 36 1175 1987 ; 
D. Mitchell and N. Turok, 58 1577 1987 ; 294 1138 1987 ;  
I. Antoniadis, J. Ellis and D.V. Nanopoulos, 199 402 1987 ; 
M. Axenides, S.D. Ellis and C. Kounnas, 37 2964; 1988 ; 
I.I. Kogan, JETP. Lett. 45  (1987) 709;
B.Sathiapalan,  35 3277 1987 ;  
J. Attick and E. Witten, 310 291 1988 ;
A.A. Abrikosov Jr. and Ya. I. Kogan
6 1501 1991  (submitted 1989),
Sov. Phys. JETP  69  (1989) 235; 
R. Brandenberger and C. Vafa, 316 391 1989 ;
M.J. Bowick and S.B. Giddings, 325 631 1989 ;
S.B. Giddings, 226 55. 1989 ;
B.A. Campbell, N. Kaloper, K.A. Olive, 
277 265 1992 ;
S.A. Abel, 372 189 1992 ;
N. Kaloper, R. Madden, K.A. Olive, 452 677, 1995 ;
M.L. Meana, M.A.R. Osorio and  J.P. Penalba,  
400 275, 1997 ,  
408 183 1997 .


N. Deo, S. Jain and C.-I. Tan, 220 125 1989 ;
40 2646 1989 ; N. Deo, S. Jain, O. Narayan and C.-I. Tan,
45 3641 1992 


D.A. Lowe and L. Thorlacius, 51 665 1995 , 
S. Lee and L. Thorlacius, 413 303 1997 .


J.L.F. Barbon, I.I. Kogan and E. Rabinovici, 544 1999 104 , 
S.A. Abel, J.L.F. Barbon, I.I. Kogan, and E. Rabinovici,
JHEP 04  (1999) 015


M.L. Meana and J.P. Penalba,

560 154 1999 ; 447 59 1999 ;
M.A. Vazquez-Mozo, 60 106010 1999 ;
B. Sundborg, 9908001 ;
S.A. Abel, J.L.F. Barbon, I.I. Kogan, and E. Rabinovici,
9911004 


For reviews see: J. Polchinski, TASI  lecturs on D-branes, 
9611050 ; "String Theory", vols 1,2 (CUP) 1998.

 P. Kanti, I. I. Kogan, K. A. Olive, M. Pospelov.

 
K. Benakli, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D8  (1999) 153,
A. Lukas, B.A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, 9902071 ;
H.A. Chamblin and H.S. Reall, 562 133 1999 ;
P. Binetruy, C. Deffayet and D. Langlois, Phys.Lett. B544  (2002) 183;


D. Chung and K. Freese, 61 023511 2000 .


R. Brout, F. Englert and E. Gunzig, Ann. Phys. 115  (1978) 78;
Gen. Rel. Grav. 10  (1979) 1; R. Brout, F. Englert and P. Spindel, 
43 417 1979 ; Y. Aharanov and A. Casher, 166 289 1986 ;
Y. Aharonov, F. Englert and J. Orloff, 199 366 1987 


N.Turok, 60 549 1988 


N. Sanchez and G. Veneziano,

Nucl. Phys.  B333  (1990) 253;
M. Gasperini, N. Sanchez and G. Veneziano,

Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A6  (1991) 3853;


Nucl. Phys.  B364  (1991) 365;



A. Riotto,

Phys.Rev. D61  (2000) 123506.








