




  
 

 

 
SPhT-T03/052  

 
Massless N=1 Super Sinh-Gordon:
   Form Factors approach   

 Benedicte Ponsot (ponsot@spht.saclay.cea.fr )   

 Service de Physique Theorique, Commissariat
a l'energie
atomique,

L'Orme des Merisiers,
 F-91191 Gif sur Yvette, France. 




 
The  Super Sinh-Gordon model with spontaneously broken supersymmetry is considered.
Explicit expressions for form-factors of operators  of the Neveu-Schwartz sector
 and operators  of the Ramond sector are proposed.
 
 PACS: 11.25.Hf, 11.55.Ds


Introduction 
The SShG model can be considered as a perturbed super Liouville
field theory, which lagrangian density is given by






with the background charge . This model is a CFT with
central charge



The super Sinh-Gordon model is 1+1 dimensional integrable quantum
field theory with  supersymmetry. We consider the Lagrangian






In this model the supersymmetry is spontaneously broken
: the bosonic field becomes massive, but the Majorana fermion
stays massless and plays the role of Goldstino. In the IR limit, the
 effective theory for the Goldstino is to the lowest order
 the Volkov-Akulov lagrangian 
where supersymmetry is realized non linearly. The irrelevant
operator along which the Super Liouville theory flows into Ising
is the product of stress-energy tensor 
, which is the
lowest dimension non derivative operator allowed by the
symmetries. The dots include higher dimensional irrelevant
operators.

The scattering in the left-left and right-right subchannels is
trivial, but not in the right-left channel. The following
scattering matrices were proposed in




For the right (left) movers the energy momentum is parametrized in
terms of the rapidity variable  () by
 (and
). The mass scale of the theory
 is equal to . The form factors(We
refer the reader to for a discussion on form factors in
massless QFT.) 

are defined to be matrix elements of an operator between the
vacuum and a set of asymptotics states. The form factor bootstrap
approach (developed originally for massive
theories, but that turned out to be also an effective tool for massless theories) leads to a system of
linear functional relations for the matrix elements ; let
us introduce the minimal form factors which have neither poles nor
zeros in the strip  and which are solutions of
the equations 

.

Then the general form factor is parametrized as follows:
 
and the function  depends on the operator considered through the parameter 
(The meaning of  will be clear in the next sections.) .

The  and  scattering formally behave as in the massive
case, so annihilation poles occur
 only  in the  and  subchannel. This leads to the residue formula
 
and a similar expression in the  subchannel.
 It
is important to note that these equations do not  refer to
any specific operator.


Expression for form factors 
 The minimal form factors read explicitly:




and






The latter form factor has asymptotic behaviour when 

 
where 
.
The logarithmic contributions come from resonances.

The residue condition () written in terms of the
function  reads
 
Let us introduce now the functions
 
as well as
 
and
 
We assign odd -parity to both right and left-movers (
  and even
(odd) parity to right (left) movers under duality transformations
(
 In the
Neveu-Schwartz sector (which consists of local operators), the operators  and 
 have non zero matrix elements on
(even,even) number of particles, whereas  and
 on (odd,odd) number of
particles. Let us remind that the Volkov-Akulov
formalism is expressed in terms of a constraint superfield

, satisfying , and for
which a solution is . Hence, from
the fusion rules of the critical Ising model we deduce
that the first set of operators renormalizes on the family of the
identity and the second set on the family of the energy . As
 is the descendant field by
supersymmetry of the primary , its form factors
differ from those of  by a multiplicative factor
that does not affect the bootstrap equations and that has correct
behaviour under Lorentz transformations:


. In the Ramond sector, the non local operators 
 and  renormalize on the
family of the spin field and disorder field respectively.




Neveu-Schwarz sector: operators  
Form factors of the operator . 
Because of symmetry under spin and parity,  has
non vanishing matrix elements for an even number of left and right
movers. We introduce the sets 
and the first form factor(As it is mentionned above, the
bootstrap equations do not refer to any particular operator, so
the dependence with respect to the parameter  is
introduced by hand. We do not have so far any compelling argument
to justify our choice for the  dependence of the lowest
form factor, neither in the Neveu-Schwartz sector nor in the
Ramond sector considered in the next section. They are simply
similar to some other known cases (see e.g. ).) 
.
We propose
 
Such an expression satisfies the residue condition
().



Form factors of the trace of the stress energy
tensor.  The first form factor is determined by using the
Lagrangian: .
 





Let us note that the leading infrared behavior of  is given by
, which defines the direction of the flow in
the IR region. To determine the subleading IR terms that appear
in the expansion (),
one uses the asymptotic developpement for  given by
equation (). For example (up to the logarithmic
terms):
 
The terms into brackets give
 
where  and
. So the next irrelevant
operator appearing is  (up to derivatives).







Form factors of the operator . 
The number of left movers and right movers is odd. The form
factors are written in this case Let
. The lowest form factor is
.
We propose
 






























We suppose that the form factors of the energy operator 
are given by the expression
 


Remark 
One can check that in the limit
, the cluster property is
satisfied(This type of argument has also been used before, see 
e.g. .) :


.





Ramond sector 
Operator . 
It has non vanishing matrix elements when the sum of left movers
and right movers is odd. Let .
The lowest form factors are 

. We
propose:
 

















Operator  ( even). 
As it is explained in, there is an additional minus sign
in front of the product of  matrices in the bootstrap equation
().
 
 even

Let  and the lowest form factor
. We propose :
 







 odd 

Let . The lowest form factor
is
 


. We propose:
 

























Remarks 
 
Let us introduce now the operator 
. Its form factors satisfy the
cluster
 property like an exponential of a bose field
 
The expressions for the form factors of 
and  give the expected leading IR behaviour
: 


,
where  is odd for  and even for 
.


Conclusion 
Finally, we would like to say that the representations proposed
for the functions  are general enough
(Their structure is very similar to the one found for the
operator  in the bosonic Sinh-Gordon model in
, equ. (61).)  to obtain immediately the form factors of the
operators  in the Tricritical Ising
model perturbed by the subenergy that defines a massless flow
 to the Ising model, simply by replacing 
 and  by their
corresponding values. We checked for a low number of
particles that they indeed reproduce the results ofwhere the first form factors of 
 are computed in terms of symmetric polynomials,
as well as with, where an expression for the form
factors of the operator  for an arbitrary number of
intermediate particles is proposed. In principle, it should not be
difficult to extend our results to other massless models flowing
to the Ising model,
 but where the -matrix has a more complicated structure of resonance poles.
Of course it remains to prove if our choice for the  dependence
of the form factors reproduces the correct UV conformal dimension of the operators.

Acknowledgments 
I am grateful to Al.B. Zamolodchikov for suggesting the problem.
Discussions with D. Bernard, V.A. Fateev, G. Mussardo, H. Saleur, F.A. Smirnov are
acknowledged. In particular, I thank G. Delfino for his
comments on the manuscript and useful discussions. Work supported
by the CEA and the Euclid Network HPRN-CT-2002-00325.


 99 
 C. Ahn, C. Kim, C. Rim and Al.B. Zamolodchikov, "RG
flows from Super-Liouville Theory to Critical Ising Model",
Phys. Lett. B541  (2002) 194, hep-th/0206210





 D.V. Volkov and V.P. Akulov, "Is the neutrino a
Goldstone particle?", Phys. Lett. B46  (1973) 109




 M. Karowski and P. Weisz, Nucl. Phys. B139 
(1978) 455

 B. Berg, M. Karowski and P. Weisz,
Phys. Rev. D19  (1979) 2477

 F.A. Smirnov, "Form factors in Completely Integrable
Models of Quantum Field Theory", Adv. Series in Math. Phys.
14 , World Scientific 1992


 G. Delfino, G. Mussardo and P. Simonetti,
"Correlation fonctions along a massless flow",
Phys. Rev. D51  (1995) 6620, hep-th/9410117



 P. Mejean and F.A. Smirnov, "Form-factors for principal chiral field model
with Wess-Zuminov-Novikov-Witten term", Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A12  (1997) 3383, hep-th/9609068



 M. Rocek, "Linearizing the Volkov-Akulov Model", Phys. Rev. Lett. 41  (1978) 451

 A.A. Belavin, A.M. Polyakov and A.B. Zamolodchikov, "Infinite conformal symmetry in 2D
 quantum field theory", Nucl. Phys. B241  (1984) 333


 A. Koubek and G. Mussardo, "On the Operator Content of the Sinh-Gordon Model", Phys. Lett. B311  (1993) 193, hep-th/9306044


 V.P. Yurov and Al.B. Zamolodchikov, "Correlation functions of integrable 2D models of the
 relativistic field theory; Ising model", Int. J. Mod. Phys.
 A6  (1991) 3419






 J.L. Cardy and G. Mussardo, Nucl. Phys. B340  (1990) 387


 H. Babujian and M. Karowski, "Sine-Gordon breather
form factors and quantum field equations", J. Phys. A35  (2002) 9081, hep-th/0204097

 D.A. Kastor, E.J. Martinec and S.H. Shenker, "RG
flow in  Discrete Series", Nucl. Phys. B316  (1989)
590

 A.B.  Zamolodchikov, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 48  (1987), 1090



 Al.B. Zamolodchikov, "From tricritical Ising to
 critical Ising by thermodynamic Bethe ansatz", Nucl. Phys. B358  (1991) 524








