


  




 
 
 
##  
1  #1#2    


  [#1]  
 


#1  
tr  
Tr  


/   



#2 


1    & #1       
#1#2  
#1 () 
  
() 





 

 
hep-th/0304079 

PUPT-2080
 
Proton Decay in Intersecting D-brane Models 

 
Igor R. Klebanov(On leave from Princeton University.) 
and
Edward Witten

 




 
Abstract 


We analyze proton decay via dimension six operators in certain
GUT-like models derived from Type IIA orientifolds with
-branes.  The amplitude is parametrically enhanced by a factor
of  relative to the coresponding result  in
four-dimensional GUT's. Nonetheless, even assuming a plausible
enhancement from the threshold corrections, we find little overall
enhancement of the proton decay rate from dimension six operators,
so that the predicted lifetime from this mechanism remains close
to  years.

 
April, 2003
  


 

Introduction 

Grand Unified Theories in four dimensions have had impressive
successes, in accounting for the quantum numbers of fermions
, in predicting - with the aid of supersymmetry - a
value of  that is in excellent agreement with
experiment, and in pointing twenty years in advance of
decisive measurements to the right order of magnitude of neutrino
masses. GUT theories also make the exciting
prediction that the proton may decay with a lifetime close to
present experimental bounds.

With supersymmetry, even if one assumes an -parity symmetry to
avoid catastrophic proton decay at low energies, there actually
are two different GUT-based mechanisms for proton decay.  The
proton may decay due to dimension five operators of the form 
, where  and  are quark and lepton
superfields.  Or it may decay by dimension six operators of the
form  coming from gauge
boson exchange; this effect is similar to proton decay in GUT's
without supersymmetry, but is significantly slower because
supersymmetry raises the GUT scale. In the simplest models, proton
decay by dimension five operators dominates, and in fact present
experimental bounds make life difficult for these models
 (see, however,). This suggests the possibility
that some mechanism suppresses the dimension five operators and
that gauge boson exchange may after all  be the dominant
mechanism.  Various methods to suppress the dimension five
operators while preserving the successes of GUT's are known,
though they tend to be somewhat technical.  For example, one
construction based on discrete symmetries is fairly
natural in the class of models that we will consider in this
paper.

Most GUT-like string-based models of particle physics do not
precisely lead to four-dimensional GUT's, since unification takes
place only in higher dimensions (for an early review, see
, chapters 15 and 16), leading among other things to
possibilities for GUT symmetry breaking by discrete Wilson lines
  and to a higher-dimensional mechanism for
doublet-triplet splitting.  Generally, models
such as the heterotic string on a Calabi-Yau manifold lead to
qualitatively similar issues concerning proton decay to those in
GUT's, though the details are somewhat different.  One important
reason that the details are different is that because of the
higher-dimensional structure, there is generally in these models
no precise answer to the question, "Which color triplet gauge
boson is the  partner of the standard model gauge bosons?"
There is a lightest color triplet gauge boson, whose wave-function
in the compact dimensions depends on the details of the model, and
its exchange may, depending on the model, give the right order of
magnitude though not the correct numerical value of the dimension
six part of the proton decay amplitude.

Recently, these issues were reconsidered in another
class of models - -theory on a  manifold.  (Actually, in
many cases these models give dual descriptions, useful in a
different region of the parameter space, of the same models that
can be studied via the heterotic string on a Calabi-Yau manifold.)
The GUT threshold correction to proton decay was computed in this
class of models and was seen to give a potential enhancement of
the proton decay rate.  It was also shown that in this type of
model, because of the way quarks and leptons are localized,
exchange of the lightest color triplet gauge boson does not
dominate the proton decay amplitude.  On the contrary, a field
theoretic attempt to compute a proton decay amplitude by summing
over Kaluza-Klein harmonics runs into an ultraviolet divergence,
and consequently the correct answer depends on the cutoff provided
by -theory. Formally, this UV divergence enhances the proton
decay amplitude by a factor of  compared to
what it would be in a four-dimensional model. (This factor must be
combined with the threshold factor, of course.) The coefficient of
 is universal and independent of the details
of the model (such as how the GUT symmetry is broken) - in fact,
the dominant four-fermi operator is local and invariant under the
full GUT symmetry, in contrast to the usual situation in
four-dimensional GUT's.  However, present knowledge of -theory
does not make it possible to compute the numerical coefficient of
this operator.

As an alternative, we will in the present paper consider another
dual class of models in which the calculation can be done. These
models fall in the general class of intersecting brane worlds
 
- Type IIA superstrings with gauge bosons
supported on -branes and chiral matter multiplets at
intersections of the -branes. Many supersymmetric
GUT-like models have been constructed along these lines
, 
though so far none with the mechanism of symmetry
breaking by Wilson lines on the -brane that we will assume in
the present paper to justify borrowing various above-cited
results.(
In the dual context of M-theory on  manifolds,
some examples of
symmetry breaking by Wilson lines were considered 
in.)  
(In actual model-building, one typically considers branes
in an orbifold of a six-torus, but more generally one may start
with any Calabi-Yau manifold: see, for example,.) Threshold corrections in intersecting
D6-brane GUT-like models were calculated in. 
These models are dual to -theory
on a manifold of  holonomy as , the Type IIA string
coupling constant, becomes large.  The chiral matter fields are
localized (at brane intersections) in a similar way to what
happens in -theory on a  manifold, and accordingly we will
find the same anomalous factor of  in the
proton decay amplitude. The difference is that in perturbative
Type IIA string theory, everything is explicitly calculable, and
hence we will be able, at least for , to be precise
about the numerical factors. Regrettably, the numerical factors
accompanying  are such that even assuming a
plausible enhancement from the threshold factors, the proton decay
rate is comparable to or only slightly greater than that in
standard SUSY-GUT's.
  Of course, the precise factors that appear in the corresponding
-theory (or large ) limit are still unknown.

In this paper we will not be concerned with any specific model,
but will rather try to incorporate universal features of the
GUT-like intersecting D-brane models relevant to calculation of
the proton decay rate. Typically one needs a stack of D6-branes
intersecting an orientifold fixed sixplane along  dimensions.
On the covering space we then have a stack of D6-branes
intersecting an image set of D-branes. If there are 5
D6-branes in the stack, then on the covering space we find gauge
group , with open strings localized at the
intersection transforming in the bifundamental representations
.
After the orientifold projection we find  gauge theory with
matter in . Our goal is to
calculate the 4-fermion contact term whose  structure is
. Such an interaction
mediates proton decay processes such as  (and,
depending on the assumed flavor structure, other modes with
 replaced by  and/or  by ). The
calculation is conveniently carried out on the covering space
where we need the 4-point function for two 
 states and two 
states. The calculation is  sensitive to the local structure of
the intersection, and is  insensitive to how the D6-branes are
wrapped around the compact space, as long as its size is somewhat
greater than the string scale so that worldsheet instantons are
suppressed.

Four-dimensional GUT's also have dimension six operators 
 which lead
to proton decay modes such as  and
; as observed in in the analogous
-theory case, such interactions do not arise generically in a
model of this type.  To get such an interaction, we need two
stacks of branes that are not mirror images to meet on an
orientifold plane; in general, this would be a coincidence. Both
four-dimensional GUT's and the brane worlds have additional 
 interactions (which in the brane worlds arise
from brane intersections away from the orientifold planes), but
these do not violate baryon number.




Vertex Operators 

Without a loss of generality we may assume that
the D6-branes are oriented in the  directions.
The D-branes intersect them along the  directions
that will have the interpretation of a  dimensional
'intersecting brane world.' To specify its orientation in the six
transverse directions, we define the complex coordinates
 
In order to preserve  supersymmetry in 
dimensions, the rotation must act as an  matrix on the
three complex coordinates. Choosing the matrix to be
diagonal, we see that the rotation that turns the D6-branes into
the D-brane acts as
 
where
 


We need to construct the vertex operators for the 
and  open
strings. Such operators, when inserted on the boundary of the
disk, create discontinuities in the boundary conditions for the
transverse coordinates and their fermionic partners. A standard
method for studying correlators on the upper half-plane is the
doubling trick where the half-plane is replaced by the entire
plane, but with only the holomorphic part of the field on it (for a review, see). If
we consider complex fields  corresponding to the transverse
coordinates , then their Laurent expansion around the
insertion of the vertex operator has mode numbers shifted by
. This is analogous to what happens near a
twist field introduced in orbifold theories and we can use similar
methods for calculating the correlation functions.

Consider a bosonic twist field  which creates a
discontinuity in a complex coordinate .
Then we have the OPE 
The dimension of  is ,
and we will assume that  lies between  and .
Now consider the complex fermion , which is a
worldsheet superpartner of . By worldsheet supersymmetry,
its mode numbers are also shifted by .
In the Ramond sector,  must be accompanied by the
fermionic twist  such that
 
If we bosonize  into a real scalar ,
whose Green's function is
 
 then
 
This means that the dimension of  is
 
Therefore,
 
independent of the rotation angle .

The complete vertex operator that creates a massless  string in
the R sector is
 
where  is the bosonized ghost field.
If we bosonize the fermions , , into scalars
 and , then the  dimensional spinor

, where 
. The GSO projection for  strings requires that 
, which restricts us to a spinor of definite chirality.
 is a Chan-Paton factor with an index  in the
fundamental of the first , and an index  in the
antifundamental of the second . Since 
 and , we see that the requirement that
the dimension of  is  gives the 4-d massless dispersion
relation .

The vertex operator 
for  strings is constructed similarly,
except we need to replace the  and  twists by
 and . The latter are defined by
sending  in the OPE.
The GSO projection now requires that ;
this corresponds
to 4-d spinor chirality opposite to that of the  string.
Thus, we have the vertex operator
 


The 4-fermion Amplitude in String Theory 

Our goal is to calculate the 4-fermion amplitude



 
The crucial ingredient in this calculation is the knowledge of the
correlator of the bosonic twist fields . In the orbifold
theories, these were calculated in. We will
take the square root of their result to account for the fact that
we have the boundary twist fields rather than the bulk ones. (This
intuitively plausible result has been derived in
 and, up to normalization, in; see also for a treatment of cases
where the intersecting D-branes have different dimensionalities.)
This gives
 
where
 
is the hypergeometric function and  represents a numerical
constant.


On the other hand, the correlator of the fermionic twists is simply
 
while the ghost factor contributes
 
The correlator of the 4-d spin fields , where
 are the spinor polarizations, gives
an -independent factor
.
This -independence is evident from the form of the bosonized
correlator
 

Putting together all the parts of the vertex operators, defining
as usual
 
and including both - and -channel diagrams, we find the
amplitude
 
where  is a normalization that we will fix
later, while
the 's and 's are Chan-Paton
matrices of  and  strings.


In four dimensions, with
 having one chirality and  the other, we have

. This insures the antisymmetry of the amplitude under
permutation of particles  and  (or of particles  and ).

We note that the hypergeometric functions are crucial for
the convergence of the integral at the endpoints of the
integration region for vanishing momenta .
As ,
 
where
 

Therefore, even with , we find a convergent integral.
Its behavior near  is
 
The physical reason for the absence of an IR divergence at
vanishing momentum is the following. Even though there is a
massless intermediate state from the untwisted sector, the special
kinematics of this problem gives no IR divergence. For example, if
the -channel intermediate state is a massless  string,
which is a gauge boson, then it can carry arbitrary momentum 
along the directions of the -brane orthogonal to the intersection.
These three components of momentum have to be integrated over:
 
which converges near  even for . Thus, going from
the effective field theory to the form of the string integrand near ,
we find the replacement
 

This observation also allows us to normalize the 4-fermion
amplitude. If we consider the -channel factorization on the
 gauge boson, which is the leading term as , then
we should find
 
where the 3-point function for emission of a gauge boson of
Chan-Paton indices  is
 
The index  corresponds to the polarization of the
intermediate vector state. Since the gauge coupling on D6-branes
is given (according to, eqn. 13.3.25) by 
, we have
 

Performing the integral on the RHS of () with
the replacement (), we find
 
Equating this to the contribution to , given in eqn.
(), from the -channel  massless intermediate state,
 
we find that
 



The low-energy limit of the 4-fermion amplitude is hence,




 
where
 




This has been derived for intersections of two stacks of branes
without any orientifolding.  Thus, in an intersection of a stack
of  -branes with a stack of  -branes, we would have
a  gauge theory with the fermions supported at
the intersection points transforming as bifundamentals, and the
above four-fermi interactions.  To get an  theory with
fields transforming in the , we should consider the case
that  and the two stacks are exchanged by an orientifolding
operation  and intersect on the orientifold
plane ( is the worldsheet parity;  acts by
complex conjugating all three
complex coordinates: ,
). Moreover, we
pick an orientifolding operation  that projects onto fermions
whose wavefunctions  and  transform
as antisymmetric, rather than symmetric, tensors of . Tree
level amplitudes in the orientifold theory are obtained by
computing tree level amplitudes on the covering space for states
that are invariant under the orientifolding projection, and then
dividing by 2.  The  interaction in
an orientifold theory is thus derived from
 

Evaluation Of  

Now let us discuss the numerical evaluation of the integral .
After writing
 
noting that the
two terms contribute equally, and setting  to evaluate
the contribution of the first term, we can write  as
 
Let us try to evaluate the integral on the RHS numerically for the
most symmetric choice of rotation angles:
. It turns out that for
sufficiently large , it is hard to maintain numerical precision
in evaluating the hypergeometric functions. To deal with this
problem, we will break up the integral into the range from  to
 and from  to . In the first region we use
Mathematica to evaluate it numerically, while in the second we may
use the asymptotics () to replace the integral by
 
where we used . In practice, the sum of
the two is insensitive to  in a certain range; we have checked
this for  between 15 and 25. We find
 
It is interesting that a large number  emerges from an
explicit string calculation.

Now cosider a generalization to  and
.
For the purpose of numerical evaluation, we approximate
 by
 






















It is interesting to ask how  behaves when one of the rotation
angles becomes small. This can be determined from ()
by letting  approach  from above, so that
 corresponds to rotation by close to . It turns out that  decreases
rather slowly from its maximum value at . For example,
 and 
. Even when all three rotation angles become
effectively small,  does
not fall off very rapidly. Using (), we find
; ;
. We conclude that for a broad
range of angles the quantity  lies in the range .

Comparison To Four-Dimensional GUT's 

According to, eqns. (12.1.10b) and (13.3.24), the
gravitational action for Type IIA superstrings is
 
The string coupling constant is . After reduction to
four dimensions on a six-manifold   of volume , the
gravitational action in four dimensions is
 
As the coefficient of  in four-dimensional General Relativity
is
conventionally , with  Newton's constant, we
have
 

The gauge coupling  of gauge fields on a -brane is
defined by saying that the effective action for the gauge fields
is
 
where  is the Yang-Mills field strength and  is the
trace in the fundamental representation of . If we take the
-brane worldvolume to be , where  is a
compact three-manifold of volume , then the action in four
dimensions becomes
 
However, before comparing to four-dimensional GUT's, we must
recall that it is conventional to expand the gauge fields as
, where .
Similarly, one conventionally expands .
If this is done, the action becomes
 
The GUT action is conventionally written
 
where  is the GUT coupling.  Hence, we have
.  Since
 according to eqn. (13.3.25)
of, we have
 

The volume  enters in the running of 
 standard model gauge couplings from very high energies down
to the energies of accelerators.  Roughly speaking, 
plays the role of , the mass scale of unification, in a
four-dimensional  theory.  To find the precise relation
between them, one must compute the one-loop threshold corrections
to gauge couplings.  This was done in for -theory on
a manifold of  holonomy.  The one-loop threshold corrections
are the same in Type IIA as in -theory, since they come from
Kaluza-Klein harmonics on  that are the same in the two
theories.  So we can borrow the result of. According to
that result (see eqn. (3.30) of), the precise relation
between  understood as the mass at which the low energy
coupling constants appear to unify and  is
 
 where  is a certain  topological
invariant of  (together with Wilson lines on  that break the
GUT symmetry to the standard model) that is known as the
Reidemeister or Ray-Singer torsion.   depends on a model,
but is readily computable in a given model.  For example, in a
model considered in in which  is a lens space 
 for some positive integer  (which must be prime
to 5 if we want an  model), and the Wilson line on  has
eigenvalues  with
 for some integer  prime to ,
one has
 
For a slightly more general lens space, also described in
, whose definition depends on another integer , this
is replaced by . The
factor  can be important in determining the proton lifetime,
as will become clear.  For example, for the minimal choice that
leads to the standard model gauge symmetry, which is , ,
we have , and the threshold correction will prove to
enhance the proton decay rate significantly. It is possible for
lens spaces to make , but only if  is extremely large.

Using  (), we can express () in the form
 
where as usual .  Alternatively,
 



Ideally, we would like to compute all of the parameters in the
string compactification in terms of the quantities
, , and , about which we
have at least some experimental knowledge. The Planck mass is
well-known ( GeV), but 
and  are somewhat model-dependent. The most commonly
cited values based on extrapolation from low energy data are
 GeV, .
Unfortunately, the string theory really depends on four unknowns
, , , and .

To parametrize our ignorance, we may introduce the dimensionless
quantity
 
which is of order one if  is fairly isotropic, and solve for
the other stringy parameters in terms of , ,
, and . For , this has already been
done in ().  Dividing () by
(), we get
 
We can similarly solve for ,
 

The factor about which we have the least
intuition is , which comes from a ratio of volumes.  To
try to get some intuition about the possible values of ,
and also about whether the model makes sense, let us examine
quantitatively the formula () for :
 
Our calculation does not make much sense if , since then
we should do the computation in -theory (leading back to the
discussion in section 5 of) rather than in Type IIA
superstring theory.  If , our computation makes sense,
but it is implausible for the vacuum to be stabilized after
supersymmetry breaking in a way that would enable the world as we
see it to exist.  So the discussion makes most sense if  is
relatively close to 1.  We note that happily () is
compatible with having  near 1 while the GUT parameters
have their usual values, , and  is not too far
from 1.

In view of the preceding discussion,
it is perhaps more useful to use () to solve
for , parametrizing our ignorance via the unknown value
of , which we expect to be near 1:
 
Now () becomes
 
Finally, the amplitude for proton decay is, from
(),
  where  is the integral discussed in the last
section. It is interesting to compare this result with the
M-theory estimate of:
 
We find the same scaling with , 
and  as in M-theory. If we keep these parameters and
the rotation angles
 fixed, then we may study the amplitude as a function of .
String theory indicates that this function behaves as
 for small ; M-theory tells us that it approaches a constant
for large .
Strictly speaking, () is
reliable for small , but we will take it as a rough
approximation for  of order .

Analogous Field Theory Amplitude 

Let us compare this to the analogous four-fermion amplitude in
four-dimensional GUT's. For simplicity, we will assume that (as in
 models) all superheavy gauge bosons have the same mass
.   is comparable to the unification scale 
inferred from the running of the low energy gauge couplings, but
differs from it, in general, by model-dependent factors. Exchange
of superheavy gauge bosons of mass  gives an amplitude
 
where we have labeled initial and final fermion states as
, and .  The sum runs over the superheavy gauge
bosons, but since the standard model gauge bosons contribute
baryon-number conserving interactions anyway and taking the sum
over all generators of the gauge group will lead to a simpler
formula, we will  do this.  (Standard model gauge boson masses are
near zero, not near , so () is not a good
approximation to their contribution.)  Note that, ignoring
worldsheet instantons, the string theory four-fermion amplitude is
-invariant, since it comes from a local contribution that
does not see the symmetry breaking by Wilson lines, while the
four-fermion operator in GUT's is of course not -invariant.

We first consider the case that the fermions transform as 
's of , though the resulting 
 amplitude is actually baryon number conserving.  To
get baryon nonconservation, we need to incorporate 
's as well, as we will do presently.  Also, to get a better
match to the local string theory construction with Chan-Paton
factors, we take the gauge group to be  instead of ;
the extra  gauge field does not violate baryon number
anyway.  (In string theory, the local construction at a particular
brane intersection point has  gauge symmetry, but globally
in realistic models the extra  is Higgsed by absorbing an RR
mode.)

Let us work out the group theory part of the matrix element in
eqn. ().  For this, we introduce  column and row
vectors  and  for states transforming in
the  or ; the group theory factor of the
current-current matrix element becomes
 
 where the
 are traceless  matrices that generate .  As
we noted earlier, the  are conventionally normalized so that
. It is straightforward to show
that
 
The  interaction in GUT's is hence
  where we sum over
the two channels in which the gauge boson can be exchanged.

Now we move on to the  interaction.
In order to make clear the origin of a certain factor of 2, we
will introduce the  by a field theory version of the
orientifold that we used in string theory. The gauge group is
, with gauge fields ,  and the fermions
consist of fields  transforming as 
 plus a field  transforming as 
. The Lagrangian is invariant under an
"orientifolding"  symmetry  that exchanges  with
, where  is the transpose (or equivalently, as
 is hermitian, the complex conjugate) of , breaking
 to a diagonal .  exchanges 
and , leaving a  of the unbroken , and we
take it to act on  with a suitable sign such that the invariant
modes in  transform as the  of the diagonal ,
corresponding to an antisymmetric  matrix .

The kinetic energy is taken to be a general -invariant
expression:
 
where sums over all indices of  , and  are
understood. Let us work out the  interaction prior
to orientifolding.  It comes from exchanges of  gauge bosons in
the two  groups. In working out the contribution from
exchange of a gauge boson in either   factor, the
indices of  that  transform under the other  are
spectators. The amplitude due to exchange of either  is thus
just like (), except that when we include the
spectator index, the wavefunctions all are  matrices
 and  rather than row and column
vectors, and the pairing of row and column vectors is replaced by
a trace.  The amplitude due to exchange of either  is hence
 
The total amplitude due to exchange of a gauge boson in one or the
other  is hence
 

Orientifolding is carried out by restricting to -invariant
states and dividing the action by 2.  As a result, we can drop
 and , but we must divide the  kinetic energy by 2.
The resulting kinetic energy is then
 
The  kinetic energy has been divided by , but is still
canonically normalized in the following sense.   is an
antisymmetric matrix, so for example has a  block
looking like
 
The kinetic energy is canonically normalized for fields like 
appearing above the diagonal in .

As for the  interaction in the
orientifold theory, we can borrow it from ().  We
merely have to take the wavefunctions  and 
 to be invariant under , which means that they
are  antisymmetric matrices.  Also, we have to divide
by 2, just as we divided the -invariant part of the
classical action by 2 to get ().  So the 
 interaction is finally
 

Of course, we could have derived this directly starting with the
kinetic energy ().


Comparison 




 To compare string theory to
four-dimensional gauge theory, we therefore need merely compare
the string theory amplitude  from
() to the field theory amplitude
 from ().
The comparison is thus
 
We call the left hand side the string amplitude , and the
right hand side the corresponding GUT amplitude .  Using
(), we find the ratio to be

 
For other parameters fixed, this ratio scales as
, which is the same as in the M-theory
calculation of. The negative power of 
reflects the fact that in this type of model, proton decay is a
stringy effect, rather than being dominated by exchange of a
single Kaluza-Klein mode.  Exploring a possible enhancement due to
this factor was the motivation for the present paper, but the
factor of  in the denominator is clearly unfavorable. We
can rewrite () as
 
Happily, , of which we can only say that we expect it to be
more or less close to 1, is here raised to a relatively small
power, helping to reduce the uncertainty.


Using the most commonly cited values 
 GeV, , a recent evaluation of
 the proton lifetime in
four-dimensional SUSY  due to gauge boson exchange gave the
value  years if  (we
have taken eqn. (17) of this paper with 
GeV). If  or  is changed, the proton lifetime
scales as:
 
 Using modified
values of  and  is natural in the present
discussion if doublet-triplet splitting is accomplished with
discrete symmetries as in, since this necessitates
extra matter fields (in complete  multiplets) surviving to
energies below the GUT scale. For example, in, in
models with such additional multiplets, it was found plausible to
have values such as , 
GeV. The net effect of these changes is to roughly double the
proton lifetime.

To obtain the proton lifetime  in this class of
string theories from (), we multiply by
  and replace the prefactor 1.6 by 2 for a
reason explained below. Thus:
 

A proton lifetime of order  years due to gauge boson
exchange is considered unobservably small for the foreseeable
future; the present experimental bound on  is about
 years (for example, see), while
a next generation detector (described for example in)
may reach a limit close to  years.  However, it is clear
that a relatively modest enhancement in the proton decay amplitude
might save the day.  Looking at (), we see a few
large and small factors that tend to cancel. This formula contains
the small overall factor , along with the factor , which
we have found to be roughly  for plausible values of the
angles, and the threshold factor , where  need
not be large but is in fact equal to 8 for the minimal lens space
with fundamental group , and a little larger for many
of the lens spaces with other small fundamental groups.  Combining
these factors,  the best we can say is that in a model based on
intersecting -branes, rather as in four-dimensional GUT's, the
proton lifetime due to dimension six operators is likely to be
close to  years.

Note that one major source of uncertainty in GUT's is absent here:
the proton lifetime directly involves the scale  that can
be probed using low energy data, rather than the heavy gauge boson
mass  whose relation to  is model-dependent.

What we have evaluated in this paper is a local, stringy
contribution to proton decay in a certain class of models based on
intersecting Type II -branes. If the compactification volume
is even slightly larger than the string scale, so that worldsheet
instanton effects are at least slightly suppressed, what we have
computed is likely to be the dominant contribution (from dimension
six operators) in this class of models. The result we have
obtained has an anomalous power of  because it is a
short distance stringy effect. As in, this contribution
yields only a  interaction,
which contributes to .  In four-dimensional GUT's,
there is also a 
 contribution, leading to . With the
assumptions made in, the ratio of 
to the total is , where 
is a CKM matrix element. Hence in comparing the stringy proton
decay rate to that in field theory, we should include a factor of
 in the proton lifetime in the string model to account
for the missing .  We included this factor in
taking the prefactor in () to be 2.

The last paragraph has been formulated loosely; with different
assumptions about the flavor structure at the GUT scale, the
 could be a  and the  could be a  (in
which case the lepton polarization in the final state would be
measurable). In either the GUT theory or the string model, the
proton lifetime could be increased further by unfavorable
assumptions about flavor structure (mixing with the third
generation, for instance, or mixing with new GUT-scale fermions).
At any rate, the assertion of this class of models that proton
decay is caused mainly by 
interactions is testable in principle.


Acknowledgments 

We thank M. Cvetic and S. Raby for useful discussions.
I.R.K. gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the
George P.  Cynthia W. Mitchell Institute for Fundamental
Physics at Texas A M University, where some of this work was
carried out.
This material is based upon
work supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grants
No. PHY-9802484 and PHY-0070928. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation.


thebibliography 10 

H. Georgi and S. Glashow, "Unity Of Elementary Particle Forces,"
Phys. Rev. Lett. 32  (1974) 438.


S. Dimopouos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, "Supersymmetry And The
Scale Of Unification," Phys. Rev. D24  (1981) 1681.


M. Gell-Mann, P. Ramond, and R. Slansky, in Supergravity ,
eds. P. van Nieuwenhuysen et. al., 315 (North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1979); T. Yanagida, in Proc. Workshop on Unified Theory And
Baryon Number In The Universe  (eds. O. Sawada and A. Sugamoto) 95
(KEK, Tsukuba, 1979).

H. Murayama and A. Pierce, "Not Even Decoupling Can Save Minimal
Supersymmetric ," hep-ph/0108104.

J. Hisano, "Proton Decay In The Supersymmetric Grand Unified
Models," hep-ph/0004266.



S. Raby, "Proton Decay," hep-ph/0211024; H. Dermisek, A. Mafi,
and S. Raby: "SUSY GUT's Under Siege: Proton Decay,"
hep-th/0007213.

B. Bajc, P. F. Perez and G. Senjanovic,
"Proton decay in minimal supersymmetric SU(5),"
Phys. Rev. D 66 , 075005 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0204311];

"Minimal supersymmetric SU(5) theory and proton decay: Where do we  stand?,"
arXiv:hep-ph/0210374.


E. Witten, "Deconstruction,  Holonomy, and Doublet-Triplet
Splitting," hep-ph/0201018.

M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz, and E. Witten, Superstring
Theory  (Cambridge University Press, 1987).

P. Candelas, G. Horowitz, A. Strominger, and E. Witten, "Vacuum
Configurations For Superstrings," Nucl. Phys. B258  (1985)
46.

E. Witten, "Symmetry Breaking Patterns In Superstring Models,"
Nucl. Phys. B258  (1985) 75.

T. Friedmann and E. Witten, "Unification Scale, Proton Decay, And
Manifolds Of  Holonomy," hep-th/0211269.

M. Berkooz, M. R. Douglas and R. G. Leigh,
"Branes intersecting at angles,"
Nucl. Phys. B 480 , 265 (1996)
[arXiv:hep-th/9606139].


R. Blumenhagen, L. Goerlich, B. Kors and D. Lust,
"Noncommutative compactifications of type I strings on tori with  magnetic background flux,"
JHEP 0010 , 006 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0007024].


C. Angelantonj, I. Antoniadis, E. Dudas and A. Sagnotti,

Phys. Lett. B 489 , 223 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-th/0007090].


G. Aldazabal, S. Franco, L. E. Ibanez, R. Rabadan and A. M. Uranga,
"D = 4 chiral string compactifications from intersecting branes,"
J. Math. Phys.  42 , 3103 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0011073];

"Intersecting brane worlds,"
JHEP 0102 , 047 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0011132].


R. Blumenhagen, B. Kors and D. Lust,
"Type I strings with F- and B-flux,"
JHEP 0102 , 030 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012156].


R. Blumenhagen, B. Kors, D. Lust and T. Ott,
"The standard model from stable intersecting brane world orbifolds,"
Nucl. Phys. B 616 , 3 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0107138].


C. Kokorelis,
"GUT model hierarchies from intersecting branes,"
JHEP 0208 , 018 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203187];

"Deformed intersecting D6-brane GUTs. I,"
JHEP 0211 , 027 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0209202];

"Deformed intersecting D6-brane GUTs. II,"
arXiv:hep-th/0210200.


M. Cvetic, G. Shiu and A. M. Uranga,
"Chiral four-dimensional N = 1 supersymmetric type IIA orientifolds from  intersecting D6-branes,"
Nucl. Phys. B 615 , 3 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0107166].


R. Blumenhagen, L. Gorlich and T. Ott,
"Supersymmetric intersecting branes on the type IIA T**6/Z(4)  orientifold,"
JHEP 0301 , 021 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211059].


M. Cvetic, I. Papadimitriou and G. Shiu,
"Supersymmetric three family SU(5) grand unified models from type IIA  orientifolds with intersecting D6-branes,"
arXiv:hep-th/0212177.


T. Friedmann,
"On the quantum moduli space of M theory compactifications,"
Nucl. Phys. B 635 , 384 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203256].


R. Blumenhagen, V. Braun, B. Kors and D. Lust,
"Orientifolds of K3 and Calabi-Yau manifolds with intersecting D-branes,"
JHEP 0207 , 026 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0206038].


D. Lust and S. Stieberger,
"Gauge threshold corrections in intersecting brane world models,"
arXiv:hep-th/0302221.


A. Hashimoto,
"Dynamics of Dirichlet-Neumann open strings on D-branes,"
Nucl. Phys. B 496 , 243 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9608127].


A. Hashimoto and I. R. Klebanov,
"Scattering of strings from D-branes,"
Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  55B , 118 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9611214].



L. J. Dixon, D. Friedan, E. J. Martinec and S. H. Shenker,
"The Conformal Field Theory Of Orbifolds,"
Nucl. Phys. B 282 , 13 (1987).


S. Hamidi and C. Vafa,
"Interactions On Orbifolds,"
Nucl. Phys. B 279 , 465 (1987).


M. Bershadsky and A. Radul,
"Conformal Field Theories With Additional Z(N) Symmetry,"
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 2 , 165 (1987).


M. Cvetic and I. Papadimitriou,
"Conformal field theory couplings for intersecting D-branes on  orientifolds,"
arXiv:hep-th/0303083.


S. A. Abel and A. W. Owen,
"Interactions in Intersecting Brane Models,"
arXiv:hep-th/0303124.


E. Gava, K. S. Narain and M. H. Sarmadi,
"On the bound states of p- and (p+2)-branes,"
Nucl. Phys. B 504 , 214 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9704006].


I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli and A. Laugier,
"Contact interactions in D-brane models,"
JHEP 0105 , 044 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0011281].


J. Polchinski,
"String Theory. Vol. 2: Superstring Theory And Beyond,"
Cambridge University Press, 1998.




K. S. Babu and J. Pati, "The Problems Of Unification-Mismatch And
Low : A Solution With Light Vector-Like Matter,"
hep-ph/9606215.

K. S. Ganezer, "The Search For Nucleon Decay At
Super-Kamiokande," Int. J. Mod. Phys. A16  (2001) 855.

C. K. Jung, "Feasibility Of A Next Generation Underground Water
Cerenkov Detector: UNO," hep-ex/0005046.







