
A. S. de Castro and A. de Souza Dutra
E-mail: dutra@feg.unesp.br  


UNESP-Campus de Guaratingueta-DFQ

Av. Dr. Ariberto Pereira da Cunha, 333

C.P. 205

12516-410 Guaratingueta  SP Brasil 
Classes of exact wavefunctions for general time-dependent Dirac
Hamiltonians in 1+1 dimensions  
 
In this work we construct two classes of exact solutions for the most
general time-dependent Dirac Hamiltonian in 1+1 dimensions. Some problems
regarding to some formal solutions in the literature are discussed. Finally
the existence of a generalized Lewis-Riesenfeld invariant connected with
such solutions is discussed.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Ge, 03.65.Pm

The interest in solving problems involving time-dependent systems has
attracted the attention of physicists since a long time. This happens due to
its applicability for the understanding of many problems in quantum optics,
quantum chemistry and others areas of physics-. In
particular we can cite the case of the electromagnetic field intensities in
a Fabry-Pe rot cavity. In fact this kind of problem still
represents a line of investigation which attracts the interest of physicists 
. However, as has been observed recently by Landim and
Guedes, the most part of these works deal with nonrelativistic
systems. So they tried to bridge this gap, by studying the problem of a
fermion under the presence of a time-dependent Lorentz vector linear
potential in two-dimensional space-time. For this they used the so called
Lewis-Riesenfeld invariant operator, in order to guess the wavefunction
which solves the problem. Unfortunately, they just presented a formal
solution for the problem under question. In fact, if one consider that in
the most part of the works treating the non-relativistic time-dependent
systems, the solution is not formal only for a limited number of
time-dependence for the potential parameters, it is a little bit strange
that in there is no limitation over those parameters. In view
of these comments, as a first example, we are going to complete the program
initiated by Landim and Guedes, by solving the problem up to the end,
showing that there exists really some restrictions for a complete solution
of this problem. After that, we will show that there exists at least two
classes of solutions for the time-dependent Dirac equation in 1+1
dimensions. This is done considering the most general combination of Lorentz
structures for the potential matrix. Then we show that the problem studied
in is only a particular case of one of those classes. Finally
we construct the Lewis-Riesenfeld invariant operators which have our
solutions as eigenfunctions.

Let us begin by presenting the Dirac equation in 1+1 dimensions, in the
presence of a time-dependent potential for a fermion of rest mass , 
 

where we used  and  is the momentum operator. 
 and  are Hermitian square matrices satisfying the relations 
. Here we choose 
and , where  and 
 are the  standard Pauli matrices. In this way 
is a two-component spinor. Furthermore the subscripts for the terms of
potential denote their properties under a Lorentz transformation:  for
the time component of the two-vector potential,  and  for the scalar
and pseudoscalar terms, respectively. The absence of the space component of
the two-vector potential is due to the possibility of its elimination
through a gauge-like transformation.

In the particular case considered by Landim and Guedes, one
has 
 

As suggested by them, we will use as an Ansatz for the solution
the following spinor 
 

so that the corresponding coupled equations are

 

where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to .
Imposing that 
 we eliminate the spatial dependence of the above equations so
obtaining

 

Now we simplify even more the above equations if we perform the
following identifications 
 

getting 
 

where  and 
. By deriving the each one of the above equations
it is easy to conclude that one gets the following second-order equations 
 

At this point it is convenient to rescale the  functions as 
, one gets finally that 
 

Note that in general these last equations are not somewhat straightforward
to solve as asserted in. However we note that for a time
exponentially decaying force, these equations takes the form a Schroedinger
equation for the Morse potential in the time variable, without the usual
boundary conditions of such kind of equation.

>From now on we will present an extension of the class of time-dependent
relativistic systems with exact solutions. For this purpose we begin with
the complete Hamiltonian (), and make the more general Ansatz 
 

Thus we obtain

 

where the prime denotes differentiation with respect to 
. As by construction  do not depend on , one sees that it is
mandatory to get rid of such a dependence in the above equations. As a
consequence two classes of solution emerge, corresponding to 
or .

Let us analyze the class where . In this case the exponential
factor appearing in the equations disappears and, consequently the only way
of getting the off-diagonal terms independent of , is by imposing that 
 

On the other hand, the effect of this condition over the diagonal
terms results that 
 

Note that this class allows the treatment of systems that are at
most linear in the spatial coordinate, and includes the system proposed by
Landim and Guedes as a particular case. The general equations to be solved
in this class is now given by

 

with  and 
. The above equations can now be decoupled
giving

 

where we made the same definition as above for the 
functions and now  and 
. It is easy to verify that the
above equations recall that appearing in () in their particular case.
Once again it is in general not solvable, showing that we have got a formal
solution, so that if one want to solve the problem until the end, one must
to look for particular cases where these equations have explicit solutions.

>From now on we analyze the class where . In this new
class, the exponential factor appearing in the equations holds and,
consequently the only way of getting the off-diagonal terms independent of 
 in the equations (), is by imposing that 
 

Now, the condition of spatial independency of the diagonal terms
implies that 
 

where  is an arbitrary function of the
time. In this case the equation decouple giving simply 
 

Now it is easy to obtain the solution of these equations. These are given by 
 

At this point some comments are in order. From above we easily conclude that
for this second class of solutions, one really obtains arbitrary non-formal
solutions, provided that the remaining integrals can be done. Here it is
important to remark that this new class of systems allows arbitrary
dependence on the spatial and time variables, in contrast to the previous
class of systems.

In what follows, we try to construct an invariant operator of the Lewis and
Riesenfeld type, which have the above classes of solutions
as eigenfunctions. It could be used, as done in, in order to
suggest the form of the spinor presented as an Ansatz in this work. The
invariant obviously must satisfy the equation 
 

and can be written as 
 

where  and  are  matrices, whose
elements, in order to guarantee the validity of the above equation (
), must obey the following set of coupled differential equations 
 

where we defined that 
 and 
. On the other hand, we are looking for invariant
operators which have the Dirac spinors as eigenfunctions, which implies into
further conditions over the elements of the matrices  and 
. This lead us to the following conditions if we consider the eigenvalue
equation for the invariant operator acting over the spinor ()
introduced in this work 
 

with the functions  being arbitrary functions of
time. It is not difficult to show that for the first class one can obtain a
solution, which includes that proposed in as a particular
case, given by 
 

For the second class of solutions however, as can be easily realised from
the above set of coupled nonlinear equations () and the
constraints coming from (), it is quite difficult to extract
simple solutions. For this reason we were not able to verify if there exist
a relativistic invariant which is linear in the momentum, responsible for
the generalized solutions here presented. In fact, as it is typical of
nonlinear equations, different solutions of it could lead to independent
sets of wavefunctions. Finally it is interesting to make some comments, the
first one being the observation that the extension of the solutions
discussed in this work, by introducing a time-dependent mass is quite
simple, as can be seen due to its appearance combined with time-dependent
potentials  and . On the other hand, the case of the so called
Dirac oscillatoris not directly solvable from the second
class of solutions, this happens because when  is linear in the
coordinate, it implies into the need of a  quadratic in , in order
to guarantee the exact solution of the form guessed in this work.

Acknowledgments:  The authors are grateful to FAPESP and
CNPq for partial financial support.

 99 
  R. K.Colegrave and M. S. Abdalla, Opt. Acta 30 
(1983) 861; 28  (1981) 495.

  H. R. Lewis and K. R. Symon, Phys. Fluids 27  (1984)
192.

  C. Farina and A. de Souza Dutra, Phys. Lett. A 123 
(1987) 297.

  A. de Souza Dutra and B. K. Cheng, Phys. Rev. A 39 
(1989) 5897.

  B. R. Holstein, Am. J. Phys. 57  (1989) 714.

  C. F. Lo, Phys. Rev. A 45  (1992) 5262.

  J. Y. Ji, J. K. Kim and S. P. Kim, Phys. Rev.A 51 
(1995) 4268.

  I. A. Pedrosa, G. P. Serra and I. Guedes, Phys. Rev. A 
56  (1997) 4300.

  I. Guedes, Phys. Rev. A 63  (2001) 034102.

  M. Feng, Phys. Rev. A 64  (2001) 034101.

  I. Sturzu, Phys. Rev. A 64  (2001) 054101.

  R. Landim and I. Guedes, Phys. Rev. A 61  (2000)
054101.

  H. R. Lewis and W. B.Riesenfeld, J. Math. Phys. 10
  (1969) 1458.

  M. Moshinsky and A. Szczepaniak, J. Phys. A 22 
(1989) L817.

