














IR 
ZZ  
12  
14  
sech  
i.e.,  



< _   
> _   
DCPT-03/15 






Comment on "Global monopole in Asymptotically dS/ AdS Spacetime" 
Bruno Bertrand    and    Yves Brihaye(Yves.Brihaye@umh.ac.be)  
Faculte des Sciences, Universite de Mons-Hainaut,
 B-7000 Mons, Belgium 
Betti Hartmann(Betti.Hartmann@durham.ac.uk)  
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University
of Durham, Durham DH1 3LE, U.K. 
 


 
In this comment on the recently published
paper "'Global monopole in Asymptotically dS/ AdS Spacetime" [Phys. Rev. D 66  (2002), 107701], we reconsider global monopoles in asymptotic de Sitter/ Anti- de Sitter
space-time. In comparison to the mentioned publication, we find that the introduction
of a cosmological constant can not  render a positive
mass of the global monopole. Moreover, we find (confirmed by our numerical
analysis) a different asymptotic behaviour of the metric functions.

PACS numbers: 04.20Jb, 04.40.Nr, 14.80.Hv  




Introduction 
In recent years topological defects in asymptotic de Sitter (dS)/
Anti- de Sitter (AdS) space-time have gained renewed interest.
This is mainly due to the proposed dS/CFT, resp.
AdS/CFT correspondences.  These correspondences 
suggest a holographic duality between gravity in a -dimensional
dS, resp. AdS space and a conformal field theory (CFT) "living"
on the boundary of the dS, resp. AdS spacetime and thus being -dimensional. 
However, dS space-time is also interesting from a cosmological point of
view since it seems to be confirmed by observational datathat we live in a universe with positive cosmological constant.

Consequently, global monopoles have been studied in dS/AdS space-time.
Gravitating global monopoles in asymptotically flat space-time 
were first discussed in. These  topological defects
were found to have a negative mass and a deficit angle depending on the
vacuum expectation value (vev) of the scalar Goldstone field and the gravitational
coupling. For sufficiently high enough values of the vev the solutions
have an horizon. These solutions were named (after their string counterparts 
) "supermassive monopoles". 

In , it was found that the introduction of a cosmological constant
can render the mass of the monopole positive. This was demonstrated by a figure showing the mass
function as function of the radial coordinate for different choices of the cosmological
constant. In our recent work, we are mainly interested in composite monopole
defects in dS/ AdS space-time. This is why we cross-checked the
results of and found discrepancies between our results and those in.

The paper is organised as follows: we give the model in Section II and discuss the
asymptotic behaviour, which should be compared to that in, in Section III.
We give our numerical results in Section IV and conclude in Section V.
 

The Model 
We consider the following action :
 
which describes a Goldstone triplet , , interacting with
gravity in an asymptotically de Sitter (dS) (for the cosmological constant
), resp. Anti-de Sitter (AdS) () space-time.
 is Newton's constant,
 is the self-coupling constant of the Goldstone field
 and  the vacuum expectation value (vev) of the Goldstone field.

For the metric, the spherically symmetric Ansatz
in Schwarzschild-like coordinates reads :
 
while for the Goldstone field, we choose the hedgehog Ansatz :
 
We introduce the following dimensionless variable and coupling constants :
 


Varying () with respect to the metric fields gives 
the Einstein equations which can be combined to give two first order
differential equations for  and : 
 
 
and  and  are related as follows: 
 
Note that for , the existence of solutions without horizon
is restricted by .

Variation with respect to the matter fields yields the Euler-Lagrange
equations for the Goldstone field :
 
The prime denotes the derivative with respect to .
Note that the equations have the same structure as  for the 
asymptotically flat space-time. The cosmological
constant just appears in the relation defining  and .


In order to solve the system of equations uniquely,
we have to introduce  boundary conditions, which we choose to be : 
 


The dimensionless mass of the solution is determined by the asymptotic 
value   of the function  and is given
by .




Asymptotic behaviour 
Expanding the functions
around the origin gives :
 
where  and  are free parameters to be determined numerically.
The asymptotic behaviour () is given by :
 
with the constant:
 
It is worthwhile to contrast the coefficient of the  correction for the
mass function  appearing in  the above equation () 
with its counterpart in, eq.(18). While in the latter
the coefficient is independent on both the cosmological constant and the
self-coupling of the Goldstone field, we find here a non-trivial dependence
on these parameters (which is indeed confirmed by our numerical analysis).
We also remark that the expansion presented in is in contradiction
with the figure presented in that paper. The figure of seems incompatible
with the fact that the first asymptotic correction to the mass is
supposed to be independent of the cosmological constant.
 
Numerical results 
We remark that without loosing generality, we can choose .

Following the investigation in, we have studied the dependence of the mass
 on the cosmological constant .
It is well know that for  
global monopoles have a negative mass. Thus, the global monopole
has a repulsive effect on a test particle in its neighbourhood. The authors ofaddressed the question whether the mass can become positive for specific choices of the
cosmological constant and found that for positive cosmological
constants (Note that the sign convention in is opposite to the
one used by us, i.e. dS space has a negative cosmological constant in.)  
this is possible. As a check for a future publication on composite 
monopole defects in dS/AdS space-time, we have tried to obtain the results given inand found contradictions.

By solving the three equations numerically we constructed
solutions for positive and negative values of .
First, we checked, whether the asymptotic behaviour found in ()
is correct. We indeed confirmed numerically that the coefficients have the
given dependence on the coupling constants. We have then fixed 
and determined the mass  in dependence on .
Our results are illustrated in Fig. 1. First, we remark that
for , the mass of the solution is close to
. Since the mass of the global monopole
in flat space is just  (of course in rescaled units in comparison
to here), the value of 
is in good agreement with these results. 

Since solutions in AdS space () are
not restricted by the appearance of horizons, we can choose .
Clearly, we find that the mass increases, but stays negative for all 
values of the cosmological constant. Choosing  positive, solutions
exist only for small values of  since a cosmological horizon appears in dS space.
Thus, we have not plotted the mass dependence here. However, we remark that
 for all .
Since the mass curve does only alter its shape very little when choosing different ,
we conclude that in contrast to what is claimed in, the appearance of
a cosmological constant (of either sign) can not  alter the sign of the mass of the global monopole.
Rather, we find that the mass gets more negative for increasing  which can be related to the
fact that the core of the monopole increases due to increased cosmological expansion. For , we find
that the mass becomes less negative for  increasing, which is due to the decreased cosmological
expansion, but however stays negative for all values of  in AdS space.


We contrast the behaviour of the mass-function  for different values of  with that in Fig.1
of. Since the authors choose the vev of the Goldstone field to be , while we choose it to
be , the values of their cosmological constant in their plot corresponds to choosing
,  and  here. Moreover, their choice of  leads to .
First, we remark that we are surprised that the authors of have managed to find
solutions which correspond to our . We find that increasing  from zero to positive values,
we can construct solutions only for . The reason is that with increasing
cosmological constant the horizon which appears for the dS solutions decreases to lie closer and closer to
the core of the monopole. We thus present  for ,  and  in Fig. 2. 
Clearly, the mass function  is a constantly decreasing function of the coordinate  and
doesn't have local extrema like in. Moreover, the asymptotic values of  are always negative.



Conclusions 
Topological defects are believed to be relevant 
for structure formation in the universe. 
Global defects, i.e. defects which don't involve gauge fields
are of special interest in this context since they have
a long-range scalar field. This leads to the infiniteness of energy
in flat space, but however renders a strong gravitational
effect when the topological defects are studied in curved space.
Moreover, in the case of the global monopole, the coupling to gravity
can remove the singularity present in flat space. The space-time then
has a deficit angle and is not locally flat. Moreover, the mass
of the monopole is negative, which was interpreted as a repulsive effect
of the monopole. 

The authors of have studied global monopoles in a dS/AdS space-time and
found that the inclusion of the cosmological constant can render the mass of the 
monopole positive. Reconsidering these solutions with a highly accurate numerical routine (see 
 for a short description) and
studying the asymptotic behaviour  we come to a different conclusion :
global monopoles do not  acquire a positive mass in AdS or dS space-time.



 
BH was supported by an EPSRC grant.

 99 
A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard, Cosmic Strings and Other
topological defects , Cambridge University Press, 1994.
  A. Strominger, JHEP 0110 , 034 (2001);
JHEP 0111 , 049 (2001).
 J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Phys. 2 , 231 (1998);
E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 , 253 (1998).
 S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. 517 , 565 (1999);
A. G. Riess et al., Astron. J. 116 , 1009 (1998).
 X. Li and J. Hao, Phys. Rev. D66 , 107701 (2002).
 M. Bariolla and A. Vilenkin, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 , 341 (1989).
 D. Harari and C. Lousto

Phys. Rev. D42 , 2626  (1990).
 S. Liebling, Phys. Rev. D61 , 024030  (1999).
 P. Laguna and D. Garfinkle, Phys. Rev. D40 , 1011 (1989).
 J. Spinelly, U. de Freitas and E. R. Bezerra de Mello,
Phys. Rev. D66 , 024018  (2002);
Y. Brihaye and B. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. D66 , 064018  (2002);
E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Y. Brihaye and B. Hartmann, 
Phys. Rev. D67 , 045015  (2003).
 E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Y. Brihaye and B. Hartmann, in preparation 
 Y. Brihaye, B. Hartmann and J. Kunz, 
Phys. Rev. D65 , 024019  (2002).









 
bbh1.eps  
The value of the mass  is given for the AdS monopoles
() as function of . We have chosen , .  
 
bbh2.eps  
The mass function  is shown as function of  for
,  and . We have chosen , .  











