


An O(N) symmetric extension of the Sine-Gordon Equation  

 Fred Cooper  fcooper@nsf.gov 
T-8, Theoretical Division, MS B285, Los Alamos National
Laboratory,
Los Alamos NM 87545 
National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA 22230 
Pasquale Sodano   pasquale.sodano@pg.infn.it 
 Dipartimento di Fisica e Sezione I.N.F.N., Universita
di Perugia ,Via A. Pascoli I-06123, Perugia, Italy. 
Andrea Trombettoni  Andrea.Trombettoni@pg.infn.it 
 Dipartimento di Fisica e Sezione I.N.F.N., Universita
di Perugia, Via A. Pascoli I-06123, Perugia, Italy. 
Alan Chodos  chodos@aps.org 
American Physical Society, One Physics Ellipse, College Park, MD
20740   



 
We discuss an  exension of the Sine-Gordon (S-G)equation described by
the
Lagrangian  + N
,  where 
 which allows us to  perform an expansion
around the leading order in large-N result using Path-Integral methods.  In
leading order we show our methods agree with the results of a variational
calculation at large-N. We discuss the striking differences for a
non-polynomial interaction between the form for  in
the Gaussian approximation that one obtains at  large-N when compared to the
 case.  This is in contrast to  the case when  is a
polynomial and no such drastic differences occur. We find for our large-N
extension of the Sine-Gordon model that  the unbroken ground state is
unstable
as one increases the coupling constant (as it is for the original S-G
equation) and we find in leading order that the unbroken symmetry vacuum is
stable as long as .


 25.75.Ld, 05.70.Ln, 11.80.-m, 25.75.-q  LA-UR-03-1823 



Introduction 
Although the Sine-Gordon equation has previously been studied using
variational
methods,a systematic expansion around the mean field theory result has been lacking.
Here we use the method of auxiliary fields to study going beyond mean field
theory using a systematic expansion based on the the parameter  obtained
when we consider a particular O(N) extension of the orginal S-G model.
Using the methodology of   we first extend the
problem to having O(N) symmetry and then introduce an auxiliary field 
 by the insertion of a functional delta function
into the path integral. The large-N expansion is then obtained by
integrating
out exactly the  field and then performing a steepest descent
evaluation
of the remaining path integral.  Unlike the case of polynomial interactions,
at leading order in the Gaussian approximation there is a distinct
difference
in the equations of motion when  and  large.  We display this
by comparing the  results with those of the S-G equation.
As in the original S-G equation, our  extended model has an unstable
vacuum as a function of the coupling constant.  We find that in leading
order
in large-N that  the vacuum is unstable for .

Time Dependent Variational Approach 
  One method for obtaining a time dependent
variational approximation to a quantum field theory is to
start with Dirac's Variational principlefor
obtaining the functional Schrodinger Equation. By using wave functionals which
become "exact" in the
large-N limit- namely Gaussians we will obtain the time-dependent Hartree
approximation to the exact field equations.

 Dirac's
variational principle
 
leads directly to the Schrodinger equation:
 
In the  representation

and
 

In this representation one can choose a Gaussian
trial wave functional:
 
where
;


and
 

 Then the effective action for the trial wave functional is
 
where
 

 is a constant of the motion and is a first integral of the motion.
The equations one gets by varying the effective action with respect to
the variational parameters are:
 
For calculating expectation values,
 
with the normalization  determined from the conservation of probability:
 

To get a general expression for   one can use the
method of the generating functional:

 
In the single field case (N=1) for example one has
 
and we obtain the simple result
 
To obtain the expectation value of an arbitrary potential we assume that the
potential
has a Taylor series expansion about  the classical  field 
 and  the expectation value is taken with respect to the
Gaussian
trial wave function.   At N=1 we obtain the result:
 
For the O(N) extension of the potential, 
 and the Green's function  is now an   matrix. One
then finds making the Gaussian ansatz and ignoring non-leading terms in
 that (see)
  
where
 

Thus at leading order in large- the expectation value of the potential
becomes   
  Model 
First let us look at a typical polynomial model such as
the  model described by the classical potential
 
For  one gets the Hartree approximation result
 
where in the above  and  is the variational function.

To obtain the phase structure  one calculates the
effective potential which is the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the
Gaussian trial state for spatially homoogenous time independent fields:
 

We can change variables from  to the effective mass  for
constant (homogeneous) external sources and in that case parametrize

via
 
So that if we introduce a cutoff 
 
The first two terms in the effective potential coming from the kinetic
energy
can now be written as
 
This has an infinite  independent term which is the cosmological
constant
and needs to be subtracted by hand.

In general  is a functional of  or . Using the
chain rule we have
 
with
 
 Here
 

Another way of writing the Kinetic energy which removes the cosmological
constant
term is used in and leads to a result independent of the
cutoff.
There one lets   in the definition of   and sets
   

The potential energy also has divergences which are related to mass and
coupling constant renormalization if one does not do any normal ordering.
Here
we will first use conventional renormalization and then show it is
equivalent
(in 1+1 dimensions) to normal ordering the unrenormalized result with
respect
to the renormalized mass.   First let us look at the case .
We define the renormalized mass  as the value of 
determined from the gap equation obtained from setting  
  i.e.   
The gap equation for  is fully renormalized if we solve the above for
 in terms of  and also perform the coupling constant renormalization
 
Defining
 
one then obtains the renormalized equation
 

We notice here by comparing Eq.  and Eq.  that the
only  difference between the unrenormalized and renormalized gap
equations
are the replacement of:
 

This is an example of the result in two space-time dimensions (see also
) that if one did no  mass and coupling constant
renormalization, but normal ordered the two point function with respect to the
renormalized mass parameter  the theory would be rendered finite.

To obtain the renormalized effective potential one needs to do an
integration of the renormalized equaition for 
 and add  the pure  dependent terms.

We have
 
Integrating and adding the pure  dependent terms we obtain:
  

 at large  
At leading order in large  one has as discussed before that
 
 where here we use the shorthand 

.  Performing the mass renormalization we find now:

 
The equation for the coupling constant renormalization is also slightly
changed and reads:
 
then the renormalized gap equation is
 
Thus apart from the factors in front of  and   reflecting 
 etc, the renormalization at large  is quite similar to what
happens
in the Hartree approximation.
We also find
   which after renormalization can be written (using
 for  at constant fields)
 
This result  again could have been obtained if we did NOT 
renormalize the coupling constant or the  mass and instead used  for
the
mass parameter and everywhere made the subtraction:  
Integrating as before we find the renormalized effective potential can
be written in the form
 
which has the advertised form.
sine-Gordon equation 

The sine-Gordon equation is quite interesting since the classical
equation has a kink solution which remains after quantization and  there is
also
a phase transition as we increase the effective coupling constant as
discussed
by Coleman.  The  usual sine-Gordon equation is described
by
the Hamiltonian:  
where in the "" representation




Taking the expectation value of this Hamiltonian in the trial
Gaussian wave functional state one now has
 

Varying the action we obtain the following field equations for the
variational functions:
 
 
 

In the Heisenberg picture, making the same the Hartree approximation gives
the
following  covariant equation for the nonequaltime correlation function:

 

where
 
Again the connection between the covariant and noncovariant Green's
functions
at equal spatio-temporal points is: 
.

  When  is
independent of  one can again introduce the Fourier Transform:
 
where now

In particular, when  one has the gap equation:
 

This equation tells one how to choose  as a function of the cutoff
 to
insure  that the physical mass  is finite.

To study the phase transition in this theory in this approximation we follow
.   We determine for what values of
the coupling constant one can have  be a minimum of  the energy.

In the vacuum sector we have  for the Hamiltonian Density:
 
Inserting a momentum space cutoff 
 
Let us define an arbitrary  renormalized mass squared parameter 
by
 
which has the property that
 
we find that the once subtracted (at ) energy density is given by
 
The first derivative is given by:
 
The minimum for  is at
 
We notice that if we choose

then the extrema of the energy is at

Since the second derivative of the energy is given by:
 
we find that a stable ground state with unbroken symmetry () exists
only for
 
which is in accord with the result of Coleman.

The resulting renormalized effective potential is
 

For the Schrodinger picture update equations we can defined a finite
spatially and temporally varying renormalized mass  via
 

This mass renormalization will render the resulting update equations
for the time evolution problem finite.
In terms of the renormalized mass  the renormalized TDHF equations
are
:

 
 
 

In the Heisenberg picture, the covariant time dependent equations in terms
of
 are

  thus the space and time dependent effective mass is
 
The expectation value of the field obeys the equation
 
The subscript  in Eq.  means that one uses the once
subtracted covariant Green's function. Here we see that the main effect of the Hartree approximation on the
kink evolution equation is to replace  by a self consistently determined
. We notice that the "classical" field evolves quite differently
than the propogator.  As we shall
see next, making the Gaussian approximation but keeping
only leading order terms at large-N dramatically alters the evolution
equation
in a manner that can be interpreted as a change in the behavior of the
periodicity itself, but with the
evolution of  and  being similar. 
For the N-component field we will consider instead the classical potential:
 
Using the previous result at large  that 
,
we have that the effective potential is now:
 
The renormalized effective potental is thus given by
 
with  an arbitrary subtraction point.
If we choose the extremum of energy when  to be at  than
the
renormalized effective potential can be written as:
 

We notice now that the effective mass (pole in the propagator) is  at
 
which is functionally totally different than the  Hartree result that
 

 Path Integral Approach 

To obtain the large-N expansion for an arbitrary even polynomial interaction
we follow the work of Eyal et. al.
.  Starting from the usual path integral for the generating
functional
 
one introduces the composite field  using :
  This allows us to rewrite the generating
functional (also adding sources for  and )  as
 

The equations resulting from the second form of the action are
 

The large-N expansion is obtained by integrating out the  fields and,
recognizing that the
resulting action is proportional to 
performing the remaining  integral by Stationary Phase.  The first
integration yields
 
where
 
and here
 
is now the covariant two time Green function.
The stationary phase conditions are:
 
where  and 
.
In the absence of sources, this leads to the constraint equation for 
 
and the equation for the effective mass (gap equation) in leading order:
 
At leading order we also have from the definition of 
 that
 
so that unlike the Hartree case the mass for the classical field  is
the same as the mass entering into the propagator.
The Gaussian fluctuations about this mean field (Stationary point of the
effective action)  is obtained from the second derivative of the effective
action at the stationary point. This matrix is actually the inverse
propagator
of the two component field made up of  and .  The stability of
the
large-N approximation is related to the eigenvalues of this matrix being
positive. Critical behavior is related to the deteminant of the matrix being
zero.   The second derivatives are given by
 
 
 
For constant fields, the Fourier transform of the inverse propagator is
given
by   

   Expanding  about the stationary phase point, keeping up to Gaussian
fluctuations and Legendre transforming one has the effective action to 
is
  and the inverse matrix
propagator is defined in terms of the second derivatives of the
effective action at the stationary phase point with respect to the fields
 and .

In 1+1 dimensions,  is
finite
and (for the case of zero classical field) given by the integral
 
where in the last equality we have made the Wick rotation 
.  The value of  is important in studying the critical
points of the theory where the determinant of the quadratic fluctuations
around the mean field becomes zero and one has a massless  excitation.  At
that
point the large-N expansion breaks down and a resummation technique is
needed
as discussed in.  Explicitly  
and the condition for the determinant to vanish becomes
 

 model at large-N 
 We start with the
usual Lagrangian for the  model is  (see)
 
and .

Introducing the functional  function that 
 we get the second form of the Lagrangian
 

The effective potential obtained at leading order in large N for 
theory written in terms of
the auxiliary fields  is simply (scaling out the )
 
where here  is the covariant two time Green function
 
The gap equation  is obtained from
 
and  can be eliminated in favor of  using
) 
However, 
  where  was
defined earlier in the
variational approach. This is seen by considering
 

 Once we rewrite  solely in terms of  as
,
then we obtain that
 
This yields the unrenormalized equation:
 
using the same mass and coupling constant renormalization as in the
variational aproach we get exactly
the same result:
 

Integrating this with respect to  we obtain the renormalized effective
potential:
 
We can rewrite this as:
 
This is exactly what we got from the variational method. However now we can
systematically improve on the variational result in terms of a series in
.

To study the critical behavior of  and the stability of the large-N expansion
one needs to study the condition for the determinant of the Gaussian fluctuations to
vanish, namely:

 
where
 
Here the potential in terms of  is given by
 
The second derivative is to be evaluated at the stationary point where
, 

We can rewrite everything in terms of renormalized parameters by having 
;  and 
where everything is normal ordered with respect to the renormalized mass of the 
 field . 
Taking the second derivative at the stationary phase point we obtain when 
  and  that (since )
 
. Thus the critical condition for the existence of a zero in the 
inverse propagator is
 
In  we can have the renormalized  negative and still have a positive
definite theory as long as .

O(N) Sine-Gordon 
Here the Lagrangian divided by  written in terms of the auxiliary fields
  is given by  
where
 

Following what we did for  field theory we have that the effective
potential is now:
 
where again   is the covariant Green's function with
 
The gap equation  is obtained from
 
and  again can be eliminated in favor of  using
 
As in the polynomial potential cases, we can render the theory finite by
just
regulating  with respect to an arbitrary mass parameter 
 
so that
 
The gap equation for  at  gives the renormalized mass :
 
so that choosing our subtraction point to be  we obtain that
 

Next we have again
 
Using our renormalization scheme , we obtain
 
Integrating this with respect to  gives the renormalized effective
potential
 
which again displays the usual result at large-N that the renormalized
expectation of the Classical potential has the property:
 

The second derivative of  with respect to  at the minimum 
 (for the unbroken vacuum
)
is
 
Thus the vacuum is stable as long as
 

Let us now show that this result is the same as demanding that the large-N expansion
be an expansion about a minimum by considering the determinant of the
fluctuations around the minimum. Critical behavior is
given by the vanishing of the determinant (Eq. ). We have, 
using our renormalization scheme,   
where now
 
and
 with the subtraction being made at the physical mass .
Taking two derivatives we find that
 
where  , 
At the stationary phase pont we need the limit of  as  
This is
 
The condition for the determinant of the fluctuations to be positive is 
 
where
 
Eq.  leads to the condition (when ) 
 
This is the same result as that we found for the stability of the vacuum 

To go beyond the lowest order approximation one first includes the Gaussian
fluctuations and
considers  and   as components of a new two component field with
matrix inverse propagator .
The one particle irreducible generating functional now gets a contribution
 
However this naive  expansion is secular for time evolution problems as
shown in.  A better approximation which avoids secularity
is a resummed next to leading order
in 1/N expansion obtained from the two-particle
irreducible formalism written in terms of the fields
 and propagators  and . The  self-consistent
 correction is found from the Graph in 
  which will give the same Schwinger Dyson
equations
as the standard 1-PI 1/N  expansion except with FULL propagators and not
leading order ones in the self energy graphs.  This is discussed in detail
in.
Conclusions 
In this paper we have shown how to generalize the Sine-Gordon equation to the case of
O(N) symmetry.  This then allows  us to go beyond the Gaussian
approximation (at large-N) in a systematic, controlable way.  We found that at
leading order in large N, the pole in the propagator looks functionally
different from that found in the Hartree approximation for . Thus the
combinatorics of large-N for non-polynomial potentials leads to expressions for
the evolution of the one and two point function which look qualitatively
different from what is found for polynomial potentials. We also found that the
stability of the mean-field vacuum found using a Hamiltonian approach leads to
the same condition as the stability of the large-N approximation found by
studying Gaussian fluctuations about the leading order. We briefly
discussed the fact that the naive  expansion is secular beyond leading
order and has to be replaced by a resummed  expansion obtainable from a
two particle irreducibility approach. 

This research is supported by the DOE under contract
W-7405-ENG-36.

 9 

 S. Coleman, Phys.Rev. D  11, 2088 (1975)
 D. Boyanovsky, F. Cooper, J.J. de Vega and P.
Sodano Phys. Rev. D  58, 025007 (1998).  hep-ph/9802277
 Paolo Di Vecchia  and Moshe Moshe, Phys.Lett.B300:49-52,1993 
e-Print Archive: hep-th/9211132
 Galit
Eyal,
Moshe Moshe, Shinsuke Nishigaki, Jean Zinn-Justin .  Nucl.Phys.B470, 369
(1996)  e-Print Archive: hep-th/9601080 
   P. Dirac. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 26, 376 (1930)
  A.K. Kerman
and S.E. Koonin, Ann. Phys. 100, 332 (1976);  R. Jackiw and A. K. Kerman,  
Phys. Lett. A71, 158 (1979);
 F. Cooper, S.-Y. Pi and
P. Stancioff, Phys. Rev. D, 34,
3831 (1986); F. Cooper and S. -Y. Pi in Current Trends in
Physics 
Ed. by A. Khare and T. Pradhan (World Scientific, Singapore, 1986).
 F. Cooper and E. Mottola,  Phys. Rev.  D36, 3114 (1987);
S.Y. Pi and M. Samiullah, Phys. Ref. D 36 , 3128 (1987)
 D. Boyanovsky and  H.J. de Vega,
Phys. Rev.  D47 , 2343 (1993);
 D. Boyanovsky, M. D'Attanasio, H.J. de Vega, R. Holman
Phys.Rev. D54 (1996) 1748.
 W.A.
Bardeen,M.Moshe, and M. Bander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52,
1188 (1984)
 S.J. Chang, Phys. Rev. D 13, 2778 (1976).
 B. Mihaila F. Cooper and J. Dawson Phys. Rev. D63 (2001) 096003.
 J. Cornwall, R. Jackiw and E. Tomboulis, Phys. Rev. D10, 2428 (1974),
Gordon Baym, 
 K. Blagoev, F. Cooper, J. Dawson and B. Mihaila Phys. Rev. D64 (2001)
125003 hep/ph 0106195.
F. Cooper, J Dawson, B. Mihaila Phys.Rev.D67:056003,2003 	
hep-ph/0209051 ibid:Phys.Rev.D67:051901,2003 ; hep-ph/0207364
 J. Berges Nucl.Phys.A699:847-886,2002 
e-Print Archive: hep-ph/0105311;G. Aarts, D. Ahrensmeier, R.
Baier, J. Berges, J. Serreau Phys.Rev.D66:045008,2002 
e-Print Archive: hep-ph/0201308 .

