




 
Stockholm
 USITP 05-03
 April 2003

 

Extra Gauge Symmetry for Extra Supersymmetry 


 A.A. Zheltukhin and D.V. Uvarov
 
 Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Stockholm, SCFAB,

 SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 

 Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology, 61108, Kharkov,  Ukraine
15.mm
 
Abstract 
   
5.mm

 It is shown that the extra supersymmetry of tensionless superstring and super -brane is accompanied by the presence of new bosonic gauge symmetries. 
It permits to use composed coordinates encoding all physical degrees of freedom of the model and invariant under these gauge symmetries and the enhanced -symmetry. 
It is proved that the composed gauge invariant coordinates coincide with the componets of symplectic supertwistor realizing a linear representation of the hidden OSp(1,2M) symmetry of the super -brane Lagrangian. A connection of the presented gauge symmetries with massless higher spin gauge theories and a symmetric phase of /string-theory is discussed.




 Introduction 

Tensionless (super)strings have recently been discussed in the frame of massless higher spin field theory and AdS/CFT correspondence,,. The point is the relation  between the 't Hooft  coupling constant    and the rescaled string tension , where  is the radius of 
 (The rescaled string tension as a perturbative parameter of string dynamics in curved spaces was previously considered in.) . This relation shows that the zero limit for the string tension  leads to a free gauge theory. The conjecture was advanced that conformal  SYM theory has to be dual to the theory of massless higher spin fields when  is large.
Symplectic (super)symmetries   play an important role in the formulation of the massless higher spin field dynamics and may be linearly realized in the generalized space-time described  by the real symmetric matrix   
and its superpartner ,. 
If  are identified with the Majorana spinor indices the  components can be treated as space-time coordinates added by tensor central charge (TCC) coordinates presented  by antisymmetric space-time tensors contracted with appropriate antisymmetrized products of 
-matrices.

It was assumed in that higher spin gauge theory may be treated 
as a symmetric phase of -theory. This assumption is supported by the observation  on a nonlinear character of the  supersymmetry realization in  
  supergravity which is the low-energy limit of /string-theory, where higher spin exitations are massive. The consideration of superstring theory as a  spontaneously broken phase of higher spin gauge theory promises a new  basis 
for  understanding the microscopic structure of superbranes in terms of the 
spontaneous breaking parameters of higher spin gauge theory which correlates  with the topological approach.
 
Thus, it is important to find the right kind of string/M-theory in terms of the new dynamical variables associated with orthosymplectic (super)symmetries and higher spins. This problem stimulates investigation of the superstring and superbrane dynamics in generalized spacetimes extended by the addition of TCC coordinates,,. 

Using the twistor-like approach, the exactly solvable model of tensionless super -brane preserving  of the  supersymmetry was proposed in. This super -brane saturates the exotic BPS state with the same symmetry whose existence  has been  proved in applying the model independent analysis of the  superalgebra enlarged by tensor central charges.
The model preserves all its properties in the -dimensional Minkowski space with  , where the supersymmetric Cartan form and an auxiliary twistor-like Majorana spinor, defining the superbrane Lagrangian, are the same modulo the spinor's dimension.
 As a result, the tensionless super -brane will saturate the exotic BPS state spontaneously breaking only one from   global supersymmetries, where  is the Majorana spinor dimension. An interpretation of this tensionless super p-brane as the BPS state of -theory was recently discussed in. 
An important property of the tensionless super -brane and  the
appropriate  BPS state is the linear character of the  symmetry realization. The linear realization is a result of the transition to a new 
  supertwistor variable previously considered  in the superparticle dynamics,,. The symplectic supertwistor  encodes all physical degrees of freedom contained in  and the Majorana spinor  which describe the original formulation of the model. 
This reduction of the initial variable number points out on the presence of hidden bosonic gauge symmetries  strongly correlating with the extra -symmetry. A fine tuning of  these symmetries results in the  minimal spontaneous breaking of the  global supersymmetry and manifests itself by the  symmetry appearance. 

Therefore, the problem  appears to find hidden gauge symmetries responsible for the reduction of the bosonic degrees of freedom described by the space-time and TCC coordinates. Let us remind that the reduction of the fermionic degrees of freedom of the model is provided by its enhanced -symmetry.
The required bosonic symmetries should match the enhanced -symmetry and their description is important for understanding the structure of a symmetric phase of string/-theory and local symmetries compatible with the BPS states characterized by  extra supersymmetry.

In this letter we present a set of new bosonic gauge symmetries matched with the enhanced -symmetry of the tensionless super -brane. We show that these gauge symmetries result in the invariant reduction of the bosonic gauge degrees of freedom described by the original symplectic spin-tensor . The invariant character of the reduction means that the symplectic supertwistor  encoding all physical degrees of freedom and providing the  symmetry of the superbrane Lagrangian is gauge invariant under the transformations of the bosonic and enhanced  symmetries. 


 Tensionless super -brane with enhanced supersymmetry 

The inclusion of TCC in the algebra of  supersymmetry generalizes anticommutator of the Majorana supercharges  to the form,  
The r.h.s. of Eq. () contains antisymmetrized products of -matrices multiplied by the TCC  which are antisymmetric Lorentz tensors in the Minkowski space-time commuting with .
The real antisymmetric parameters  corresponding to  are known as TCC coordinates which may be presented in the equivalent spinor form 
  
by analogy with the spinor representation of  the space-time coordinates

  
The coordinates  and  may be treated as the components of
the real symmetric spin-tensor
  
which can be identified with the symmetric matrix of generalized symplectic coordinates 
considered in,.
The pairs  unifying   and the Majorana spinor  form a generalized superspace invariant under the  global supersymmetry 
  
The differential one-forms  and   of the generalized superspace 
 
are the Cartan forms invariant under () which have been used to construct the exactly solvable model 
  
of tensionless super -brane ( with extra -symmetry. 
The action  includes an auxiliary Majorana spinor  and the world-volume density  which are invariants of the  supersymmetry. 
The spinor  parametrizes the light-like density of the brane momentum. The action  is also invariant under the transformations of the enhanced symmetry 
  
where the parameter  is restricted by the only one real condition
  
As a result, this model preserves  fraction of the  supersymmetry, where  is the dimension of the correspondent Majorana spinor. 
The model yields a pure static general solution for the Goldstone fermion  defined by the Lorentz invariant projection
   
encoding the spontaneously broken component of the supersymmetry. 
The exact solvability of the model implies the presence of hidden local symmetries which is revealed by the change of variables 
  
 introducing the Majorana spinor  as a new variable substituted for .
In terms of the new spinor variable  the action () transforms to the form
  
The action () is the component representation of the  invariant action  
    
in which the real  supertwistor  and invariant supersymplectic metric  
have been used. The transition  from the representation () to the supertwistor representation () (or ()) is accompanied by the reduction of some original variables both in the fermionic and bosonic sectors. It means that the super -brane Lagrangian is singular due to the presence of hidden gauge symmetries. The enhanced -symmetry () is responsible for the reduction of the  of the  components of the Majorana spinor  and one remaining fermionic variable  () proved to be invariant under the -symmetry transformations (),(). The invariance of the Goldstone fermion  proves that   fermionic gauge degrees of freedom have been reduced without gauge fixing. The question then appears about hidden gauge symmetries responsible for the reduction of the bosonic gauge degrees of freedom contained in . 
    We shall define these symmetries in the next Section.

 Gauge symmetries matched with extra -symmetry 
 
First of all we note that both of the representations () and 
() are invariant under the local Weyl symmetry including one real parameter 
 
 The transformations  () imply that , but  and the supertwistor  are not invariant under the Weyl transformations
 
The invariant character of  () means that the Weyl symmetry does not participate in the discusssed reduction of the bosonic coordinates and other gauge symmetries should be found. 
To connect the above-mentioned gauge symmetries with the  symmetry of the  higher spin theory and the results we present here a detailed analysis of the  supersymmetry. The generalization of these results to  the higher dimensions  will be clear from this analysis.

In the  case the action   () acquires the form
 
where the supersymmetric one-forms  and 
 in the Weyl basis are
 
For the search of hidden gauge symmetries it is efficient to introduce a basis in the spinor space of the model. To this end a linearly independent local Weyl spinor  
may be added to .  Then, without loss of generality, the Weyl spinors  and  attached to the brane worldvolume may be identified with the local Neuman-Penrose dyad defined by the well known relations
 
and their complex conjugate. The scalar products  () will be invariants of the Weyl transformations () if the transformation   is taken into account. The Majorana bispinors , ,  and  will respectively form a basis in the Majorana bispinor space.

The first of the desired gauge symmetries which transforms only  is defined as 
 
 and it is a local symmetry of the action  (), due to the relation .
We shall call this one-parametric real transformation as -shift. It shifts  by the light-like -vector 
 
The change  in () lifts the  -shift to the bispinor representation and shows that it is also the symmetry of the high dimensional action () due to the relation =0 satisfiable for the Majorana bispinors. 

The next gauge symmetry of  () transforms only the TCC coordinates  
 
It includes one complex parameter  and we shall call it as -shift. Note that the local spin-tensor  in () has zero norm, i.e. =0, and defines a set of local null planes attached to the super -brane world-volume. Therefore, the -shifts are a generalization of the -shifts (), 
described by the field of null vectors, to the shifts defined by the field of null bivectors, as it can be seen from the representation () in the tensor form 
 
where  and  are real parameters
    
In terms of the Majorana bispinor  the transformation () is presented as
 
 where  the bivectors  and  belong to 
the field of null or isotropic bivectors defined  by the conditions 
 
and are interpreted as the egenvalues of the generalized TCC  (). We see that the local translations of the TCC coordinates  by the null bivectors () produce a new type of gauge symmetry due to which the TCC coordinates  proved to be defined modulo the shift by the null bivectors. In the higher dimensional Minkowski spacetimes additional multivector translations presented  by the bilinear covariants similar to   will appear as admissible gauge symmetries of the action ().

To continue the description of the next gauge symmetries we note that 
the dyad space () is symmetric under the  spinor permutation which transforms the null spin-tensors   
() to the null spin-tensors . But, it is not a symmetry of the action ().
 However, the local shift of  by the null tensor  similar to the null shift () may be compensated if simultaneous shift of  by the correspondent null vector 
 similar to ()
will be added.
As a result, we find a new one-parametric gauge symmetry of  ()
 
because the correspondent variation of  ()
 
equals to zero due to (). Let us  call the transformation () as -shift.
 
The local space-like vectors  and 
 
 orthogonal to the real local null vectors   () and   (), form the local tetrade attached to the superbrane worldvolume.  

The local shifts of the -coordinates in the transverse directions 

 
which we shall call -shifts, change  ()
 
However, just as in the previous case the variations () are exactly compensated by the correspondent shifts of the TCC coordinates 
 
where the symmetrized production  was introduced.

Thus, we found six real bosonic gauge symmetries of the action () in the   Minkowski space-time generated by the  and 
 which form six parametric abelian group of translations in the  symplectic subspace of the  symplectic superspace. 
 In the next Section we shall show  that these gauge symmetries are responsible for the invariant reduction of six bosonic gauge degrees of freedom contained in  (). 
 

 The gauge invariance of the supertwistor  
 
 
Here we show that the supertwistor  is invariant under the above presented 
bosonic gauge symmetries and the enhanced -symmetry.
The invariance of  will prove the gauge invariant character of the considered reduction of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom. 
To this end let us consider the transformation properties of the supertwistor  under the fermionic -symmetry (), () and bosonic symmetries described by the -shifts (), -shifts (), -shifts () and the -shifts (), (). 

Then we find that invariant character of the  and  follows from the definitions of the transformation rules of the enhanced -symmetry and the bosonic symmetries. 

Using this observation one can present the gauge transformations of the remaining supertwistor component   as
 
The substitution of the -symmetry transformations () in () together 
with using  the relations () and () yields the required result
 

Taking into account the invariance of  under the bosonic gauge symmetries one can  simplify the variation  () to the form
 
The substitution of the  -shifts () and  -shifts () into () results in the relations
 
and their complex conjugate which prove the invariance of  under these shifts.

The invariance  under the -shifts () follows from the cancellation of  and  contributions given  by  
 

The analogous cancellations take place between the  and  contributions 
 
and their complex conjugate generated by the -shifts (), ().

It completes the proof of the invariance of  under the discussed six bosonic and three fermionic gauge symmetries.

 Conclusion 

Symmetries of tensionless superstring and superbrane with extra supersymmetry were studied. It was shown that the -symmetry enhancement is accompanied by the appearance of bosonic gauge symmetries including the Weyl transformation and the local abelian translations of the space-time and TCC coordinates. In the case of  supersymmetry the  translations are presented by the local vectors and bivectors constructed from the components of an auxiliary spinor field parametrizing the momentum density of the brane. In the high dimensional spaces gauge multivector  translations of TCC coordinates will appear. Due to these gauge symmetries the original brane's coordinates are defined modulo these gauge translations resulting in the appearance of new composed coordinates encoding the physical degrees of freedom contained in the original coordinates. The new  variables are unified in the componets of a symplectic supertwistor realizing linear representation of the OSp(1, 2M) symmetry. We proved that this supertwistor is an invariant of the gauge translations and the enhanced -symmetry. 
So, the linearly realizible symplectic supersymmetries describing massless higher spin gauge theories appear as a result of a fine tuning of the set of local and global symmetries of the 
Lagrangians of tensionless superstring and superbrane. The tensionless objects are connected with the high energy limit  of the string theory, where masses of all particles are negligible and a hidden large symmetry takes shape. 
It hints that symplectic supertwistor describing tensionless strings and branes may be found relevant variable for the description of a symmetric phase of 
-theory and quantum field string theory at the high energy scale.

  Acknowledgements 

A.Z. thanks Fysikum at the Stockholm University for the kind hospitality and Ingemar Bengtsson for the useful discussion. The work was partially supported by the grant of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and Ukrainian SFFR project 02.07/276.
 99 

 E. Witten, unpublished (see http://theory.caltech.edu/jhs60/witten/1.html).
B. Sundborg, Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B102/101 (2001) 113. 
  
M.A. Vasiliev, Conformal higher spin symmetries of 4d massless supermultiplets ad osp(L,2m) invariant equations in generalized (super)space, hep-th/0106149;

 Higher  spin conserved currents in  symmetric spacetime, hep-th/0204167. 
A.A. Zheltukhin, CQG 13 (1996) 2357;
  S.N. Roshchupkin and A.A. Zheltukhin,
Nucl.Phys. B543 (1999) 365.
C. Fronsdal, Masslesss particles, orthosymplectic symmetry and another type of Kaluza-Klein theory, Preprint UCLA/85/TEP/10, in Essays on supersymmetry, 
Reidel, 1986 (Mathematical Physics Studies, v.8).
P.C. West, JHEP 08 (2000) 007.
T. Curtright, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 (1988) 393.
E. Bergshoeff and E. Sezgin, Phys. Lett. B 392 (1995) 256.
 A.A. Zheltukhin and  U. Lindstrom,  Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B102/101 (2001) 126; JHEP 01 (2002) 034;
 O.E. Gusev and  A.A. Zheltukhin, JETP Lett. 64 (1996) 487.
 A. A. Zheltukhin and D.V. Uvarov, Phys. Lett. B 545 (2002) 183;

JHEP 08 (2002) 008.
J.P. Gauntlett, G. Gibbons, C.M. Hull and P.K. Townsend, 

Comm. Math. Phys. 216 (2001) 431.

J.A. de Azcarraga, J.P. Gauntlett, J.M. Izquierdo and  P.K. Townsend,

 Phys.Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 2443.

 I.A. Bandos, BPS states in M-theory and twistorial constituents, 
hep-th/0208110.
A. Ferber, Nucl. Phys. B 132 1978 55.
T. Shirafuji, Progr. Theor. Phys., 70 (1983) 18.
 
I. Bandos and J. Lukierski, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 14 (1999) 1257.
J.P. Gauntlett and C.M. Hull, JHEP 01 (2000) 004.
 R. D'Auria and P. Fre, NPB 201 (1982) 101;  erratum NPB 206 (1982) 496.
 J. van Holten and A. van Proyen, J. Physics A 15 (1982) 101.
D.V. Volkov and A.A. Zheltukhin,
JETP Lett. 48 (1988) 63; 
Lett. Math. Phys. 17 (1989) 141.
 I.A. Bandos and  A.A. Zheltukhin, Fortschr. Phys. 41 (1993) 619.
 R. Penrose and M.A.H. Mac Callum, Phys. Rep. 6 (1972) 241.
D.J. Gross and P.F. Mende,  Phys. Lett. B 197 (1987) 129;

D.J. Gross, unpublished (see http://theory.caltech.edu/jhs60/gross/13.html).

