









Knotlike Cosmic Strings in The Early Universe 
Yi-shi Duan and Xin Liu
Corresponding author. Electronic address: liuxin@lzu.edu.cn  
Institute of Theoretical Physics, Lanzhou University, 

Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China  
 
In this paper, the knotlike cosmic strings in the early universe are
discussed. We derive the cosmic string structures from the non-zero torsion
tensor, and reveal that these strings are just created from the zero points
of complex scalar quintessence field. In these strings we mainly study the
knotlike configurations, and have constructed a new topological invariant
for them. It is also shown that this invariant is just the total sum of all
the self-linking and all the linking numbers of the knotlike strings family,
and that this invariant is preserved in the branch processes during the
evolution of cosmic strings.

PACS number(s): 98.80.Cq, 02.40.-k, 11.15.-q 

Introduction 

As we all know, torsion is a slight modification of the Einstein theory of
relativity (proposed in 1922-1923 by E . Cartan), and is a
reasonable generalization that appears to be necessary when one considers
the early universe and tries to conciliate general relativity with quantum
theory. It is known that in the presence of torsion the
space-time is the Riemann-Cartan manifold , hence in this paper
the Riemann-Cartan geometry of the early universe is studied
.

The torsion in Riemann-Cartan space-time is defined as 
 
Here  is the vierbein, with  being the local Lorentz group
index and  denoting the -dimensional space-time 
;  is the covariant derivative of 
 
where  is the spin connection of Lorentz group. On the
analogy of 't Hooft's theory, the gauge invariant torsion
tensor is defined as 
 
where  is the unit vector field in the Lorentz group space and 
 is its covariant derivative: 
 
From (), () and (), the torsion tensor 
 can be expressed as 
 
where  is a  gauge potential. The expression (
) shows that the antisymmetric -order tensor  can be
just regarded as a  gauge field tensor.

Recently, the quintessence field has been introduced as the background field
of universe to account for the flatness and the accelerating expansion of
universe. In this paper, we mainly consider the complex
scalar quintessence field . For the purpose to
describe the interaction between  and the  gauge potential 
, one introduces the covariant derivative of  as 
 
where  is the Planck length. In the following
Sect.II, through () and () and using the 
-mapping topological current theory, we will derive the cosmic string
structures from , and reveal that these cosmic strings are
just created from the zero points of quintessence field . In
Sect.III, we will mainly study the knotlike configurations in these cosmic
string structures. Based on the integral of Chern-Simons -form we
construct a new topological invariant for the knotlike strings. It is also
shown that this invariant is just the total sum of all the self-linking and
all the linking numbers of the knotlike strings family. In Sect.IV,
moreover, the conservation of this topological invariant in the branch
processes during the evolution of cosmic strings is simply discussed.

The Cosmic Strings 

In this section we will show that there are cosmic string structures
inhering in the torsion tensor 

The complex scalar quintessence field  is a kind of order
parameter field, which is a section of complex line bundle, i.e., a section
of the -dimensional real vector bundle on : 
 
From () and () it can be proved that the 
 gauge potential  can be expressed as 
 
Then from () we have 
 
According to the -mapping topological current theory
, it can be proved that  can be expressed in a 
-function form: 
 
where  

Taking the  index  in () as  we obtain the 
-function expression for the spatial components of 
 
where 
 is the Jacobian vector.

Obviously the expression () provides an important conclusion: 
 
so it is necessary to study the zero points of  to determine the
non-zero solutions of  The implicit function theory shows
 that under the regular condition 
 
the general solutions of 
 
can be expressed as 
 
which represent the world surfaces of a family of  moving isolated
singular strings  with string parameter  .
These singular string solutions are just the cosmic strings. Furthermore, we
have 
 
where  is the winding number of  around 
 with the positive integer  being the Hopf index and 
 the Brouwer degree. Hence the topological charge of the cosmic
string  is 
 

In the end of this section, it should be addressed that in the above the
regular condition () has been used; when this condition
fails, the branch processes during the evolution of cosmic strings will
occur. This will be detailed in Sect.IV.

The Topological Invariant for The Knotlike Cosmic Strings 

It has been pointed out, that for a string structure of finite energy, its
length must be finite, which is possible if its core forms a knot
. Recently it is shown by Faddeev and Niemi that there are knotlike
structures appearing as stable finite solitons in a realistic 
-dimensional model. In this section, we will mainly study the
knotlike cosmic string structures, and construct a new topological invariant
for them. It is also shown that this invariant is just the self-linking and
the linking numbers of the knotlike cosmic strings family.

The expression () shows that  can be regarded as a 
 gauge field tensor. In order to construct a topological invariant in
the space-time, one must pick a Lagrangian which does not require any choice
of metric . Precisely in -dimensional space there is a
reasonable choice, namely, the integral of the Chern-Simons -form
: 
 
Hereinafter we just study () to get the topological invariant
for the knotlike cosmic strings. Using the above () and (
), the expression () can be written as 
 
It can be seen that when the  cosmic strings of () are 
closed curves, i.e., a family of  knotlike strings 
, () leads to 
 
This is a very important expression. Consider the  gauge
transformation of : 
 
where  is a phase factor denoting the 
transformation. It is seen that the 
term in () contributes nothing to the integral  hence the
expression () is invariant under the gauge transformation.
Therefore, from the fact that  of () is independent of the
choice of metric and is invariant under the  gauge transformation, one
can conclude that  is a topological invariant for the knotlike cosmic
strings, which can be used in the research of the topology of string
structures in the early universe.

In following we will show that  is just the total sum of all the
self-linking and all the linking numbers of the knotlike strings family.
Using (), the expression () can be reexpressed as 
 
where  and  are two points respectively on knots 
 and . Noticing that  and  can be the
same one knot, or two different knots, we should write () in two
parts ( and ); furthermore the  part includes both the 
 and the  cases. So  should be
written in three terms:    
 and  terms. Defining a -dimensional unit vector 
 and
another -dimensional unit vector  on the -formed-sphere 
,  can be decomposed in terms of  as 
 
 
Then using () and the relation 

, the three terms of  can be expressed as 
 
where  
 denotes the pull-back of 
 surface element.

Let us discuss these three terms in detail. Firstly, the first term of (
) is just related to the writhing number  of 

 
For the second term of (), since this is the 
term, one can prove that it is related to the twisting number 
of 
 
where  is the unit tangent vector of knot  at  (
 when ), and  is defined as 

. From the White formula 
 
we see that the first and the second terms of () just compose
the self-linking numbers of knots. Secondly, for the third term, one can
prove 
 
where  is the Gauss linking number between 
 and . Therefore, thirdly, from (
), (), () and () we arrive at
the important result: 
 
This precise expression just reveals the relationship between  and the
self-linking and the linking numbers of the knots family. Since the
self-linking and the linking numbers are both the invariant characteristic
numbers of the knots family in topology,  is an important invariant
required to describe the topology of knotlike cosmic strings in early
universe.

The Conservation of  in The Branch Processes of Knotlike Cosmic
Strings 

In our previous work it has been pointed out that, during
the evolution of cosmic strings, when the regular condition (
) fails, the branch processes (i.e. the splitting, mergence and
intersection) will occur; and in these branch processes, the sum of the
topological charges of final cosmic string(s) is equal to that of the
initial cosmic string(s) at the bifurcation point, namely:

(a) for the case that one string  split into two strings  and 
we have 

(b) the case that two strings  and  merge into one string  


(c) the case that two strings  and  meet, and then depart as two
other strings  and  

In following we will show that when the branch processes of knotlike strings
occur, the topological invariant  of () (i.e. ())
is preserved:

(i) The splitting case. We will consider one knot  split into two
knots  and  which are of the same self-linking number
as , and will compare
the two numbers  and  where 
is the contribution of  to  before splitting, and 
 is the total contribution of  and  to 
 after splitting. Firstly, from the above text we have 
 in the splitting process. Secondly, on the one
hand, noticing that in the neighborhood of bifurcation point 
,  and  are infinitesimally displaced
from each other; on the other hand, for a knot  its self-linking
number  is defined as 
where  is another knot obtained by infinitesimally displacing 
 in the normal direction . Therefore 

 and 
 (here 
 denotes another arbitrary knot in the family (
)). Then,
thirdly, we can compare  and  as: before
splitting, from () we have 
 
where ;
after splitting, 
 
Comparing () and (), we just have 
 
This means that in the splitting process  is preserved.

(ii) The mergence case. We consider two knots  and 
which are of the same self-linking number, merge into one knot 
which is of the same self-linking number as  and .
This is obviously the inverse process of the above splitting case, therefore
we have 
 

(iii) The intersection case. This case is related to the collision of two
knots. We consider two knots  and 
which are of the same self-linking number, meet, and then depart as other
two knots  and  which are of the same self-linking
number as  and . This process can be identified to two
sub-processes:  and  merge into one knot ,
and then  split into  and  Thus from the
above two cases (ii) and (i) we have 
 

Therefore we obtain the result that, in the branch processes during the
evolution of knotlike cosmic strings (i.e., the splitting, mergence and
intersection), the topological invariant  is preserved.

Conclusion 

In this paper, the early universe as a Riemann-Cartan space-time is
considered. In Sect.II, it is revealed that from the non-zero torsion tensor 
 one can derive the cosmic string structures, which are just
created from the zero points of complex scalar quintessence field. In
Sect.III, we emphasize on the knotlike configurations in these cosmic
strings. Based on the integral of Chern-Simons -form, we construct a new
topological invariant  for the knotlike strings. It is also pointed out
that  is just the total sum of all the self-linking and all the linking
numbers of the knotlike strings family. In Sect.IV, it is shown that  is
preserved in the branch processes (i.e. the splitting, mergence and
intersection) during the evolution of knotlike cosmic strings.

Acknowledgment 

One of the authors XL would like to thank Dr. P. M. Zhang for the useful
discussions and help. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation and the Doctor Education Fund of Educational Department
of the People's Republic of China.

 
  E . Cartan, C. R. Acad. Sci. 174 (1922) 593; Ann. Ecole
Normale, 41 (1924) 1

  V. De Sabbata, IL Nuovo Cimento 107A (1994) 363

  E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, The Early Universe
(Addison-Wesley, 1990); M. S. Turner and J. A. Tyson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71
(1999) S145

  Y. Jiang and Y. S. Duan, J. Math. Phys. 24 (2000) 6463;
J. Math. Phys. 41 (2000) 2616

  G. 't Hooft , Nucl. Phys. B 79 (1974) 276

  M. S. Turner, astro-ph/9912211; A. Hebecker and C.
Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B 497 (2001) 281; N. Dalal et. al. , Phys. Rev.
Lett. 87 (2001) 141302; L. Wang et. al. , Astrophys. J. 530 (2000) 17;
S. Bludman and M. Roos, Astrophys. J. 547 (2001) 77

  C. -J. Gao and Y. -G. Shen, Phys. Lett. B 541 (2002) 1;
Je-An Gu and W-Y. P. Hwang, Phys. Lett. B 517 (2001) 1; J. Frieman et.
al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 2077

  Y. S. Duan, X. Liu and P. M. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter. 14 (2002) 7941

  Y. S. Duan, SLAC-PUB-3301 (1984); Y. S. Duan, S. Li
and G. H. Yang, Nucl. Phys. B 514 (1998) 705; Y. S. Duan, L. B. Fu and G.
Jia, J. Math. Phys. 41 (2000) 4379; Y. S. Duan, H. Zhang and S. Li, Phys.
Rev. B 58 (1998) 125; L. B. Fu, Y. S. Duan and H. Zhang, Phys. Rev. D 61
(2000) 045004; Y. S. Duan, X. Liu and P. M. Zhang, J. Phys. A 36 (2003) 563

  E . Goursat, A Course in Mathematical Analysis, vol. I
translated by E. R. Hedrick (Dover, New York, 1904)

  J. A. Schouten, Tensor Analysis for Physicists  
(Clarendon, Oxford, 1951)

  L. Faddeev and A. J. Niemi, Nature 387 (1997) 58;
hep-th/9705176

  S. S. Chern and J. Simon, Ann. Math. 99 (1974) 48; S.
Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, Ann. Phys. (NY) 140 (1982) 372

  E. Witten, Commun. Math. Phys. 121 (1989) 351

  S. Nash and S. Sen, Topology and Geometry of Physicists
(Academic Press INC, 1983)

  D. Rolfsen, Knots and Links (Publish or Perish, Berkley CA,
1976); W. Pohl, Journal of Math.  Mech. 17 (1968) 975; A. Calini and T.
Ivey, dg-ga/9608001

  A. M. Polyakov, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 3 (1988) 325

  A. J. Niemi, Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 125006; A. Gangui,
Topological Defects in Cosmology, Lecture Notes for the First Bolivian
School on Cosmology (astro-ph/0110285)

