

6.0in 8.3in -0.25truein 0.30truein 0.30truein 
 
SLAC-PUB-9689

JLAB-THY-03-31 

March 2003
 

 
Light-Front Quantization of Gauge
Theories(T his work is supported by the
Department of Energy under contract number DE-AC03-76SF00515.)   


Stanley J. Brodsky

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center 

Stanford University, Stanford, California 94309 

and 

Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Laboratory, Newport News, Virginia 23606

sjbth@slac.stanford.edu  


 
Abstract 
Light-front wavefunctions provide a frame-independent
representation of hadrons in terms of their physical quark and
gluon degrees of freedom.  The light-front Hamiltonian formalism
provides new nonperturbative methods for obtaining the QCD
spectrum and eigensolutions, including resolvant methods,
variational techniques, and discretized light-front quantization.
A new method for quantizing gauge theories in light-cone gauge
using Dirac brackets to implement constraints is presented.  In
the case of the electroweak theory, this method of light-front
quantization leads to a unitary and renormalizable theory of
massive gauge particles, automatically incorporating the Lorentz
and 't Hooft conditions as well as the Goldstone boson equivalence
theorem. Spontaneous symmetry breaking is represented by the
appearance of zero modes of the Higgs field leaving the
light-front vacuum equal to the perturbative vacuum. I also
discuss an "event amplitude generator" for automatically
computing renormalized amplitudes in perturbation theory. The
importance of final-state interactions for the interpretation of
diffraction, shadowing, and single-spin asymmetries in inclusive
reactions such as deep inelastic lepton-hadron scattering is
emphasized.

 
Invited talk, presented at the

2002 International Workshop On Strong Coupling Gauge Theories
and

Effective Field Theories (SCGT 02)

Nagoya, Japan

 10-13 December 2002
  


Introduction 

Light-front wavefunctions are the amplitudes which interpolate
between hadrons and their quark and gluon degrees of freedom in
QCD. For example, the eigensolution of a meson,
projected on the eigenstates  of the free
Hamiltonian  at fixed light-front time 
 with the same global quantum numbers, has the expansion:
 
The set of light-front Fock state wavefunctions 
represents the ensemble of quark and gluon states possible when
the meson is intercepted at the light-front.  The light-front
momentum fractions 
with  and  with
 represent the
relative momentum coordinates of the QCD constituents; the scalar
light-front wavefunctions 
 are independent of the proton's momentum 
, and . The physical transverse momenta are

The  label the light-front spin  projections of
the quarks and gluons along the quantization  direction.  The
spinors of the light-front formalism automatically incorporate the
Melosh-Wigner rotation.  Light-cone gauge  is used to
eliminate unphysical gauge degrees of freedom.  The gluon
polarization vectors  are
specified in light-cone gauge by the conditions 
 The quark and gluon
degrees of freedom are all physical; there are effectively no
ghost or negative metric states.

An important feature of the light-front formalism is that the
projection  of the total angular momentum is kinematical and
conserved.  Each light-front Fock state component satisfies the
angular momentum sum rule: 
 The summation over  represents
the contribution of the intrinsic spins of the  Fock state
constituents.  The summation over orbital angular momenta
 
derives from the  relative momenta.  This excludes the
contribution to the orbital angular momentum due to the motion of
the center of mass, which is not an intrinsic property of the
hadron.  The light-front eigensolution corresponds to a spin 
particle in the hadron rest frame ,
not the constituent rest frame  since
  The numerator structure of the
light-front wavefunctions is in large part determined by the
angular momentum constraints.  Thus wavefunctions generated by
perturbation theory can provide a
template for the numerator structure of nonperturbative
light-front wavefunctions.

Hadronic amplitudes can be computed by inserting a sum over a
complete sets of free Fock states for each external hadron, thus
representing the dynamics of each hadron as a convolution of its
light-front wavefunctions with the corresponding -particle
irreducible quark-gluon matrix elements, summed over  For
example, in the case of spacelike form factors, the matrix
elements of local currents are given by a simple overlap of
light-front wavefunctions.  If one chooses  the frame with
, then matrix elements of currents such as  in
electroweak theory and have only diagonal matrix elements
 Thus once one has solved for the light-front
wavefunctions, one can compute hadron matrix elements of currents
between hadronic states of arbitrary momentum. Remarkably, quantum
fluctuations of the vacuum are absent if one uses light-front time
to quantize the system, so that matrix elements such as the
electromagnetic form factors only depend on the currents of the
constituents described by the light-cone wavefunctions.  As I
discuss below, the degrees of freedom associated with vacuum
phenomena such as spontaneous symmetry breaking in the Higgs model
have their counterpart in light-front  zero modes of the
fields.

Matrix elements of spacelike currents such as spacelike
electromagnetic form factors thus have an exact representation in
terms of simple overlaps of the light-front wavefunctions in
momentum space with the same  and unchanged parton number
.  The Pauli form
factor and anomalous moment are spin-flip matrix elements of 
and thus connect states with Thus, these quantities are nonzero only if there is nonzero
orbital angular momentum of the quarks in the proton.   The Dirac
form factor is diagonal in  and is typically dominated at
high  by highest states with the highest orbital angular
momentum. In the case of nuclear form factors, Fock states with
"hidden color" play an important role, particularly at large
momentum transfer. The formulae for
electroweak current matrix elements of  can be easily
extended to the  coupling of gravitons.  In, fact, one can
show that the anomalous gravito-magnetic moment , analogous
to  in electromagnetic current interactions, vanishes
identically for any system, composite or
elementary.  This important feature, which
follows in general from the equivalence
principle , is obeyed
explicitly in the light-front formalism.
The light-front Fock representation is especially advantageous in
the study of exclusive  decays.  For example, we can write down
an exact frame-independent representation of decay matrix elements
such as  from the overlap of 
parton conserving wavefunctions and the overlap of  from
the annihilation of a quark-antiquark pair in the initial
wavefunction.  The off-diagonal 
 contributions give a new perspective for the
physics of -decays.  A semileptonic decay involves not only
matrix elements where a quark changes flavor, but also a
contribution where the leptonic pair is created from the
annihilation of a  pair within the Fock states of
the initial  wavefunction.  The semileptonic decay thus can
occur from the annihilation of a nonvalence quark-antiquark pair
in the initial hadron.  Intrinsic charm 
states of the  meson, although small in probability, can play
an important role in its weak decays because they facilitate
CKM-favored weak decays. The "handbag"
contribution to the leading-twist off-forward parton distributions
measured in deeply virtual Compton scattering has a similar
light-front wavefunction representation as overlap integrals of
light-front wavefunctions.
In the case of hadronic amplitudes involving a hard momentum
transfer , it is often possible to expand the quark-gluon
scattering amplitude as a function of . The
leading-twist contribution then can be computed from a
hard-scattering amplitude  where the external quarks and
gluons emanating from each hadron can be taken as collinear.  The
convolution with the light-front wavefunction and integration
  over the relative transverse momentum
projects out only the  component of the light-front
wavefunctions.  This leads to hadron spin selection rules such as
hadron helicity conservation.  Furthermore,
only the minimum number of quark and gluon quanta contribute at
leading order in  The nominal scaling of  hard hadron
scattering amplitudes at leading twist then obeys dimensional
counting rules.Recently these rules have been derived to all orders in the gauge
coupling in conformal QCD and large  using gauge/string
duality. There is also evidence from
hadronic  decays that the QCD coupling approaches an
infrared fixed-point at low scales. This may
explain the empirical success of conformal approximations to QCD.
The distribution amplitudes  which appear in
factorization formulae for hard exclusive processes are the
valence LF Fock wavefunctions integrated over the relative
transverse momenta up to the resolution scale
.  These quantities specify how a hadron
shares its longitudinal momentum among its valence quarks; they
control virtually all exclusive processes involving a hard scale
, including form factors, Compton scattering, semi-exclusive
processes, and photoproduction at large
momentum transfer, as well as the decay of a heavy hadron into
specific final states.
The quark and gluon probability distributions  and
 of a hadron can be computed from the absolute squares of
the light-front wavefunctions, integrated over the transverse
momentum.  All helicity distributions are thus encoded in terms of
the light-front wavefunctions.  The DGLAP evolution of the
structure functions can be derived from the high 
properties of the light-front wavefunctions.  Thus given the
light-front wavefunctions, one can compute all
of the leading twist helicity and transversity distributions
measured in polarized deep inelastic lepton scattering.  Similarly,
the transversity distributions and off-diagonal helicity
convolutions are defined as a density matrix of the light-front
wavefunctions.

However, it is not true that the leading-twist structure functions
  measured in deep inelastic lepton scattering are
identical to the quark and gluon distributions.  It is usually
assumed, following the parton model,  that the  structure
function measured in neutral current deep inelastic lepton
scattering is at leading order in  simply 
, where 
and  can be computed from the absolute square of the
proton's light-front wavefunction. Recent work by Hoyer, Marchal,
Peigne, Sannino, and myself shows that this standard
identification is wrong. In fact, one cannot
neglect the Wilson line integral between currents in the current
correlator even in light-cone gauge.  In the case of light-cone
gauge, the Wilson line involves the transverse gluon field
 not  Gluon exchange between
the fast, outgoing partons and the target spectators affects the
leading-twist structure functions in a profound way.  The
final-state interactions lead to the Bjorken-scaling diffractive
component  of deep inelastic scattering.  The
diffractive scattering of the fast outgoing quarks on spectators
in the target in turn causes shadowing in the DIS cross section.
Thus the depletion of the nuclear structure functions is not
intrinsic to the wave function of the nucleus, but is a coherent
effect arising from the destructive interference of diffractive
channels induced by final-state interactions.    Similarly, the
effective Pomeron distribution of a hadron is not derived from its
light-front wavefunction and thus is not a universal property.
Many properties involving parton transverse momentum are also
affected by the Wilson line.

Measurements from the HERMES and SMC collaborations show a
remarkably large single-spin asymmetry in semi-inclusive pion
leptoproduction  when the proton is
polarized normal to the photon-to-pion production plane.
Hwang, Schmidt, and I  have shown that
final-state interactions from gluon exchange between the outgoing
quark and the target spectator system lead to single-spin
asymmetries in deep inelastic lepton-proton scattering at leading
twist in perturbative QCD; i.e. , the rescattering
corrections are not power-law suppressed at large photon
virtuality  at fixed .  The existence of such
single-spin asymmetries requires a phase difference between two
amplitudes coupling the proton target with 
 to the same final-state, the same amplitudes which
are necessary to produce a nonzero proton anomalous magnetic
moment.  The single-spin asymmetry which arises from such
final-state interactions does not factorize into a product of
distribution function and fragmentation function, and it is not
related to the transversity distribution  which
correlates transversely polarized quarks with the spin of the
transversely polarized target nucleon.  In general all measures of
quark and gluon transverse momentum require consideration of
final-state interactions as incorporated in the Wilson line.

These effects
highlight the unexpected importance of final- and initial-state
interactions in QCD observables-they lead to leading-twist single-spin
asymmetries, diffraction, and nuclear shadowing, phenomena not included
in the light-front wavefunctions of the target.  Alternatively, as
discussed by Belitsky, Ji, and Yuan, one can
augment the light-front wavefunctions by including the phases induced by
initial and final state interactions. Such wavefunctions correspond to
solving the light-front bound state equation in an external field.


The Light-Front Quantization of QCD 

In Dirac's "Front Form", the generator of
light-front time translations is 
 Boundary conditions are set on the transverse plane
labelled by  and .  Given the Lagrangian of a
quantum field theory,  can be constructed as an operator on
the Fock basis, the eigenstates of the free theory.  Since each
particle in the Fock basis is on its mass shell, 
 and its energy 
 is positive, only particles with positive momenta
 can occur in the Fock basis.  Since
the total plus momentum  is conserved, the
light-cone vacuum cannot have any particle content.

The Heisenberg equation on the light-front is
 
The operator  the "light-cone
Hamiltonian", is frame-independent.  This can in principle be
solved by diagonalizing the matrix  on the free
Fock basis:  
The eigenvalues  of  give the
squared invariant masses of the bound and continuum spectrum of
the theory.  The light-front Fock space is the eigenstates of the
free light-front Hamiltonian; , it is a Hilbert space of
non-interacting quarks and gluons, each of which satisfy 
 and   The
projections  of the eigensolution on the
-particle Fock states provide the light-front wavefunctions.
Thus solving a quantum field theory is equivalent to solving a
coupled many-body quantum mechanical problem:
 

where the convolution and sum is understood over the Fock number,
transverse momenta, plus momenta, and helicity of the intermediate
states.  Light-front wavefunctions are also related to
momentum-space Bethe-Salpeter wavefunctions by integrating over
the relative momenta  since this projects out the
dynamics at 

A review of the development of light-front quantization of QCD and
other quantum field theories is given in the
references. The light-front quantization of
gauge theory can be most conveniently carried out in the
light-cone gauge .  In this gauge the 
field becomes a dependent degree of freedom, and it can be
eliminated from the Hamiltonian in favor of a set of specific
instantaneous light-front time interactions.  In fact in
 theory, this instantaneous interaction provides the
confining linear  interaction between quarks.  In 
dimensions, the transverse field  propagates massless
spin-one gluon quanta with polarization
vectors which satisfy both the gauge condition
 and the Lorentz condition 
.

Prem Srivastava and I have  presented a
new systematic study of light-front-quantized gauge theory in
light-cone gauge using a Dyson-Wick S-matrix expansion based on
light-front-time-ordered products.  The Dirac bracket method is
used to identify the independent field degrees of
freedom.   In our analysis one imposes the light-cone
gauge condition as a linear constraint using a Lagrange
multiplier, rather than a quadratic form.  We then find that the
LF-quantized free gauge theory simultaneously satisfies the
covariant gauge condition  as an operator
condition as well as the LC gauge condition.  The gluon propagator
has the form
 
where we have defined
 
Here  is a null four-vector, gauge direction, whose
components are chosen to be , 
.  Note also
 
The gauge field propagator 
 is transverse not only to the gauge direction
 but also to , i.e. , it is doubly-transverse .  Thus  represents the polarization sum over
physical propagating modes.  The last term proportional to 
 in the gauge propagator does not  appear in the usual
formulations of light-cone gauge.  However, in tree graph
calculations it cancels against instantaneous gluon exchange
contributions.

The remarkable properties of (the projector)  greatly
simplifies the computations of loop amplitudes.  For example, the
coupling of gluons to propagators carrying high momenta is
automatic.  In the case of tree graphs, the term proportional to
 cancels against the instantaneous gluon exchange
term.  However, in the case of loop diagrams, the separation needs
to be maintained so that one can identify the correct
one-particle-irreducible contributions.   The absence of collinear
divergences in irreducible diagrams in the light-cone gauge
greatly simplifies the leading-twist factorization of soft and
hard gluonic corrections in high momentum transfer inclusive and
exclusive reactions since the numerators
associated with the gluon coupling only have transverse
components.

The interaction Hamiltonian of QCD in light-cone gauge can be
derived by systematically applying the Dirac bracket method to
identify the independent fields.   It
contains the usual Dirac interactions between the quarks and
gluons, the three-point and four-point gluon non-Abelian
interactions plus instantaneous light-front-time gluon exchange
and quark exchange contributions
 
where
 


The renormalization constants in the non-Abelian theory have been
shown to satisfy the identity 
at one-loop order, as expected in a theory with only physical
gauge degrees of freedom.  The renormalization factors in the
light-cone gauge are independent of the reference direction
.   The QCD  function computed in the noncovariant
LC gauge agrees with the conventional theory
result.  Dimensional regularization and the
Mandelstam-Leibbrandt
prescriptionfor LC gauge were used to define the Feynman loop
integrations.  There are no Faddeev-Popov or
Gupta-Bleuler ghost terms.

The running coupling constant and the QCD  function have
also been computed at one loop in the doubly-transverse light-cone
gauge.   It is also possible to
effectively quantize QCD using light-front methods in covariant
Feynman gauge.  It is well-known that the
light-cone gauge itself is not completely defined until one
specifies a prescription for the poles of the gauge propagator at
 The Mandelstam-Liebbrandt prescription has the
advantage of preserving causality and analyticity, as well as
leading to proofs of the renormalizability and unitarity of
Yang-Mills theories.  The ghosts which
appear in association with the Mandelstam-Liebbrandt prescription
from the single poles have vanishing residue in absorptive parts,
and thus do not disturb the unitarity of the theory.

A remarkable advantage of light-front quantization is that the
vacuum state  of the full QCD Hamiltonian evidently
coincides with the free vacuum.  The light-front vacuum is
effectively trivial if the interaction Hamiltonian applied to the
perturbative vacuum is zero.  Note that all particles in the
Hilbert space have positive energy ,
and thus positive light-front .  Since the plus momenta
 is conserved by the interactions, the perturbative
vacuum can only couple to states with particles in which all
 = 0; , so called zero-mode states.   Bassetto and
collaborators have shown that the
computation of the spectrum of  in equal time
quantization requires constructing the full spectrum of non
perturbative contributions (instantons).  In contrast, in the
light-front quantization of gauge theory, where the 
singularity of the instantaneous interaction is defined by a
simple infrared regularization, one obtains the correct spectrum
of  without any need for vacuum-related contributions.
Zero modes of auxiliary fields are necessary to distinguish the
theta-vacua of massless QED(1+1)
, or to
represent a theory in the presence of static external boundary
conditions or other constraints.  Zero-modes provide the
light-front representation of spontaneous symmetry breaking in
scalar theories.
Light-Front Quantization of the Standard Model 

Prem Srivastava and I have also shown how light-front quantization
can be applied to the Glashow, Weinberg and Salam (GWS) model of
electroweak interactions based on the nonabelian gauge group
.    This theory contains a
nonabelian Higgs sector which triggers spontaneous symmetry
breaking (SSB).  A convenient way of implementing SSB and the
(tree level) Higgs mechanism in the front form  theory  was
developed earlier by Srivastava.  One
separates the quantum fluctuation fields from the corresponding
dynamical bosonic condensate   (or
zero-longitudinal-momentum-mode) variables, before  applying
the Dirac procedure in order to construct the Hamiltonian
formulation.  The canonical quantization of LC gauge GWS
electroweak theory in the front form  can  be derived by
using the Dirac procedure to construct a self-consistent LF
Hamiltonian theory.  This leads to an attractive new formulation
of the Standard Model of the strong and electroweak interactions
which does not break the physical vacuum and has well-controlled
ultraviolet behavior.  The only ghosts which appear in the
formalism are the  modes of the gauge field
associated with regulating the light-cone gauge prescription.  The
massive gauge field propagator has good asymptotic behavior in
accordance with a renormalizable theory, and the massive would-be
Goldstone fields can be taken as physical degrees of freedom.

For example, consider the Abelian Higgs model.  The interaction
Lagrangian is
 
 where
   and
 
 with  The complex
scalar field  is decomposed as  
 where  is the  zero mode
determined by the minimum of the potential: 
,  is the dynamical Higgs field, and
 is the Nambu-Goldstone field.  The quantization
procedure determines , the 't Hooft
condition.  One can now eliminate the zero mode component of the
Higgs field  which gives masses for the fundamental quantized
fields.   The  field then has mass  and the Higgs
field acquires mass 

A new aspect of LF quantization, is that the third polarization of
the quantized massive vector field  with four momentum
 has the form .  Since
, this non-transverse polarization vector has zero norm.
However, when one includes the constrained interactions of the
Goldstone particle, the effective longitudinal polarization vector
of a produced vector particle is 
 which is identical
to the usual polarization vector of a massive vector with norm
.  Thus, unlike
the conventional quantization of the Standard Model, the Goldstone
particle only provides part of the physical longitudinal mode of
the electroweak particles.

In the LC gauge LF framework, the free massive gauge fields in the
electroweak theory satisfy simultaneously the 't Hooft conditions
as an operator equation.  The sum over the three physical
polarizations is given by 
  which satisfies:  
 and 
.  The free propagator of the massive
gauge field  is
 
It does not have the bad high energy behavior found in the (Proca)
propagator in the unitary gauge formulation, where the would-be
Nambu-Goldstone boson is gauged away.

In the limit of vanishing mass of the vector boson, the gauge
field propagator goes over to the doubly transverse gauge,
(), the
propagator found in QCD.  The numerator
of the gauge propagator  also has important
simplifying properties, similar to the ones associated with the
projector .  The transverse polarization vectors
for massive or massless vector boson may be taken to be
 whereas the
non-transverse third one in the massive case is found to be
parallel to the LC gauge direction 
.  Its projection along the direction
transverse to  shares the spacelike vector property
carried by .  The Goldstone boson or
electroweak equivalence theorem becomes transparent in  the LF
formulation.


The interaction Hamiltonian of the Standard Model can be written
in a compact form by retaining the dependent components 
and  in the formulation.  Its form closely resembles the
interaction Hamiltonian of covariant theory, except for the
presence of additional instantaneous four-point interactions.  The
resulting Dyson-Wick perturbation theory expansion based on
equal-LF-time ordering has also been constructed, allowing one to
perform higher-order computations in a straightforward fashion.
The singularities in the noncovariant pieces of the field
propagators may be defined using the causal ML prescription for
 when we employ dimensional regularization, as was shown
in our earlier work on QCD.  The power-counting rules in LC gauge
then become similar to those found in covariant gauge theory.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking is thus implemented in a novel way
when one quantizes the Standard Model at fixed light-front time
 In the general case, the Higgs field  can
be separated into two components:

 
where  is a classical    zero-mode field and
 is the dynamical quantized field.   Here  is the
weak-isospin index.  The zero-mode component is determined  by
solving the Euler-Lagrange tree-level condition:
 
A nonzero value for  corresponds to spontaneous symmetry
breaking.  The nonzero  couples to the  gauge boson and
Fermi fields through the Yukawa interactions of the Standard
Model.  It can then  be eliminated from the theory in favor of
mass terms for the fundamental matter fields in the effective
theory.  The resulting masses are identical to those of the usual
Higgs implementation of spontaneous symmetry breaking in the
Standard Model.

The generators of isospin rotations are defined from the dynamical
Higgs fields:
 
Note that the weak-isospin charges and the currents corresponding
to   are not conserved if the zero mode  is nonzero
since the cross terms in  and  are missing. Thus
 Nevertheless, the charges annihilate the
vacuum:  since the dynamical fields 
have no support on the LF vacuum, and all quanta have positive
 Thus the LF vacuum remains equal to the perturbative
vacuum; it is unaffected by the occurrence of spontaneous symmetry
breaking.

In effect one can interpret the  zero mode field 
as an -independent external field, analogous to an applied
constant electric or magnetic field in atomic physics.  In this
interpretation, the zero mode is  a remnant of a Higgs field which
persists from early cosmology; the LF vacuum however remains
unchanged and unbroken.

Non-Perturbative Methods 

As noted in section 2., solving a quantum field theory at fixed
light-front time  can be formulated as a relativistic
extension of Heisenberg's matrix mechanics.  If one imposes
periodic boundary conditions in , then the 
momenta become discrete: 
, where 
.  For a given "harmonic
resolution" , there are only a finite number of ways a set of
positive integers  can sum to a positive integer . Thus at
a given , the dimension of the resulting light-front Fock state
representation of the bound state is rendered finite without
violating Lorentz invariance.  The eigensolutions of a quantum
field theory, both the bound states and continuum solutions, can
then be found by numerically diagonalizing a frame-independent
light-front Hamiltonian  on a finite and discrete
momentum-space Fock basis.   The continuum limit is reached for 
 This formulation of the non-perturbative light-front
quantization problem is called "discretized light-cone
quantization" (DLCQ). The method preserves the
frame-independence of the Front form.


The DLCQ method has been used extensively for solving one-space
and one-time theories, including applications
to supersymmetric quantum field theoriesand specific tests of the Maldacena
conjecture.   There has been progress in
systematically developing the computation and renormalization
methods needed to make DLCQ viable for QCD in physical spacetime.
For example, John Hiller, Gary McCartor, and
I  have shown
how DLCQ can be used to solve 3+1 theories despite the large
numbers of degrees of freedom needed to enumerate the Fock basis.
A key feature of our work is the introduction of Pauli Villars
fields to regulate the UV divergences and perform renormalization
while preserving the frame-independence of the theory.  A recent
application of DLCQ to a 3+1 quantum field theory with Yukawa
interactions is given in the references. One
can also define a truncated theory by eliminating the higher Fock
states in favor of an effective
potential.Spontaneous symmetry breaking and other nonperturbative effects
associated with the instant-time vacuum are hidden in dynamical or
constrained zero modes on the light-front.  An introduction is
given by McCartor and Yamawaki  
The pion distribution amplitude has been computed  using a
combination of the discretized DLCQ method for the  and 
light-front coordinates with a spatial lattice
in the transverse directions.  A finite lattice spacing  can be
used by choosing the parameters of the effective theory in a
region of renormalization group stability to respect the required
gauge, Poincare, chiral, and continuum symmetries.
Dyson-Schwinger models can also be used to predict
light-front wavefunctions and hadron distribution amplitudes by
integrating over the relative  momentum of the Bethe-Salpeter
wavefunctions.  Explicit nonperturbative light-front wavefunctions have
been found in this way for the Wick-Cutkosky model, including spin-two
states.One can also implement
variational methods, using the structure of perturbative solutions as a
template for the numerator of the light-front wavefunctions.

A Light-Front Event Amplitude Generator 

The light-front formalism can be used as an "event amplitude
generator" for high energy physics reactions where each particle's
final state is completely labelled in momentum, helicity, and
phase.  The application of the light-front time evolution operator
 to an initial state systematically generates the tree and
virtual loop graphs of the -matrix in light-front time-ordered
perturbation theory in light-cone gauge.  Given the interactions
of the light-front interaction Hamiltonian, any amplitude in QCD
and the electroweak theory can be computed.  For example, this
method can  be used to automatically compute the hard-scattering
amplitudes  for the deuteron form factor or  elastic
scattering.

At higher orders, loop integrals only involve integrations over
the momenta of physical quanta and physical phase space 
.  Renormalized amplitudes can be
explicitly constructed by subtracting from the divergent loops
amplitudes with nearly identical integrands corresponding to the
contribution of the relevant mass and coupling counter terms -
the "alternating denominator method".  The
natural renormalization scheme to use for defining the coupling in
the event amplitude generator is a physical effective charge such
as the pinch scheme.  The argument of the
coupling is then unambiguous.  The DLCQ
boundary conditions can be used to discretize the phase space and
limit the number of contributing intermediate states without
violating Lorentz invariance.  Since one avoids dimensional
regularization and nonphysical ghost degrees of freedom, this
method of generating events at the amplitude level could provide a
simple but powerful tool for simulating events both in QCD and the
Standard Model.  Alternatively, one can construct the matrix
for scattering in QCD using light-front quantization and the event
amplitude generator; one can then probe its spectrum  by finding
zeros of the resolvant.  It would be particularly interesting to
apply this method to finding the gluonium spectrum of QCD.

Acknowledgments 
Work supported by the Department of Energy under contract number
DE-AC03-76SF00515.  This talk is in large part based on
collaborations with the late Professor Prem Srivastava.  I
am grateful to Professor Koichi Yamawaki and the other organizers of
this meeting for their outstanding hospitality in Nagoya.

 99 



See, e.g. , S. J. Brodsky and H. C. Pauli, Light-Cone
Quantization and QCD , Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 396, eds.,
H. Mitter et al. , Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991.


S. J. Brodsky, D. S. Hwang, B. Q. Ma and I. Schmidt,


Nucl. Phys. B 593 , 311 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0003082].




X. d. Ji, J. P. Ma and F. Yuan,

[arXiv:hep-ph/0301141].




S. D. Drell and T. Yan,



Phys. Rev. Lett. 24 , 181 (1970).



G. B. West,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 24 , 1206 (1970).



S. J. Brodsky and S. D. Drell,

Phys. Rev. D 22 , 2236 (1980).



S. J. Brodsky, C. R. Ji and G. P. Lepage,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  51 , 83 (1983).




L. Okun and  I. Yu. Kobzarev, ZhETF, 43  1904 (1962) (English
translation: JETP 16   1343 (1963)); L. Okun, in proceedings
of the International Conference on Elementary Particles, 4th,
Heidelberg, Germany (1967).  Edited by H. Filthuth.  North-Holland,
(1968).



X. Ji,

Phys. Rev.  D55 , 7114 (1997), [arXiv: hep-ph/9609381].



O. V. Teryaev,


[arXiv: hep-ph/9904376].




S. J. Brodsky and D. S. Hwang,


Nucl. Phys. B 543 , 239 (1999) [arXiv:hep-ph/9806358].


S. J. Brodsky and S. Gardner,

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 054016 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0108121].



S. J. Brodsky, M. Diehl and D. S. Hwang,


Nucl. Phys. B 596 , 99 (2001) [arXiv:hep-ph/0009254].



M. Diehl, T. Feldmann, R. Jakob and P. Kroll,

Nucl. Phys. B 596 , 33 (2001) [Erratum-ibid. B 605 ,
647 (2001)] [arXiv:hep-ph/0009255].







S. J. Brodsky and G. P. Lepage,

Phys. Rev. D 24 , 2848 (1981).




S. J. Brodsky and G. R. Farrar,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  31 , 1153 (1973).




V. A. Matveev, R. M. Muradian and A. N. Tavkhelidze,


Lett. Nuovo Cim.  7 , 719 (1973).







S. J. Brodsky and G. R. Farrar,

Phys. Rev. D 11 , 1309 (1975).


J. Polchinski and M. J. Strassler,

Phys. Rev. Lett.  88 , 031601 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0109174].




S. J. Brodsky, S. Menke, C. Merino and J. Rathsman,


[arXiv:hep-ph/0212078].







G. P. Lepage and S. J. Brodsky,

Phys. Rev. D 22 , 2157 (1980).




S. J. Brodsky, M. Diehl, P. Hoyer and S. Peigne,

Phys. Lett. B 449 , 306 (1999) [arXiv:hep-ph/9812277].



M. Beneke, G. Buchalla, M. Neubert and C. T. Sachrajda,


Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 , 1914 (1999) [arXiv: hep-ph/9905312].



Y. Y. Keum, H. n. Li and A. I. Sanda,

Phys. Lett. B 504 , 6 (2001) [arXiv:hep-ph/0004004].






S. J. Brodsky, P. Hoyer, N. Marchal, S. Peigne and F. Sannino,

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 114025 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0104291].


A. V. Belitsky, X. Ji and F. Yuan,

[arXiv:hep-ph/0208038].



K. Goeke, A. Metz, P. V. Pobylitsa and M. V. Polyakov,

[arXiv:hep-ph/0302028].



S. J. Brodsky, D. S. Hwang and I. Schmidt,


Phys. Lett. B 530 , 99 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0201296].







P. A. Dirac,

Rev. Mod. Phys.  21 , 392 (1949).



For a review and references, see S. J. Brodsky,

Acta Phys. Polon. B 32 , 4013 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0111340], and

S. J. Brodsky, H. C. Pauli and S. S. Pinsky,

Phys. Rept.  301 , 299 (1998) [arXiv:hep-ph/9705477].



P. P. Srivastava and S. J. Brodsky,

Phys. Rev. D 64 , 045006 (2001) [arXiv:hep-ph/0011372].


D. M. Ditman and  I. V. Tyutin, Quantization of Fields with
Constraints , Springer-Verlag, 1990.

D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 , 1343
(1973).

H. D. Politzer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 , 1346 (1973).


  S. Mandelstam,
  
  
  Nucl. Phys. B 213 , 149 (1983).
  


G. Leibbrandt,

Rev. Mod. Phys.  59 , 1067 (1987).


  
    A. Bassetto, M. Dalbosco, I. Lazzizzera and R. Soldati,
  
  Phys. Rev. D 31 , 2012 (1985).
  

 
    A. Bassetto,
  
  
  Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  51C , 281 (1996)
  [arXiv:hep-ph/9605421].
  

P. P. Srivastava and S. J. Brodsky,

Phys. Rev.  D61 , 025013 (2000), [arXiv:
hep-ph/9906423].



A. Bassetto, G. Nardelli and R. Soldati,


Singapore, Singapore: World Scientific (1991) 227 p .


A. Bassetto, L. Griguolo and F. Vian,

[arXiv:hep-th/9911036].


K. Yamawaki,

[arXiv:hep-th/9802037].



G. McCartor,

[ArXiv: hep-th/0004139].



P. P. Srivastava,

Phys. Lett. B448 , 68 (1999) [arXiv: hep-th/9811225].


S. S. Pinsky and B. van de Sande,


Phys. Rev.  D49 , 2001 (1994), [arXiv: hep-ph/9310330].



S. Glashow, Nucl. Phys. 22 , 579 (1961); S. Weinberg, Phys.
Rev. Lett 19 , 1264 (1967); A. Salam, in Elementary
Particle Theory , ed. N. Svartholm (Almqvist and Wiksells,
Stockholm, 1969), p. 367.

P. P. Srivastava, On spontaneous symmetry breaking
  mechanism  in light-front quantized theory ,
   Ohio-State University
   preprint, November 1991, CBPF, Rio de Janeiro, preprint:
   NF-004/92.

    P. P. Srivastava,   Higgs mechanism in light-front quantized field theory , December
  1991,  Ohio-State  preprint 92-0012,    XXVI Intl. Conf.
on High Energy Physics,
  Dallas, TX, August 6-12. AIP Conf. Proceedings No. 272, pg. 2125
  (1992), Ed., J.R. Sanford.

  P. P. Srivastava,
  Constraints in light-front quantized theory , Ohio-State
  preprint 92-0175, AIP Conf. Proceedings No. 272;  Nuovo
  Cimento A107 , 549 (1994).

T. Maskawa and K. Yamawaki,



Prog. Theor. Phys.  56 , 270 (1976).


H. C. Pauli and S. J. Brodsky,

Phys. Rev. D 32 , 1993 (1985).


Y. Matsumura, N. Sakai and T. Sakai,

Phys. Rev. D 52 , 2446 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9504150].


J. R. Hiller, S. Pinsky and U. Trittmann,


Phys. Rev. D 64 , 105027 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0106193].



S. J. Brodsky, J. R. Hiller and G. McCartor,



Phys. Rev. D 64 , 114023 (2001) [arXiv:hep-ph/0107038].



S. J. Brodsky, J. R. Hiller and G. McCartor,

Annals Phys.  296 , 406 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0107246].



S. J. Brodsky, J. R. Hiller and G. McCartor,

[arXiv:hep-th/0209028].



H. C. Pauli,

[arXiv:hep-ph/0111040].




H. C. Pauli,


Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.  90 , 154 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-ph/0103108].




T. Frederico, H. C. Pauli and S. G. Zhou,


Phys. Rev. D 66 , 116011 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0210234].



G. McCartor,

in Proc. of  New Nonperturbative Methods and Quantization of the
Light Cone, Les Houches, France, 24 Feb - 7 Mar 1997.


W. A. Bardeen, R. B. Pearson and E. Rabinovici,

Phys. Rev. D 21 , 1037 (1980).


S. Dalley,

Phys. Rev. D 64 , 036006 (2001) [arXiv:hep-ph/0101318].



S. Dalley and B. van de Sande,

Phys. Rev. D 59 , 065008 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9806231].



M. Burkardt and S. K. Seal,

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 034501 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0102245].



M. B. Hecht, C. D. Roberts and S. M. Schmidt,

nucl-th/0008049.


V. A. Karmanov and A. V. Smirnov,

Nucl. Phys. A 575 , 520 (1994).




S. J. Brodsky, R. Roskies and R. Suaya,


Phys. Rev. D 8 , 4574 (1973).



J. M. Cornwall and J. Papavassiliou,

Phys. Rev. D 40 , 3474 (1989).


S. J. Brodsky and H. J. Lu,

Phys. Rev. D 51 , 3652 (1995) [arXiv:hep-ph/9405218].




