 
 





0cm      
0cm     

0pt         
0pt            
20cm        
16cm         
 


  
  
 
 
1202           
C             
G   
I   
J   
N   
N   
R   
S   
R   
T   
Z   
 
1316         
 
A         
B   
C   
D   
E   
F   
G   
H   
I   
J   
K   
L   
M   
N   
O   
P   
Q   
R   
S   
T   
U   
V   
W   
X   
Y   
Z   
 

   
f   
g   
h   
E   


  
 
.                
(                
[                
               
.               
)               
]               
              
         

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(in  ) 
(out  ) 



 



 
 
UTF 452/UTM 641  




 
 

 




QFT holography near the horizon of Schwarzschild-like spacetimes.  




 

 

 

Valter Moretti and Nicola Pinamonti  



 Department of Mathematics, E-mail: moretti@science.unitn.it
 
 I.N.F.N. Gruppo Collegato di Trento
 
 Department of Physics, E-mail: pinamont@science.unitn.it
 

 

 University of Trento, 
 Faculty of Science,
via Sommarive 14,
I-38050 Povo (TN),
Italy. 






 

 
 
 

 



April 2003  



 
 

Abstract: 
It is argued that free QFT can be defined on the event horizon of a Schwarzschild-like
spacetime and that that theory is unitarily and algebraically equivalent to QFT in the bulk
(near the horizon). Under that unitary equivalence the bulk hidden  symmetry 
found in a previous work becomes manifest on the event horizon, it being induced by a group
of horizon diffeomorphisms. The class of generators of that group can be enlarged to include
a full Virasoro algebra of fields defined on the event horizon. These generators have
a quantum representation in QFT on the event horizon and thus in the bulk.   


1 . Introduction . 
A number of papers has been concerned with the issue of the statistical origin of black-hole entropy. 
Holographic principle arose by the idea  
that gravity near the horizon should be described by a low dimensional theory with a higher dimensional group
of symmetry. The correspondence between quantum field theories of different dimensions 
was conjectured by Maldacena using the machinery of 
string theory: There is a correspondence between quantum field theory in
a, asymptotically ,   dimensional spacetime  (the "bulk")
 and a conformal theory in a 
dimensional manifold (the (conformal) "boundary" at spacelike infinity).  
Witten described the above correspondence  in terms of relations
of observables of the two theories.
Rehren proved rigorously some holographic results for free quantum fields in a  
background, establishing a correspondence between bulk observables and boundary observables 
without employing string machinery. 
To explain the correspondence one should notice that the 
conformal group which 
acts in the -dimensional   boundary can be
 realized as the group of the isometries of the  bulk.
In this way,  the bulk-boundary correspondence has a geometric nature. 
The boundary of a Schwarzschild spacetime  (dropping the boundary at
infinity) is the event horizon of the black hole. The AdS correspondence has been used
directly in Minkowski spacetime for massless particle in with the help
of the optical metric.
Is there any bulk-boundary correspondence in a manifold containing a Schwarzschild-like black hole?
Two-dimensional Rindler spacetime embedded in Minkowski spacetime approximates the nontrivial part
of the spacetime structure  near a bifurcate horizon as that of a Schwarzschild black hole embedded in Kruskal spacetime.
In that context,  we have argued in a recent work that free quantum field theory  in
two-dimensional Rindler space  presents a "hidden"  symmetry: The theory turns out
to be invariant under a unitary representation of  but such a quantum symmetry cannot be induced
by the geometric background. 
 is the group of symmetry of the zero-dimensional conformal field theory in the sense 
of, so,  as
for the case of AdS spacetime, it suggests the existence of a possible correspondence between quantum field
theory in Rindler space  and a conformal field theory defined on its event horizon.
In this  letter we illustrate the basic results that can be found in a forthcoming technical 
paper where we have shown that  it is possible to build up the wanted 
correspondence of a free quantum theory defined in the bulk and a quantum field theory 
defined on the event horizon of a two dimensional Rindler space. Other involved results are that
the  symmetry reveals a clear geometric meaning if it is examined on the horizon
and, in that context, a whole Virasoro algebra of symmetries arises.

Some overlap with our results is present in the literature. Guido, Longo, Roberts and Verch
 discussed in some detail the extent to which an algebraic QFT on a spacetime with a bifurcate
Killing horizon induces a conformal QFT on that bifurcate Killing horizon.
Along a similar theme, Schroer and Wiesbrock have studied the relationship between QFTs on
horizons and QFTs on the ambient spacetime. They even use the term 
"hidden symmetry" a sense similar as we do here and we done in. In related follow-up works by
Schroer and by Schroer and Fassarella the relation to holography 
and diffeomorphism covariance is also discussed.


2 . Hidden  symmetry .  Consider a general Schwarzschild-like metric (namely a static black hole metric
with bifurcate event horizon), 
 ,  denoting angular coordinates. 
Near the horizon (), the  nonangular part of the metric 
 reduces to the metric of a two-dimensional Rindler wedge ,
 
with , and .
Also dropping the angular coordinates,
let us consider a free Klein-Gordon scalar field  with motion equation

. To built up the one-particle Hilbert space referred to the quantization with respect to 
the Rindler Killing time ,
 any real solution  of the K-G equation must be decomposed in -stationary modes as follows
 
 is an element of the spectrum of the Rindler Hamiltonian  associated with 
evolution.
Concerning the index  we distinguish between two cases: if  there is a unique mode 
 whose expression is

.
If  there are two values of , corresponding to 
going  and going modes,  whose expression are 
.
If  there is no energy degeneration and the one-particle Hilbert space  generated by the 
positive frequency part of the decomposition above is isomorphic to .
In the other case (), twofold degeneracy implies that . Quantum field operators, acting  in the symmetrized Fock space 
 and referred to the Rindler vacuum  - that is  
if  - read 
 (t,y)=_0^_^() _E(t,y)a_E +^() _E(t,y) a_E ^dE.
As usual, the causal propagator  satisfies
.

In we have found that, if ,  is irreducible under a unitary 
representation  of  generated by (self-adjoint extensions) of the operators 
 (which enjoy the commutation relations of the Lie algebra of ), with
  
 can arbitrarily be fixed in .
 See for details on domains an all that. If  
and so ,
an analogue representation exists in each space . Making use of  Heisenberg representation
it is simply proven that the algebra generated by , with depending-on-time coefficients, is made of
constant of motions. Thus  is a symmetry of the one-particle system 
(that can straightforwardly be extended to the free 
quantum field in Fock space). The crucial point is that the found symmetry is hidden : it cannot be induced by the background
geometry since the Killing fields of Rindler spacetime enjoy a different Lie algebra from that of .


3 . Fields on the horizon . Let us  to investigate the nature of the found  
symmetry exactly on the event horizon
assuming  to be naturally embedded in a Minkowski spacetime. In particular we want to investigate
its geometrical nature, if any, on the event horizon.
 
file=rindler,width=.6 
 (Rindler) light coordinates  
,  (where ) 
cover the (open) Rindler space  . Separately,  is
well defined on the future horizon , , and  is well defined  on the past horizon
,  (see figure). Take the wavefunction in () and consider the limit on
the future horizon . That is equivalent to restrict the wavefunction on the event horizon when
it is considered as a wavefunction in Minkowski spacetime, obtaining
 
 is a pure phase (see for details).
In coordinate , the restriction of  to  is similar  with the 
replaced for  and   replaced by . 
If  the restrictions to  and  read respectively
(v)  =  e^-iEv  4E  
^(in) _+(E) dE + c.c.  , 
(u)  =e^-iEu  4E   ^(out) _+(E) dE + c.c.  
Discarding the phase it is possible to consider the following real
"field on the future Horizon":
 
as the basic object in defining a quantum field theory on the future event horizon. The same can be done 
for the past event horizon. The one-particle Hilbert space  is defined 
as the space generated by positive frequency parts  and turns out to be 
isomorphic to  once again. The field operator reads, on the symmetrized Fock space 
with vacuum , 
 _F (v)=_0^e^-iEv  4E   a_E + e^iEv  4E   a_E ^dE.
The causal propagator  is defined by imposing  and  it takes the form  . In spite of the 
absence of any 
motion equation the essential features of free quantum field theory are preserved by that definition as proven in.
 Degeneracy of the metric on the horizon prevents from smearing  field operators by functions due to the 
 ill-definiteness of the induced volume measure. However, employing the symplectic approach, 
 a well-defined smearing-procedure is that of field operators and exact -forms  where  vanishes
fast as . The integration of forms does not need any measure.
 In other words for a real exact -form  as said above
 _F ()=_0^dE 4E  
(_e^-iEv (v)) a_E + 
(_e^iEv  (v)) a_E ^
is well defined and diffeomorphism invariant.
 In a suitable domain the map 
 defines a one-to-one correspondence between exact one-forms and horizon wavefunctions of the form ()
 and .
 Finally, similarly to usual quantum field theory,  it holds  
 

 The last term define a diffeomorphism-invariant symplectic form on horizon vavefunctions.

 
 4 . Unitary and algebraic holographic theorems .
It is possible to prove the existence of a unitary equivalence between the theory in the bulk and that on the horizon in the sense we
are going to describe. Consider the case  and the future horizon . 

Theorem 1 . There is a unitary map
  such that 
 and  for any smooth compactly supported function 
 used to smear the bulk field, .   (See figure.)

 Details on the construction of  are supplied in, here we give only the main idea.
 Take  as said and consider the associated bulk wavefunction , restrict  to 
 obtaining a horizon vavefunction as in () with positive frequency part .
 Then define a horizon vavefunction  as in () with  replaced by 
 . 
 It is clear that the  map  corresponds to a unitary operator from  to . 
 That is, by definition . Imposing , by taking
 tensor products of , this map extends to a unitary map 
 .
 Finally, by direct inspection one finds that, if  , one also has
 .

 The same procedure can be used to define an analogous unitary operator referred to .
 If  two unitary operators arises.  One is  
 such that 
 and .  is the bulk Hilbert space
 associated with the ingoing modes ans  is the part of bulk field operator built up using only 
 ingoing modes. The other unitary operator  
 plays an analogous role with  replaced for  and  replaced for  everywhere.
 (More generally 
 define a unitary operator which transforms the vacuum states into vacuum states and  field operators
 into field operators.)
 As a consequence of the cited theorem, e.g. if , one has the invariance of vacuum expectation values:
 

 Similarly to the extent in the bulk case, one focuses on the algebra
  of linear combinations of product of field operators  varying 
in the space of allowed complex -forms. We assume that  also contain the unit operator . 
The Hermitean elements of  are the natural 
observables associated with the horizon field.
 From an abstract point of view the found algebra is a unital -algebra of formal operators 
with the additional properties ,
 and linearity in the form (The analogous algebra
of operators in the bulk fulfill the further  requirement  if (and only if ) ,  being the Klein-Gordon operator.
No analogous requirement makes sense for  since there is no equation of motion on the horizon.) .
 can be studied no matter any operator representation in any Fock space. Operator representations
are obtained via GNS theorem once an algebraic state has been fixed. In the case 
we get the following result which is independent from any choice of vacuum state and Fock representation.
The proof can be found in
.
 denotes the unital -algebra of associated with the bulk field operator.

  Theorem 2 . There is a unique 
 injective unital -algebras homomorphism  such that 
 , where . Moreover in GNS representations in the respectively associated 
 Fock spaces ,  built up over  and  
 respectively,  has a unitary implementation and reduces to . 

Notice that, in particular  preserves the causal propagator, in the sense that it must be

.

Analogous algebraic homomorphism theorems can be given for  and the massless case.


5 . The  symmetry becomes manifest on the horizon.  Consider quantum field theory 
on , but the same result holds concerning . In 
define  operators 
 as the right-hand side of the equation that respectively defines 
in (). 
Exactly as in the bulk case,  operators  generate a unitary  
representation . Hence, varying ,
 define a representation of 
  for the system in the bulk. By construction 
 . As a consequence
 every  turns out to be  a  symmetry of the bulk system  and the group of these symmetries 
 is unitary equivalent to that generated by 
 . In particular the one-parameter group associated with  generates -displacements
 of horizon wavefunctions which are equivalent, under the action of , to -displacements
 of bulk wavefunctions. Now, it make sense to investigate the geometrical nature  of the 
 representation  that, as we said, induces, up to unitary equivalences, 
 the original  symmetry in the bulk. In fact it is possible to prove that:
 
 Theorem 3 . If  in (), the action of every  on a state 
 is essentially equivalent to the action of a corresponding 
 -diffeomorphism on the associated (by ()) horizon wavefunction .
 More precisely, take a matrix  and 
   in a suitable space of horizon
 wavefunction (see). Let  be the positive frequency part 
 of .
 The wavefunction  associated with  reads
_g(v)= av+b cv+d - (b d ) ,g^-1 = . 
 
The term  assures that  vanishes as . Notice 
that the added term disappears when referring to  rather than .
The group of diffeomorphisms of , i.e. the real line(Actually one has to consider the projective line
.) , 
vav+b cv+d  ,g =  SL(2,)
can be obtained by composition of one-parameter subgroups associated with the following three vector fields
on :
. It is simply proven that the Lie brackets of those fields is
 a realization of the Lie algebra of . Moreover, it turns out that:

Theorem 4   
(a) If  in (), the unitary one-parameter group generated by  
 is associated, through Theorem 3, to the one-group of -diffeomorphisms 
 generated by , (b) the unitary one-parameter group generated by  is 
 associated to the one-parameter group of -diffeomorphisms 
 generated by  and (c) the unitary one-parameter group generated by  
 is associated to the one-group of -diffeomorphisms generated by . 


6 . Appearance of Virasoro algebra . 
The bulk -symmetry is manifest when examined on the event horizon, in the sense that 
it is induced by the geometry.  The Lie algebra generated by  vector fields  
play a crucial role in proving this fact. That algebra can be extended to include all the class of fields
defined on the event horizon  with . It is interesting to notice that these fields
enjoy Virasoro commutation relations  without central charge, .
A natural question arises:
 Is it possible to give a quantum representation of these generators in the sense of 
Theorem 4? 

 At least formally, the answer is positive. Indeed, by employing Theorem 4 one finds out that the infinitesimal
action of the one parameter group of diffeomorphisms generated by  on a horizon 
wavefunction  is equivalent to the action of an anti-Hermitean operator  
on the positive frequency part .  is defined as, respectively for 
and ,
 
Those operators are at least anti-Hermitean on suitable domains and enjoy Virasoro commutation rules
.


7 . Four dimensional case . 
Up to now we have investigated only the two dimensional spacetimes, but it is possible to extend our results
to a four dimensional case which better approximates the Schwarzschild extent. 
For this purpose consider the 
near-horizon approximation of a Schwarzschild-like spacetime without discarding the angular variables ,
so that 
. Every field takes an angular part described by the usual spherical harmonics
. QFT in the bulk involves the one-particle Hilbert space 
 with  if ,
  being the space at fixed 
total angular momentum  and  in the massive case 
but  in the massless case. For wavefunctions 
with components in a fixed space  Klein-Gordon equation 
reduces to the two-dimensional one with a positive contribution to the mass depending on . 
Quantum field theory can be constructed on the future horizon .
The appropriate causal propagator reads 
 The horizon field operator 
 has to be smeared with -forms as
 and Theorems 1 and 2, at least in the massive case,
 can be restated as they stand for the two-dimensional case. Theorems 3 and 4 hold true at fixed angular variables.


Acknoledgments . The authors are grateful to R.Verch for kind and useful suggestions.

 999 


G. 't Hooft, Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity. 
preprint: gr-qc/9310026  (1993).

G. 't Hooft, The scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole, an overview. 
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A11 , 4623-4688 (1996).

L. Susskind, The World as a Hologram 
J. Math. Phys. 36 , 6377-6396 (1995).

J. Maldacena,
The Large N Limit of Superconformal Field Theories and Supergravity 
Adv. Theor Math. Phys. 2 , 231 (1998).

E. Witten,
Anti-de Sitter space and holography 
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 , 253-291 (1998). 

 
K. H. Rehren,
Algebraic Holography 
Annales Henri Poincare 1  607-623 (2000). 

K. H. Rehren,
Local Quantum Observables in the Anti-deSitter - Conformal QFT Correspondence 
Phys. Lett. B493  383-388  (2000).


I. Sachs, S. N. Solodukhin,
Horizon Holography ,
Phys. Rev. D64  124023 (2001).


V. Moretti, N. Pinamonti, 
Aspects of hidden and manifest symmetry in 2d near-horizon black-hole backgrounds , 
Nuc. Phys. B647  131 (2002).


V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and  G. Furlan, Conformal Invariance In Quantum
  Mechanics.  
Nuovo Cim. A34   569 (1976).

V. Moretti, N. Pinamonti, 
Holography,  symmetry, Virasoro algebra and all that, in Rindler spacetime , 
to appear (2003).

 D. Guido, R. Longo, J. E. Robertz, R.Verch,
Charged sectors, spin and statistics in Quantum Field Theory on Curved Spacetimes 
Rev.Math Phys. 13  1203 (2001)

 
B.Schroer and H-W. Wiesbrock,
Looking beyond the thermal horizon: Hidden symmetries in chiral modes 
Rev.Math. Phys. 12  (2000) 461

 B. Schroer,
Lightfront Formalism versus HolographyChiral Scanning 
hep-th/0108203

B. Schroer and L. Fassarella,
Wigner particle theory and Local Quantum Physics 
 hep-th/0106064 


 
R. M. Wald, Quantum field theory in curved spacetime and black hole thermodynamics ,
Chicago University Press, Chicago (1994).


                                     

