
-1.5cm
-0.3cm




  
 




 
 
 
 
 
2 
^-1  
Pf  
F  
 
, 
. 
( 
) 
[ 
] 

( 
) 
X  
  




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
^-1   
Pf   
F  
 
  
, 


 







  
  
  
 





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
^-1   
Pf   
F  
 
  
, 
. 
( 
) 
e^ 
^(_+A_) 
  
^         
_5 

Astrophys.J.   
Ap.J.Lett.   
Ap.J.Supp.   
Ann.Math.   
Ann.Phys.   
Ap.J.   
Acta Phys.Pol.   
Astron. and Astrophys.   
Bull.Am.Math.Soc.   
Czech.Math.J.   
Commun.Math.Phys.   
Fortschr.Physik   
Helv.Phys.Acta   
Int.J.Mod.Phys.   
J.Math.Mech.   
J.Phys.   
J.Chem.Phys.   
Lett. Nuovo Cimento   
Suppl. Nuovo Cimento   
Mod.Phys.Lett.   
Nature   
Nuovo Cimento   
Nucl.Phys.   
Phys.Lett.   
Phys.Rev.   
Phys.Rev.Lett.   
Physics Reports   
Physica Scripta   
Progr.Theor.Phys.   
Rev.Math.Pure Appl.   
Rivista del Nuovo Cimento   
Soviet J.Part.Nucl.   
Soviet.Phys.   
Teor.Mat.Fiz.   
Theor.Math.Phys.   
Yadernaya Fizika   
Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz.   
Z.Phys.   
Z.Math.Phys.  ) 


0.3cm

.5ex  
.5ex  )  

.5ex ) 
.5ex )   

#2 ^#1   
    



 
hep-th/0304059 

CPHT-RR 012.0303 
 


 
 Modified Star-Products  

 Beyond the Large- Limit  


Pascal Grange  



 Centre de physique the orique de l'Ecole polytechnique,

 route de Saclay, F-91128 Palaiseau Cedex 

 
 pascal.grange@cpht.polytechnique.fr  






ABSTRACT  
 
 
Derivative corrections to the Wess-Zumino couplings of open-string
effective actions are computed at all orders in derivatives, taking the open-string metric into
account. This leads to a set of deformed star-products beyond the
Seiberg-Witten limit, and allows to
reinterpret the couplings in terms of a deformed integration
prescription along a Wilson line in the non-commutative
set-up. Moreover, the recursive definition of the star-products
induces deformations of  non-commutative Yang-Mills   theory. 





  
April 2003






 

Introduction 

Non-commutative field
theory on the world-volume of a D-brane has been developed in a
peculiar limit where a large constant background -field is turned
on  . This is called the Seiberg-Witten limit and amounts
to  together with a scaling of the metric,
, while open-string parameters are kept fixed. Duality properties have been studied, and an explicit mapping
between ordinary and non-commutative gauge fields exhibited  . This
inspiring correspondence has been successfully extended to the
Ramond-Ramond couplings in the Seiberg-Witten limit, leading to an infinite set of
derivative corrections  , since the corrections
are suppressed by powers of  in the non-commutative set-up. The
series of corrections are expressed in terms of modified star-products
named  (for integer ) that arise naturally from an
integration prescription along an open Wilson line. This prescription
originates from the requirement of gauge invariance of observables in
non-commutative field theory
 . Computations at tree level in presence of a
single Euclidean D9-brane   in commutative string theory
provided successful checks  , confirming that
these corrections are leading in the Seiberg-Witten limit. This suggested that the
correspondence could be extended by string computations beyond this limit. Mukhi and
Suryanarayana   derived the first correction in terms of the
open-string metric to the coupling of quadratic order in the field
strength, and generalized it to all orders (in the metric) by using a
disk amplitude computed by Liu and Michelson  . This led to a
deformation of the -product by a differential operator 
constructed out of the open-string metric : 






where  the  has the expected Seiberg-Witten
limit






The deformed star-product  received an interpretation
in terms of a deformed smearing   prescription along an open Wilson
line, that parallels the one that had given rise to the
-product  , since








In  this letter we shall 
derive the contribution of the open-string metric to the amplitude


  
so  that we shall be able  to derive the prescription of
   and to extend it to larger
orders in the field strength.


The recursive definition of the modified star-products allows to
address the question of the correct definition of gauge tranformation
  laws beyond the large- limit. We shall
work with a single Euclidean D9-brane in the description where the open-string
metric  is defined by


  

We  shall first work out the deformation of the star-products in
presence of the symmetric part of the two-point functions of
 world-sheet scalars,
 and then interpret the results in terms of a deformed gauge-invariant
 smearing
 prescription in the non-commutative set-up. 


 Taking the open-string metric into account 

Quadratic order in the field strength  
As noticed in previous investigations of Ramond-Ramond couplings for
small field strength, we are instructed to compute couplings whose
order in the field strength is half of the degree as a differential
form. Writing the result in terms of the differential form , one
has to 
make the substitution

 

Therefore  the only role played by the fermions in our
computation will be to provide us with the suitable
number of zero modes, in order to build the grading of the coupling. As we are dealing with the Ramond-Ramond sector, we may forget the first
part of the following expression, because it does not contibute to the grading.

  








 The 
computation   amounts to contracting pairs of scalars using the
open-string propagator



 

 

Each  of the propagators contributing
to the regular part of the coupling comes with
two derivatives acting on two different field strengths:
. At order  in derivatives, the regular
part of the coupling
to  reads   
 






Let  us expand the product in the above expression in terms of the symmetric and antisymmetric
parts of the propagator, and remove the regulator:






As  we expand the gauge coupling to all orders in derivatives, we have to sum these
contributions over :










The  last integral expression therefore equals





This  is a recipe for going beyond
the Seiberg-Witten limit at quadratic order in the field strength. It
confirms the prescription of  , where the first order
in  thereof was computed, and where larger orders were included by
requiring consistency with  .

Higher orders in the field strength 

The derivation   of the regular part of the couplings of
larger orders in the field strength relies on symmetry factors and not on
the precise form of the propagator. It may therefore be applied here
using the full open-string propagator with derivatives included, together
with 
the following notations:







The  coupling to a mode of  is going to be expressed as the image
of  by some differential operator , so that 
is the  of  . Furthermore, if all the metric-dependent coefficients  are set to 0, the
kernel  will reduce to the modified star-product . The only change
with respect to the derivation in the Seiberg-Witten limit comes from
 the symmetric part of the propagator, which is going to insert a
 factor of  in the
 integral for each pair of labels  (with , since
 extracting the regular part of the coupling prohibits self-contractions).


At cubic order in the field strength one can write explicitly
 

* 

As  the symmetry factors have been shown to keep the same structure for an arbitrary
number of operators, the desired operator is seen to be the following
for any integer :








Effect on the non-commutative action 
How to modify the smearing prescription 

It is possible to use the above derivation in the non-commutative
set-up, by inserting a factor of  at each of
the points at which the operators are inserted along the Wilson
line, since the full operator entering the 
coupling of degree  reads







In   order to see wether the couplings can be rewritten in terms of a
 smearing prescription, ordered with respect to a deformed
 star-product along a Wilson line, we are urged to find a recursive
 definition of the deformed star-products. It should be compatible the one derived
 by Liu   
 between 
 the modified star-products in the Seiberg-Witten limit:






 

where  the commutator is understood with respect to the
star-product. As noted in  , the commutator can still
be expressed in terms of  after deformation:





where  is the deformed version of the star-product
  defined by the prescription of integration along an open Wilson line
 for two observables.
 Therefore we are inclined to look for a deformed version of the recursive formula
using derivatives for some of the arguments. 
Let us onsider the following -ary expression


and show how the recursion is organized for one of the
terms in the above derivative. It is of the general form of multiple
convolutions (denoted by ) between operators  smeared along a line, where the
kernel 
is translation invariant.

* 

This  allows us to open up one more integration interval over an intermediate
time and to write the recursive definition of the deformed smearing prescription 





Let  us write the third rank explicitly 











whose  Seiberg-Witten limit is recognized as :













Deformed non-commutative gauge transformations 
The previous investigation of deformed star-products at larger degree
allows to derive the deformation of non-commutative field strength and
gauge transformation required to ensure gauge invariance of the
deformed smeared expression. These are as announced in
 :  




The  recursive formula was the custodian of gauge invariance in the
Seiberg-Witten limit. Extending our prescriptions to larger orders in
the gauge potentials by expanding the deformed Wilson line, we see
that the deformed smeared prescription plays exactly the same role.
 The Ramond-Ramond couplings  are given, for some mode , by a
 smeared integral along a straight open Wilson line of operators 
 of
 the form 
 transforming as 


so  that the gauge invariance of the couplings can be checked on an
 expansion in terms of the gauge potential, using the
recursive definition of the deformed star-products:  
  






The gauge  variation of one of the terms in the above
  expansion reads 

*  

so  that the gauge variation of the field strengths in  is
compensated by the gauge variation of the gauge potentials in
. The quantity  is therefore gauge invariant, and the
deformed smearing prescription is consistent in the non-commutative
set-up provided the commutators of non-commutative Yang-Mills theory
are also deformed.
 





Conclusion 


In order to obtain results beyond the Seiberg-Witten limit, the full open-string propagator has been taken into account in the
computation of the Ramond-Ramond couplings for small  
field strength
 at all orders in derivatives. The resulting differential operators
 acting on powers of the field strength are deformations of the
 modified star-products previously derived in the Seiberg-Witten
 limit. The expression of  is consistent with known string
 amplitudes. Moreover, the recursive definition
 of the modified star-products enables us to express any of them as rational functions of differential operators containing open-string parameters, and Gamma functions thereof.  
The results can be reformulated in the
 non-commutative set-up in terms of a deformed smearing prescription
 along an open Wilson line. This confirms earlier proposals at all
 orders in the open-string metric at disk level, and extends them to
 couplings of higher degrees. Furthermore, the deformation of the commutators
   induced in non-commutative Yang-Mills   theory by
  has been shown to lead to gauge-invariant
 couplings.


 Acknowledgements   
 

I have benefited from conversations with R. Minasian and P. Vanhove,
and from correspondence with S. Mukhi. It
is a pleasure to thank the organizers of the Les Houches Winter
School Frontiers in Number Theory, Physics, and Geometry  (HPCF 2002-00334), during which
part of this work was done. 





 beyond 


  C.-S. Chu and P.-M. Ho, Non-Commutative Open String and D-brane , Nucl. Phys. B550  (1999) 151-168,  hep-th/9812219 . 

 N. Seiberg and E. Witten, String Theory and Non-Commutative Geometry , JHEP 9909  (1999) 032, hep-th/9908142 .


 L. Cornalba, D-branes Physics and Non-Commutative
    Yang-Mills Theory , Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4  (2000)
  271-281, hep-th/9909081 .

 H. Liu, -Trek II:  Operations, Open Wilson Lines and the Seiberg-Witten Map , Nucl. Phys. B614  (2001) 305-329, hep-th/0011125 .

  

 Y. Okawa and H. Ooguri, An Exact Solution to Seiberg-Witten
  Equation of Non-Commutative   Gauge Theory , Phys. Rev. D64  (2001) 046009, hep-th/0104036 .




 S. Mukhi and N.V. Suryanarayana, Gauge-Invariant Couplings of Non-Commutative Branes to Ramond-Ramond Backgrounds , JHEP 0105   (2001) 023, hep-th/0104045 .

   
 H. Liu and J. Michelson, Ramond-Ramond Couplings of Non-Commutative D-Branes,    Phys. Lett. B518  (2001) 143-152, hep-th/0104139 .





 S.R. Das, S. Mukhi and N.V. Suryanarayana,  Derivative Corrections from Non-Commutativity   , JHEP 0108  (2001) 039, hep-th/0106024 .






 S.-J. Rey and R. von Unge, S-Duality, Non-Critical
    Open String and Non-Commutative Gauge Theory , Phys. Lett. B499 
    (2001) 215-222, hep-th/0007089 .



 S. Das and S.-J. Rey, Open Wilson Lines in Non-Commutative Gauge Theory and Tomography of Holographic
      Dual Supergravity , Nucl. Phys. B590  (2000) 453-470, hep-th/0008042 .




  D.J. Gross, A. Hashimoto and N. Itzhaki,  Observables of Non-Commutative Gauge Theories   , Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4  (2000) 893-928, hep-th/0008075 .



 H. Liu and J. Michelson, -TREK: The
    One-Loop N=4 Non-Commutative SYM Action , Nucl. Phys. B614 
  (2001) 279-304, hep-th/0008205 .
 



 T. Mehen and M. Wise, Generalized -Products,
    Wilson Lines and the Solution of the Seiberg-Witten Equations ,
  JHEP 0012  (2000) 008, hep-th/0010204 .



 S.R. Das and S.P. Trivedi, Supergravity Couplings to Non-Commutative Branes, Open Wilson Lines
and Generalised Star Products ,
  JHEP 0102  (2001) 046, hep-th/0011131 .



 S.-J. Rey, Exact Answers to Approximate Questions: Non-Commutative Dipoles, Open
Wilson Lines, and UV-IR Duality , Lecture given at Les Houches
Summer School, Session 76, Unity of
Fundamental Physics: Gravity, Gauge Theory and Strings , hep-th/0207108 .

 S. Mukhi,  Star Products from Commutative String Theory , Pramana 58  (2002) 21-26, hep-th/0108072 .



 P. Grange, Derivative Corrections from Boundary State Computations , Nucl. Phys.   B649  (2003) 297-311, hep-th/0207211 .


  

 S. Mukhi and N.V. Suryanarayana, Open-String
    Actions and Noncommutativity Beyond the Large-B Limit ,  JHEP     0211  (2002) 002, hep-th/0208203 .


  

 H. Liu and J. Michelson, 
 -Trek III: The Search for Ramond-Ramond Couplings ,
  Nucl. Phys. B614  (2001) 330-366, hep-th/0107172 .




