


1.4 




equation section 



 

 
CAMS/03-04

MCTP-03-18

hep-th/0304253



 

Consistent reductions of IIB/M theory and

de Sitter supergravity 



James T. Liu* , W. A. Sabra  and W. Y. Wen*, 
(Email addresses: jimliu@umich.edu, ws00@aub.edu.lb,
wenw@umich.edu)  


* Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics

Randall Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1120, USA 


 Center for Advanced Mathematical Sciences (CAMS) and

Physics Department, American University of Beirut, Lebanon 

  

 
We construct consistent non-linear Kaluza Klein reduction ansatze for
a subset of fields arising from the reduction of IIB and M theory
on dS and dSAdS, respectively.  These reductions
yield four and five-dimensional de Sitter supergravities, albeit with wrong
sign kinetic terms.  We also demonstrate that the ansatze may be used to
lift multi-centered de Sitter black hole solutions to ten and eleven
dimensions.  The lifted dS black holes correspond to rotating E4-branes
of IIB theory.



Introduction 

The recent observations on the acceleration of the universe has led to
renewed interest in de Sitter backgrounds in cosmology.  At the same
time, this has led to much debate on whether de Sitter space itself is
in fact compatible with M-theory.  Although several arguments may be
made against this possibility, it should be noted that de Sitter spaces
naturally arise as backgrounds for the * theories of
.  These * theories are obtained
through a timelike T-duality of the ordinary string theories, and admit an
unconventional effective field theory description involving wrong sign
kinetic energy terms for the RR fields.  Because of this and other
problems, the field theory limits of the * theories appear ill-defined.
Nevertheless, so long as one allows T-duality along a timelike circle,
one must allow for the existence of such * theories as a component of the
full M-theory.  It is in this spirit that we choose to investigate the
de Sitter supergravities which arise as consistent dimensional
reductions of IIB and M theory.

Conventional wisdom indicates that de Sitter space is
incompatible with supersymmetry.  This may be seen, for example, in
the standard classification of possible supersymmetry algebras, which allows
for both Poincare and anti-de Sitter superalgebras, but not for the
possibility of a de Sitter superalgebra.  Thus in order to obtain de
Sitter supersymmetry, one must relax one or more of the usual assumptions.
Such possibilities were first generally studied in.
In the present case, the de Sitter supergravities which we investigate
are unconventional in that they have wrong sign kinetic energy terms
as well as non-compact gaugings.  Of course, unitary theories do exist
with non-compact gaugings.  However, as will be explained below, the
non-compact symmetries which we consider here are of a different
nature, and yield mixed sign kinetic terms for the gauge fields.
While these properties of the de Sitter supergravities are clearly
undesirable, they follow as a natural consequence of the underlying *
theory.  As a result, we leave open the possibility that such de Sitter
supergravities would be of relevance for the * theory beyond the
field theory limit.  It is, however, possible that the effective field
theories which we explore, being unstable, do not provide an adequate
description of the full * theory.  Nevertheless, one may hope to gain
additional insight into de Sitter space and supersymmetry regardless of
the ultimate fate of the * theories.

For the case of anti-de Sitter supersymmetry, it has long been known
that a generalized Freund-Rubin compactification yields backgrounds of
the form AdSSphere.  Furthermore, a linearized Kaluza-Klein
analysis indicates that the zero mode fluctuations about the
AdSSphere background gives rise to a maximal gauged supergravity
in the lower dimensional AdS space.  More recently, various full and
truncated non-linear Kaluza-Klein reductions have been constructed,
demonstrating the consistent embedding of the corresponding gauged
supergravities in the higher dimensional theory
.
Based on the observation that such gauged supergravities yield a
negative cosmological constant of the form , one may at
least formally obtain a de Sitter supergravity through the analytic
continuation to imaginary coupling constant, namely .
While we follow this approach in spirit, it is important to note that
the de Sitter supergravities discussed here (being descended from *
theories) have only real bosonic fields and real gauge couplings
(although Majorana conditions on the fermions may have to be relaxed).

The non-linear Kaluza-Klein ansatze for the conventional sphere reductions
allow the embedding of various lower-dimensional solutions into the
underlying higher-dimensional theories.  For example, R-charged AdS black
holes may be lifted to ten and eleven dimensions, where they take on the
nature of rotating branes.  Similarly, the consistent
reductions constructed below allow us to lift dS black holes into the
original * theory.  In particular, multi-centered dS black holes have been
constructed in; these were furthermore
shown to satisfy an unconventional supersymmetry involving the imaginary
coupling constant mentioned above.  Here we demonstrate
that such dS black holes provide an interesting cosmological background for
* theory and furthermore investigate their lifting to ten or eleven dimensions.
Such multi-centered black holes have also been considered recently by
Behrndt and Cvetic  as examples of time-dependent backgrounds in the
analytically continued de Sitter supergravity.

In the following section we describe the general procedure of obtaining
consistent reduction ansatze for * theories.  Then in sections 3 and 4
we turn to the specific cases of IIB and M reductions,
respectively.  The latter model is particularly interesting, as it
admits a dSAdS background, whereupon either dS or
AdS may be viewed as the lower-dimensional spacetime.  Since both
cases arise from the same eleven-dimensional background, this hints at
some form of a dS/AdS duality.  Finally,
we consider the
lifting of dS black holes in section 5, and conclude in section 6.


Generalized sphere reductions of IIB and M theory 

It has been an important observation that non-dilatonic branes, in
particular the D3, M2 and M5 branes, serve as interpolating solutions
between asymptotic Minkowski and near horizon AdSSphere
geometries (AdS, AdS and AdS,
respectively).  Alternatively, the AdSSphere geometry directly
arises from a generalized Freund-Rubin compactification.  In several
cases, the complete non-linear Kaluza-Klein reduction corresponding to
such geometries is known.  However, it is generally more common that only
a truncated ansatz (often to a maximal Abelian subgroup of the full gauge
group, or with a subset of scalars and higher-rank potentials) has been
constructed.  Such truncated ansatze are often sufficient for the lifting
of solutions such as AdS black holes to the higher dimensional
theory.  

While it would be desirable to obtain a complete reduction, in this
paper we exclusively focus on the truncation to the sector arising from
the higher dimensional metric and -form fields.  To motivate our
approach, consider the Kaluza-Klein sphere reduction ansatz to
AdS.  In this case, the metric has the
general form
 

Here,  and  run from  to , and the 's satisfy
the constraint , corresponding to a parametrization
of .  The -sphere itself is given by the coset space
, while  is a symmetric unimodular matrix
consisting of  scalar degrees of freedom parameterizing the
coset .  The isometry of  gives rise to a
 gauge symmetry, with gauge potentials .  The
gauge covariant derivative is given by, e.g. ,
.  Associated with the metric ansatz
() is a corresponding one on the -form potential
( for , or  for IIB).  This will be considered in
more detail below, when we specialize to the various cases at hand.

The above analysis of the near-horizon dynamics of non-dilatonic branes
may be generalized to encompass the * theories of.
For example, the IIA and IIB theories admit branes which are the
timelike T-duals of ordinary D branes, while M theory admits
generalized M2 and M5 branes, all of which may have unusual signatures
on their world sheets.  In themselves, these branes
are all legitimate solutions of the * theories.  However, it has been
noted that they may be obtained from the ordinary brane solutions via
appropriate analytic continuations

(That this is the case simply follows from the fact that the
supergravity description of the * theories may be obtained by suitable
Wick rotations and analytic continuations of the usual supergravities.) .

This fact will be important to us below in constructing the generalized
sphere reductions.

Just as the ordinary non-dilatonic branes serve as interpolating
solutions between maximally symmetric spaces, the branes of * theory
serve a similar role.  However, in this case, the near horizon limits
are generalizations of the AdSSphere geometries to different
signatures and different signs of the spacetime and internal space
curvatures.  In all such cases, the resulting geometries for either
spacetime or the internal manifold have the maximally symmetric coset
form  or  where  and  denote
space and time dimensions, respectively.  It should be
noted that the internal spaces are often non-compact, and may include
time-like coordinates.  In particular, M theory admits
an interesting dSAdS vacuum, which may be obtained as the
near horizon of either a M2  or a M5  brane.  This has
led to speculation on a possible AdS/CFT duality between the worldvolume
theories of M2 and M5, with the roles of spacetime and internal space
interchanged.

In order to obtain the non-linear Kaluza-Klein ansatz for reduction on
either  or , we may analytically
continue away from the sphere, , corresponding to .
More specifically, starting with the homogeneous embedding of  in
, given by , we
analytically continue an appropriate subset of 's, namely

(Throughout this paper, we use a caret to distinguish quantities
involved in the generalized reduction from those of the usual sphere
reduction.) 

, while at the same time changing the signature of
the embedding space in the natural manner.  This generalization to a
non-compact internal space is conveniently encoded in terms of the
Lorentzian metric, , on the embedding space, with the
hyperbolic embedding specified by the constraint
.  In this case, the generalization of
the metric reduction ansatz, (), takes the essentially
identical form

 

Note, however, that while the scalars are still represented by a
symmetric matrix , they now parametrize the coset
 or  as appropriate to a
generalized signature internal space.  As a result,  may
have negative eigenvalues, and  corresponds to
the vacuum with no scalar excitations.  

At this point, it is important to realize that our claim of negative
eigenvalues for  yields an unconventional version of non-compact
gauging.  In an ordinary gauged supergravity theory, one may choose to
gauge a non-compact group, say, .  Nevertheless, all fields
have conventional kinetic energies, and the theory remains unitary.  In
particular, the equivalent of  for the conventional
supergravity never has negative eigenvalues, regardless of the compact
versus non-compact nature of the gauging.  Furthermore, when the gauging
is removed by taking , one recovers the standard ungauged
supergravity.  For a conventional non-compact gauging, the gauge group is
spontaneously broken to its maximal compact subgroup.  In this case, it
has been shown in that such theories arise from
dimensional-reductions on non-compact spaces, and that they may be
obtained via analytical continuation in the same spirit that we are
advocating here.  The difference with the present case, however, is that
here we choose to reduce the * theory on the maximally symmetric vacuum.
In particular, this means that, even in the ungauged limit, we retain
both compact and non-compact gauge fields (with both positive and negative
kinetic terms, related to the eigenvalues of ).  In the
framework of, we would be expanding about an unstable
vacuum.  However we leave this issue as one that must be resolved by the
underlying * theory.

While () is the universal form of the metric ansatz
for a generalized internal space, we have at the moment left the nature
of the -form field unspecified.  To proceed, we must specialize to
a particular theory.  This is what we carry out in the next section
(for IIB theory) and the subsequent one (for M theory).


The  reduction of IIB supergravity 

The bosonic sector of IIB supergravity consists of the metric, dilaton
and 3-form field strength  in the NSNS sector, as well as
,  and  in the RR sector.  The complete
 reduction of type IIB supergravity gives rise to five-dimensional
 gauged  supergravity.  However, by considering the
truncation of IIB supergravity to only the metric and self-dual 5-form,
one ends up in five dimensions with a truncation of  supergravity
to a bosonic system with  gauge fields and 20 scalars.  The
consistent  reduction in this subsector (which is the one most
directly relevant to the D3-brane) was given in, and has
the form

 

where

 

Here,  is the volume 5-form in the spacetime.
As usual, the field strength  and gauge covariant
derivatives are given in terms of the  gauge fields 
by

 

We mostly follow the notation of, except that we
reserve the caret to denote quantities relevant to * theory.
The coordinates, , are subject to the constraint
, and parametrize the internal .

We now recall that IIB supergravity with signature  may be
obtained from IIB theory by changing the signs of the RR kinetic terms.
In particular, the wrong-sign kinetic term for the self-dual 5-form
gives rise to the ten-dimensional Einstein equation

 

which in turn leads to a dS Freund-Rubin vacuum.  This simply
corresponds to an interchange of positive and negative curvatures
between spacetime and internal space (as is evident from the extra sign in
the above Einstein equation).  It should now be evident how the
appropriate IIB reduction ansatz may be obtained by the analytic
continuation of ().  To generate the wrong-sign kinetic
term, we take .  However, since
, we avoid a resulting imaginary
 by simultaneously taking .  At this stage,
we find

 

Here, we implicitly assume that both  and  remain real
quantities throughout the analytic continuation.  This intermediate
result for the metric and 5-form is unsatisfactory in that the internal
five-dimensional space has the wrong signature and that  is
still complex because of the factor of  in the last term.  Both
issues may be solved by the analytic continuation

 

It is this step that changes the 's from parameterizing  as
 to parameterizing  as .  At the same
time, the analytic continuation of the gauge fields leads to the
non-compact gauge group .

In order for  and  to be real, we finally continue
appropriate entries in the  matrix, namely

 

with corresponding inverse

 

Note that  has a single negative eigenvalue, and .
We reiterate that this negative eigenvalue results in both correct and
wrong-sign gauge kinetic energy terms showing up, depending on the
non-compact versus compact nature of the corresponding generator.
The resulting reduction ansatz for IIB theory on dS is
most conveniently given in terms of the  metric
.  We find

 

where

 

and the gauge covariant derivatives are given by

 

Although the structure of the non-compact gauging is perhaps obvious in
this reduction, to avoid confusion we will always retain explicit
factors of the  metric .

Since this reduction of IIB supergravity on dS was
obtained by appropriate continuation of the ansatz given in
, it follows that the resulting five-dimensional
Lagrangian may similarly be obtained through analytic continuation.  The
resulting Lagrangian has the form
 

This corresponds to a truncation of maximally symmetric 
gauged de Sitter supergravity.  Note that the kinetic terms for the
gauge fields in the compact subgroup 
have the wrong sign, as expected in the  theory.  In addition,
the potential

 

has opposite sign from the sphere case, and yields a maximally symmetric
dS vacuum, invariant under the de Sitter supergroup .
Note that this is the opposite sign of the  but not  the
 potential of since in
the present case  has all positive eigenvalues.

Truncation to ,  de Sitter supergravity 

The maximal   gauged anti-de Sitter supergravity has a
natural  truncation to  gauged supergravity coupled to two
vector multiplets.  The bosonic fields of this truncation comprise the
metric, two scalars and three gauge fields.  The three gauge fields are
naturally taken to be the mutually commuting subset ,  and
 of the full  gauge fields.  At the same time, the two
scalars originate from the parametrization of  as
, with the constraint .

Turning to the de Sitter supergravity, on the other hand, the
maximal compact subgroup  does not admit a 
truncation.  Nevertheless, we may perform an analogous truncation to
two compact and one non-compact  gauge fields.  To do so, we let

 

where  is the non-compact gauge field.  In addition, the
scalars may be given by 
, with .

Since the choice of  truncation corresponds to taking mutually
commuting rotation (boost) planes along the 1-2, 3-4 and 5-6 directions,
it is natural to parametrize the hyperboloid  by taking

 

In this case, the constraint  turns into
, and the reduction ansatz
() becomes

 

where  and ,
signifying the non-compact nature of .
Inserting the above  truncation into (), we
obtain the Lagrangian describing the bosonic sector of the
 theory:

 

Here we have chosen to parametrize the scalars in terms of two dilatons
 according to

 


Note that the first two compact gauge fields in
() have wrong sign kinetic terms, while the non-compact
gauge field, which would ordinarily have come in with the wrong sign,
now enters with the proper one.  The potential is positive definite,
and has the form .  While we have
started with a truncation of the ,  theory, the  content
is complete.  Thus from an  perspective, we have obtained a
consistent reduction of IIB theory (followed by truncation) to
 de Sitter supergravity in five dimensions coupled to two vector
multiplets, at least in the bosonic sector.

We may further truncate the bosonic Lagrangian () by
setting  along with
.  The resulting
Lagrangian is that of  de Sitter supergravity coupled to a single
vector multiplet

 

Here  denotes the non-compact gauge field.

The anti-de Sitter supergravity, where both  and  have
proper kinetic terms, admits one further truncation to eliminate the
remaining vector multiplet by setting  and 
.  However, in this case, a consistent truncation to 
involves satisfying the condition 
, which arises from the  equation of motion.  Since
this condition cannot be met for real gauge fields, we are unable to
reduce the de Sitter theory of () any further.

It should be noted, of course, that were one to simply analytically
continue from the truncated  anti-de Sitter supergravity Lagrangian
to obtain the pure supergravity truncation of (), one
would have to set  in order to obtain 

 

While this appears to yield a desirable theory with proper sign kinetic
term and positive cosmological constant, we emphasize that this cannot
be viewed as a reduction of IIB nor of IIB theory, since this would
necessarily involve imaginary (or in general complex) bosonic fields.



Reductions of -theory 

In the previous section we have examined the  reduction of IIB
supergravity, which gives rise to a de Sitter supergravity in five
dimensions.  Of course, similar techniques may be applied for the reduction
of  theory.  In particular, we now turn to the dSAdS
reduction of  theory.  Since this theory has two time
directions, an interesting feature arises in that we have the freedom of
regarding either dS or AdS as the spacetime, with the other factor
considered as an internal space.  We now examine both possibilities
in detail.

The AdS reduction of M theory 

By taking AdS as a compactification space, the resulting reduction
will yield a four-dimensional de Sitter supergravity theory with
non-compact gauge symmetry .  As before, we begin with the 
truncated  reduction ansatz of -theory, given by

 

where

 

and  (with ) so that the
 coordinates parametrize a seven-sphere.  This ansatz
retains the full set of  Yang-Mills fields, ,
which satisfy the standard relations given by ().  In
addition, there are 35 scalars represented by the symmetric unimodular
matrix , and which are described by the coset .
Note that the 35 pseudo-scalars of ,  have been truncated
away, and as a result this is technically not a consistent
truncation.  Nevertheless, this ansatz may be used to lift a large
class of four-dimensional solutions without axions.

The M supergravity may be formally obtained from M-theory by
analytically continuing the four-form, , while
simultaneously performing a Wick rotation on one of the spatial
coordinates (so as to yield a theory with two times).  For the
Freund-Rubin ansatz leading to AdS, it is clear that the
Wick rotation should be performed on one of the seven sphere
coordinates, thus yielding AdSdS.  The analytic
continuation on  then finally gives the dSAdS
solution of M.  As a result, this leads us to make the
continuation  along with a reparametrization of the sphere
coordinates

 

The resulting 's now parametrize AdS in terms of an
 coset.

In addition, we must analytically continue the gauge fields

 

as well as the scalar matrix

 

The analytic continuation of the gauge fields leads to a non-compact
gauge group .  As a result, the reduction ansatz for
M theory on dS is given by

 

where

 

Here,  is the  invariant
metric.  The  covariant derivatives may be written in a
straightforward manner using  when appropriate, and have the
same structure as those of ().

The resulting four-dimensional Lagrangian has the form

 

and corresponds to a truncation (without pseudoscalars) of the bosonic
sector of ,  gauged de Sitter supergravity.  The potential
is given by

 

and yields a maximally symmetric dS vacuum.  In addition, the gauge
fields in the compact subgroup  have
wrong sign kinetic terms.

Truncation to ,  de Sitter supergravity 

Although the  de Sitter supergravity has a non-compact 
gauge group, it nevertheless admits a natural 
 truncation to  de Sitter supergravity coupled to
three vector multiplets.  The four gauge fields are naturally taken as

 

where we follow the notation of the previous section that
 are  indices, while  are 
indices.  This choice of parametrization also suggests that we take

 

Note that  has the conventional interpretation as a periodic
AdS time coordinate.  Thus , the  gauge field, is
necessarily connected to gauging the isometry related to the second time
direction of the  theory.

Corresponding to this choice of truncation, we take the surviving
scalars to be given by 
, where .  The background AdS
geometry is determined by the constraint ,
or equivalently .  The truncation of
() is then

 

where  and .
The resulting theory may be described by the Lagrangian

 

where

 

is positive definite.  Here the  scalars are parametrized in terms of
three dilatons  according to

 

This Lagrangian is simply the  truncation of ().
Unlike the ,  de Sitter theory of (), here
all four  fields are compact (and all have wrong sign kinetic
terms).  Note furthermore that, as already mentioned previously,
() cannot be viewed as a consistent  reduction of
 theory, as it is missing three axionic scalars.  Hence
the vector multiples are incomplete.  This truncation with only dilatonic
scalars is similar to that considered in for the
truncated  anti-de Sitter supergravity.

We may further truncate the bosonic Lagrangian () by
setting  and  along with
.  The resulting
Lagrangian is that of  de Sitter supergravity coupled to a single
vector multiplet

 

While this theory is still incomplete in that it lacks an axion, one
further truncation to pure  de Sitter supergravity is possible by
equating the  fields and setting .  The pure
supergravity Lagrangian is

 

and concisely captures both features of * theory, namely a positive
cosmological constant and wrong-sign kinetic term for the graviphoton.

The dS reduction of M theory 

We now consider the second possibility for interpreting the
dSAdS compactification of  theory, namely
where we view the resulting theory as a seven dimensional anti-de
Sitter supergravity with  gauging.  This case is especially
interesting in that the complete  consistent Kaluza-Klein
reduction of ordinary eleven-dimensional supergravity to seven
dimensions is known from the work of.
Thus, unlike in the cases considered above, there is no need to
truncate.

To obtain the dS reduction of  theory, we analytically
continue and Wick rotate the ansatz obtained in,
which is given by

 

where

 

The full reduction gives rise to  gauged  supergravity in
seven dimensions.  The bosonic fields consist of 14 scalars given by the
symmetric unimodular  which describe the coset ,
the  gauge fields , and 5 three-form potentials
 transforming in the fundamental of .
Note that the reduction is given on the dual of the eleven-dimensional
four-form, , with  corresponding to the
volume 7-form in spacetime.  In addition, the coordinates ,
subject to the constraint , parameterize the
unit four-sphere.

The analytic continuation to * theory is different from the previous
cases, since here this is no need to take .  This is
because the simultaneous continuation  along
with Wick rotation of one of the  coordinates leaves the present
four-form ansatz unchanged.  To see this, consider the
pure AdS solution, given essentially by 
.  While  picks up
an , so does, say, .  The only important modification is
then to replace the  coset structure  by the dS
coset  by analytic continuation on the 's.
The combined transformation, including that of 1-form and 3-form potentials
is given by

 

In order for  and  to be real, we also continue
appropriate entries in the  matrix, namely

 

The resulting reduction ansatz for  theory on
dSAdS may be given in terms of the  metric
.  We find

 

where

 

Note that  is the  invariant
antisymmetric tensor.

The resulting Lagrangian has the form

 

where 
 

This resulting theory is simply an unusual non-compact gauging of maximal
 supergravity.  In particular, both the  gauge fields and the
potential

 

have their usual signs, despite the  origin of this theory.

Truncation of the  theory 

The ,  theory constructed above admits a truncation to 
supergravity coupled to an  vector.  The fields in the supergravity
multiplet consist of the metric , three gauge bosons in the
adjoint of , namely

, a single three-form potential 
, and a dilaton scalar .  In addition, the vector
multiplet consists of a single  gauge potential contained in
 and three axionic scalars.
In principle, it is straightforward to consistently truncate the above
reduction to yield the  theory.  However, the presence of the
non-abelian graviphotons and the axionic scalars results in some
complication.  We choose here not to pursue this truncation, but instead
focus on a two  truncation with , while
simultaneously retaining two dilatonic scalars.  While
this is not a consistent truncation, it may still be used to lift
solutions to eleven dimensions.

To obtain this  truncation of the full theory, we parametrize
the internal  by 
.  Only two gauge fields,
 and , are kept as well as 
.  The rest of the fields are
truncated.  The reduction ansatz, (), then becomes 

 

where .  
Inserting the above  truncation into (), we
obtain the bosonic Lagrangian

 

Here we have chosen to parametrize the scalars in terms of two dilatons
 according to

 

The potential is given by 

 

corresponding to the AdS vacuum.  Further truncation is possible by
setting  and . In this case, the
resulting Lagrangian becomes 

 

Note that both truncations () and ()
have gauge fields contained in the maximally compact subgroup
.  As a result, they both have proper kinetic
energy terms and a standard potential admitting the AdS vacuum.  So,
after appropriate truncation, we have in fact obtained a unitary theory
(indistinguishable from the corresponding truncation of ordinary
 gauged supergravity in seven dimensions) from a non-unitary one.
Nevertheless, this fact is perhaps of limited usefulness, as the
model before truncation inherits the usual drawbacks of the
underlying field theory description of * theory.


Lifting de Sitter black hole solutions 

It is an interesting observation that, even in the absence of obvious
supersymmetry, multi-centered de Sitter black hole solutions are known to
exist, and have been constructed in in the
context of Einstein-Maxwell theory with a positive cosmological constant.
These solutions resemble traditional BPS objects in that they satisfy a
set of first order equations related to the
analytic continuation of the Killing spinor equation in AdS gauged
supergravity.  In the -dimensional Reissner-Nordstrom case (for ),
the solution may be written in terms of a cosmological metric

 

where the scale factor is given by  and the harmonic
function has the multi-center form

 

It is apparent that while the background is time-dependent, this time
dependence is rather trivial and is simply a reflection of the cosmological
expansion in de Sitter space.  For this reason, these black holes are
natural candidates to lift to the higher dimensional * theory, where they
may be interpreted as possible fundamental objects of the * theory.

It was demonstrated in that this Reissner-Nordstrom black hole,
(), may be generalized to the analytically continued ,
 supergravity, and in particular the STU model corresponding to the
anti-de Sitter version of ().  Further generalizations 
to Einstein-Maxwell-dilaton theories in arbitrary dimensions are also
possible.

 dS black holes 

We first examine the five-dimensional case obtained by the hyperbolic
reduction of IIB.  The  truncated theory of ()
admits a three-charge black hole solution, given by

 

where

 

This solution was given implicitly in, at least up to analytic
continuation to the present * theory vacuum.  The continuation is chosen
here so that the metric remains real at the expense of introducing
imaginary background gauge fields

(The de Sitter black hole solution is a real solution for positive
cosmological constant and correct sign kinetic terms for the fields.
Since the first two 's of () have the wrong sign,
the corresponding gauge potentials become imaginary in ().) .

In fact, the complexification of the solution compensates for the
wrong sign kinetic terms in () in just such a way that the
black hole solution has positive energy compared with the vacuum.

There is a potential difficulty associated with lifting the solution
() to ten dimensions, in that the imaginary gauge fields

and  would lead to a complex ten dimensional metric (as well as
).  To avoid this, we turn off the first two gauge fields, and lift
the single charge () black hole to IIB theory.  The
resulting metric is

 

where  and

 

is the metric on the distorted internal hyperbolic space.  Note that we have
chosen an explicit parametrization of the maximally symmetric  as

 

After applying a change of coordinates, , and a
rearrangement of terms, the lifted solution () may be
written in the form

 

where

 

We have written  in this form in anticipation of the
brane interpretation of this lifted solution.

In fact, we recall that the IIB theory admits an E4-brane solution of
the form
 

where

 

This may be most readily compared to the lifted single charge black hole
solution of () by taking the near brane limit  with
.  In this case, we may make a change of variables,
, , and drop the one in the harmonic
function.  The resulting dS metric has the form

 

where .  It should now be apparent that
() is a generalization of this solution to the case of
non-zero R-charge in five dimensions.  Recalling that the R-charged AdS
black holes may be interpreted as rotating branes, we see
here that a similar picture holds, albeit with time as a transverse as
opposed to a longitudinal coordinate.

 dS black holes 

Turning now to four dimensions, we note that the  truncation,
(), admits a four charge dS black hole solution, given by

 

where

 

Again we are faced with the difficulty of imaginary gauge potentials.
However, unlike the five-dimensional case, all fields in the 
truncation have the wrong sign.  Hence there is no truncation (short of
setting all the charges to zero) that makes the solution real.  For this
reason, any lifting of these black holes to the M theory would result
in a complex metric, and hence it is unclear what the physical
significance of these solutions is.

Nevertheless, we note that the analytic continuation of the
Reissner-Nordstrom-de Sitter solution is obtained by setting all four
charges equal in ():

 

This may be viewed as a solution to the pure  de Sitter supergravity
of () where  is taken as the graviphoton.

 AdS black holes 

Finally, we note that the  truncation of the seven-dimensional theory,
(), admits a two charge AdS black hole solution given by 

 

where

 

Although the gauge fields have correct sign kinetic terms, the negative
cosmological constant formally results a complex metric, as noted in
.  The further truncated theory of () also admits
a solution by setting all  in ():

 


Discussion 

So far we have focused only on the reduction of the bosonic sector of *
theories.  Nevertheless, it should be possible to handle the fermions in a
similar manner through analytic continuation.  Unlike the conventional case,
where analytic continuation from an anti-de Sitter to a de Sitter theory would
complexify the fermions and destroy the matching between bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom, here the * theories have a twisted
supersymmetry built in (at the expense of wrong sign kinetic terms).  Thus
the resulting fermion sectors should not have any doubling problem.

Although we do not examine the fermions in detail, the structure of the
de Sitter supersymmetry transformations may be derived by an appropriate
continuation of the anti-de Sitter supergravities.  For example, it is well
known that the  compactification of IIB supergravity will lead to
maximal  gauged supergravity in five dimensions
.  In addition, the
non-compact  gauged case has also been investigated in
.  Turning to the  compactification of IIB
supergravity, we have seen in section 3 that the appropriate analytic
continuation requires sending  to .  This results in an
unconventional de Sitter supersymmetry with noncompact SO(5,1) gauge group.

Recall that the  ungauged maximal supergravity fields consists of
one graviton, eight gravitini , 27 vector fields ,
48 spin- fields  and 42 scalars , 
where  are  indices.  The complete scalars parametrize
the noncompact coset space .  However, for the truncation
considered in section 3, we specialize to the subgroup 
, with scalars parametrized by a
15-bein . This 15-bein may be constructed by starting
with a  matrix  and then taking

 

where the  Dirac matrices satisfy 
with .  In addition,
 ();
 () where 
anticommutes with the first six Dirac matrices.  Here we are following the
notations and conventions of.

The scalar kinetic terms  and the composite connection
 are defined through

 

where  is the inverse of .
In addition, the T-tensor is defined as 

 

Note that, the matrix  is related to  introduced in
section 3 by

 

This simply corresponds to the unconventional * supersymmetry with scalars
parameterizing .

Besides introducing this noncompact gauging, we also analytically continue
 and  in order to obtain the
Lagrangian ().  Therefore the unconventional supersymmetry
transformation rules for the gravitini and spin- fermions are 

 

where 

 

One should be able to obtain these transformations by direct reduction of
the IIB transformations, although we have not directly verified this.

The multi-centered dS black holes of the previous section are half-BPS
solutions of this twisted supersymmetry.  However it is not clear if this
is sufficient to demonstrate their stability.  Unlike for BPS objects in
an ordinary supergravity theory, here the wrong-sign kinetic terms allows
the possibility of excitations above the supersymmetric background that
nevertheless have negative energy.  On the other hand, the existence of
multi-centered solutions is at least suggestive that there may be a hidden
symmetry ensuring their stability.

Although the de Sitter supergravities which we have investigated involve
wrong sign kinetic terms and are hence ill-behaved as field theories,
such problems were already present in the underlying * theory.  Thus we
may expect that whatever stringy phenomenon cures the behavior of * theory
would also stabilize the ensuing de Sitter supergravities.  On the other
hand, it is possible that the reduction on non-compact internal
manifolds may yield inherently unstable lower dimensional theories.  Of
course, consistent truncations are possible in a standard AdSSphere
reduction, even when states are not well separated by e.g.  charge
or mass.  Hence even if the full lower dimensional de Sitter theory would
be unstable, it is possible that a stable truncation would exist.  An
example of this is given by the truncated seven-dimensional Lagrangians
() and ().

While presently we have only examined multi-centered de Sitter black
holes, it would be of interest to investigate and lift other de Sitter
backgrounds to the underlying IIB or M theory.  In fact, such
lifted solutions may additionally be T-dualized along the time direction
so that they become conventional solutions in ten or eleven dimensions.
For the case of the lifted  de Sitter black holes, it may be seen
that the T-dual of the rotating E4-brane solution, (),
would involve D4-branes as well as NSNS flux.

Finally, it remains an open issue whether multi-centered anti-de Sitter
black holes may be constructed in ordinary gauged supergravities without
resorting to complexification or analytic continuation.  To do so, one
would have to overcome the fact that in an ordinary supergravity, a
background preserving some fraction of the supersymmetries necessarily
admits a timelike or null Killing vector.  This is in direct
contradiction to the expectation that a multi-centered anti-de Sitter
black hole configuration would be time dependent, due to the focusing
effect of geodesics in anti-de Sitter space.  On the other hand, there
is no obstruction to the multi-centered de Sitter black holes, as the
unconventional signs in the superalgebra relax the condition of having a
timelike Killing vector.  This hints, at least, that the unconventional
de Sitter supergravities investigated here may play a crucial role in
the better understanding of de Sitter cosmologies and time dependent
backgrounds for string theory.


Acknowledgments 

This research was supported in part by the US Department of Energy under
grant DE-FG02-95ER40899.


 99 

C. M. Hull,
Timelike T-duality, de Sitter space, large N gauge theories and
topological field theory ,
JHEP 9807 , 021 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9806146].



C. M. Hull,
Duality and the signature of space-time ,
JHEP 9811 , 017 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9807127].



C. M. Hull and R. R. Khuri,
Branes, times and dualities ,
Nucl. Phys. B 536 , 219 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9808069].



C. M. Hull and R. R. Khuri,
Worldvolume theories, holography, duality and time ,
Nucl. Phys. B 575 , 231 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9911082].



C. M. Hull,
De Sitter space in supergravity and M theory ,
JHEP 0111 , 012 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0109213].



J. Lukierski and A. Nowicki,
All Possible De Sitter Superalgebras And The Presence Of Ghosts ,
Phys. Lett. B 151 , 382 (1985).



K. Pilch, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and M. F. Sohnius,
De Sitter Superalgebras And Supergravity ,
Commun. Math. Phys.  98 , 105 (1985).



B. de Wit and H. Nicolai,
The Consistency Of The  Truncation In D = 11 Supergravity ,
Nucl. Phys. B 281 , 211 (1987).



M. Cvetic  et al. ,
Embedding AdS black holes in ten and eleven dimensions ,
Nucl. Phys. B 558 , 96 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9903214].


H. Nastase, D. Vaman and P. van Nieuwenhuizen,
Consistent nonlinear KK reduction of 11d supergravity on
AdS and self-duality in odd dimensions ,
Phys. Lett. B 469 , 96 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9905075].



H. Nastase, D. Vaman and P. van Nieuwenhuizen,
Consistency of the AdS reduction and the origin of
self-duality in odd dimensions ,
Nucl. Phys. B 581 , 179 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9911238].


H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
Exact embedding of ,  gauged supergravity in  ,
Phys. Lett. B 467 , 67 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9906168].


H. Lu, C. N. Pope and T. A. Tran,
Five-dimensional ,  gauged supergravity from
type IIB ,
Phys. Lett. B 475 , 261 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9909203].


M. Cvetic , H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
Four-dimensional N = 4, SO(4) gauged supergravity from  ,
Nucl. Phys. B 574 , 761 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9910252].


M. Cvetic , S. S. Gubser, H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
Symmetric potentials of gauged supergravities in diverse dimensions
and Coulomb branch of gauge theories ,
Phys. Rev. D 62 , 086003 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9909121].


M. Cvetic , H. Lu, C. N. Pope and A. Sadrzadeh,
Consistency of Kaluza-Klein sphere reductions of symmetric potentials ,
Phys. Rev. D 62 , 046005 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0002056].



M. Cvetic , H. Lu, C. N. Pope, A. Sadrzadeh and T. A. Tran,
Consistent SO(6) reduction of type IIB supergravity on  ,
Nucl. Phys. B 586 , 275 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0003103].


M. Cvetic , H. Lu and C. N. Pope,
Consistent Kaluza-Klein sphere reductions ,
Phys. Rev. D 62 , 064028 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0003286].


D. Kastor and J. Traschen,
Cosmological multi-black hole solutions ,
Phys. Rev. D 47 , 5370 (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9212035].



L. A. London,
Arbitrary Dimensional Cosmological Multi-Black Holes ,
Nucl. Phys. B 434 , 709 (1995).



J. T. Liu and W. A. Sabra,
Multi-centered black holes in gauged D = 5 supergravity ,
Phys. Lett. B 498 , 123 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0010025].


K. Behrndt and M. Cvetic ,
Time-dependent backgrounds from supergravity with gauged non-compact
-symmetry ,
arXiv:hep-th/0303266.


A. Batrachenko, M. J. Duff and J. X. Lu,
The membrane at the end of the (de Sitter) universe ,
arXiv:hep-th/0212186.


C. M. Hull and N. P. Warner,
Non-compact gaugings from higher dimensions ,
Class. Quant. Grav. 5 , 1517 (1988).



G. W. Gibbons and C. M. Hull,
de Sitter space from warped supergravity solutions ,
arXiv:hep-th/0111072.


M. Gunaydin, L. J. Romans and N. P. Warner,
Gauged  Supergravity In Five-Dimensions ,
Phys. Lett. B 154 , 268 (1985).


M. Pernici, K. Pilch and P. van Nieuwenhuizen,
Gauged   Supergravity ,
Nucl. Phys. B 259 , 460 (1985).


M. Gu naydin, L. J. Romans and N. P. Warner,
Compact and Non-Compact Gauged Supergravity Theories in Five Dimensions ,
Nucl. Phys. B 272 , 598 (1986).


M. J. Duff and J. T. Liu,
Anti-de Sitter black holes in gauged  supergravity ,
Nucl. Phys. B 554 , 237 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9901149].


M. Cvetic , H. Lu, C. N. Pope, A. Sadrzadeh and T. A. Tran, 
 and  Reductions of Type IIA Supergravity , 
Nucl. Phys. B 590 , 233 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0005137].



