 hep-th/0304227  
 IC/2003/28   
 Konishi anomaly approach to gravitational -terms 
Justin R. David , Edi Gava, K.S. Narain 

High Energy Section, 

 The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics, 

Strada Costiera, 11-34014 Trieste, Italy.

Instituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, sez. di Trieste, 

and SISSA, Italy. 

justin, gava, narain@ictp.trieste.it 
 

We study gravitational corrections to the  effective superpotential in 
theories with a single adjoint chiral multiplet, using the generalized 
Konishi anomaly and the gravitationally
deformed chiral ring. We show that the genus one
correction to the loop equation in the corresponding matrix model agrees with
the gravitational corrected anomaly equations in the gauge theory. 
An important ingrediant in the proof is the lack of factorization of chiral
gauge invariant operators in presence of a supergravity background. We
also find a genus zero gravitational correction to the superpotential,
which can be removed by a field redefinition.  

3.5ex


Introduction 
Recently much progress has been made in the computation 
and understanding of F-terms which describe the coupling
of  gauge theories to  supergravity 

. 
In particular the
original conjecture of Djikgraaf and Vafa, 
relating these -terms to non-planar corrections to the free energy of
a related matrix model has been proved by 
using diagrammatic techniques, extending to the gravitational case
the super-Feynman diagram techniques ofCrucial ingredient in the proof
was the modification of the chiral ring relations due to
the coupling of the gauge theory to supergravity. In particular,
if one restricts to the first non-trivial gravitational -term
contribution, corresponding to the genus one correction 
in the related matrix model, one needs to take into account just
the modification which follows from standard 
 supergravity tensor calculus. 
The purpose of the present work is rather to study the problem   
from the viewpoint of generalized Konishi anomaly relations in the
chiral ring, by extending to the case of  gauge theories 
coupled to  supergravity the strategy ofThe key point in our analysis will be,together with
the modification of the chiral ring mentioned above, the
observation that in the presence of a non-trivial supergravity
background the usual factorization property of chiral correlators
does not hold. In particular connected two point functions
are generically non-vanishing, much like in matrix models, where     
connected correlators receive a subleading  contribution, in
the  expansion  

The paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we study 
in detail the deformation of the chiral ring due to the
coupling to supergravity and some of the resulting 
relations that we will need subsequently. In section 3
we estimate the chiral, connected two- and three-point
functions that will enter later in the equations obtained
using the generalized Konishi anomaly. Section 4 contains 
the main results: we derive there the generalized loop equations
which enables us to solve for the relevant connected two-point
functions. We show the uniqueness of the solution and use it
to compute the first non-trivial gravitational correction  
to the effective superpotential.. We finally show that 
this agrees with the genus one correction to the matrix
model free energy. 
In section 5 we make our conclusions and mention some
open problems. 




The chiral ring 


A basic ingredient in deriving the  effective -terms in   gauge
theories after integrating out the adjoint matter is the chiral ring 
. 
All quantities in the chiral ring are defined modulo
 exact terms, here  
refers to the differential operator conjugate to the supersymmetric
current
. 
It is sufficient to restrict the quantities to be in the chiral
ring as  exact terms do not contribute to 
terms. For  the  gauge theory with adjoint matter on  the chiral
ring relations are  given by
flat-chi 
[W_, ] = 0  mod   D , 
W_, W_ =0  mod   D ,
where   is the  gauge multiplet and  is the
chiral multiplet in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group.

The chiral ring relations given above are modified in the presence of
a curved background.
We review here the derivation of the modified chiral ring in presence
of background  gravity. 
Consider the following  exact quantity
dering 
 D ^  , [D_  , W_] =
 [D ^  , D_  ], W_
where  is the full covariant derivative
containing the gauge field and the spin connection. 
We used the Jacobi identity and the fact that  is chiral
to obtaining the second term in the above equality. From the Bianchi
identity for covariant derivatives one has
bianchi 
[D ^  , D_  ]  = 4i W_- 8i
G_  M^ 
where  is the  Weyl multiplet and
 refers to the Lorentz generator on spinors,
its action on a spinor is given by 
lgen 
[M^ , _]=
1 2 (^_^+ ^_^) 
Substituting  the Bianchi identity bianchi  in
dering  and using the action of the Lorentz generator 
we find the deformed chiral ring given below
ring 
W_, W_ = 2G_  W^  mod  
D , 
W^,  = 0    mod   D .
The second equation is obtained by replacing the  in
dering  by . For the conventional  supergravity theory,
in the first equation above, only the
 part of the gauge field  appears in the right hand
side. In, the modification of the ring 
involved the  part of the gauge field as well, which corresponds
to a non-standard  supergravity theory relevant to 
D-brane gauge theories. In the present paper we will always be
restricting ourselves to the standard  supergravity. In order to
avoid explicitly including the  projectors in all the formulae
below, we shall always take gauge field backgrounds to be in the
 part of . 


Using the deformed chiral ring we can derive many identities 
valid in the ring which
are used crucially  in the next sections (The
conventions followed in this paper are given in Appendix A.) .
From the definition of  and  ring  we have
ident1 
W_  W_&=& _  2  W^2 +
G_  W^ ,  
 W_W_W_&=&
1 2  _  W^2 W_+
1 2 G_  W^2 +
G_ G^ _  W^, 
using the above identities we are led to the following relations 
ident 
W_  W^2 &=& -1 2    W^2W_- 
1 2  G^2 W_, 
 W^2 W_&=& 
-1 2  W_W^2 - 1 2  G^2 W_, 
 [ W^2, W_] = 0,  &&
 W^2  W_= -1 3  G^2 W_, 
W^2 W^2 = -1 3  G^2 W^2 , 
 (G^2)^2 &=&
G^  G_ 
G^ _  G^ _ .
These identities imply that the gauge invariant combination of
certain chiral operators vanish in the chiral ring.
The following  chiral operator vanishes in the chiral ring.
op3 
G_  Tr ( W^) = 0. 
mod   D 
It is clear that if there are no 's in the trace, the above
equation is true for the gauge group . To proof the above
identity for arbitrary number of  we use the following equation
proof3 
Tr  (W_W_) &=& - Tr  
(W_W_) , 
 &=& 1 2  _  Tr  (W^2 ).
To obtain the first equation above we have used the cyclic property of trace
and ring . Now multiplying the first equation of ident1  with
arbitrary number of 's and using proof3  we obtain op3 .
Multiplying op3  by  and using con2  we
obtain
op1 
G^2 Tr ( W_) = 0,  mod  
D .



















Another important identity in the chiral ring is 
op2 
G^4 = (G^2)^2 =0,  mod    D 
The proof goes along the same lines as  the derivation of the deformed
chiral ring. Consider the following  exact quantity
dexact 
D ^   , [D_   ,  G_ ]
 = [
D ^   , D_  ],
G_  
As  is uncharged with respect to gauge field
the covariant derivative  contains only the
spin connection. The Bianchi identity for covariant derivatives now implies
bianc2 
[D ^  , D_   ] =
-8iG_ M^ 
Substituting the above equation in dexact  we obtain the following
equation in the chiral ring
symmg 
G_  G^ _  +
G_  G^ _  +
G_  G^ _   =0
Multiplying this equation by 
 
so that all the free indices are
contracted and using the last equation in ident  and con2  we
obtain op2 . As a result the gravitational corrections to the
-terms
truncate at order .




















Estimates of connected part of correlators 

In the absence of gravity correlators of gauge invariant operators
factorize in the chiral ring. 
This factorization enabled one to show that the loop equations
satisfied by the resolvent on the gauge theory agreed with the 
loop equations of the matrix
model in the large  limit. On the matrix model side factorization
in the loop equations was due to the the large  limit.
However the correspondence of the gauge theory with the matrix model
proposed by  Dijkgraaf and Vafa in 
goes beyond the large 
approximation. If the  gauge theory is placed in a background
gravitational field then the gravitational corrections to the 
terms of the gauge theory is of the form
gravcor 
_1 = d^4x d^2G^2 F_1(S),
here  refers to the gaugino condensate.
The Dijkgraaf and Vafa proposal states that the one can calculate 
from the genus one diagrams of the corresponding matrix model.
It has been shown in 
 that the modification
of the chiral ring in the presence of gravity 
allows the computation of the gravitational corrections to the
-term. The gravitational corrections enter at genus one on the
gauge theory side 
and they reduce to the genus one diagrams of the corresponding
matrix model. This implies that the loop equations of the gauge theory
would not factorize in presence of gravity, as the loop equations of
the matrix model do not factorize at genus one. 
Therefore a priori we expect that
gauge invariant operators do not factorize in the presence of gravity.
In this section we estimate the gravitational corrections to the
connected parts of various correlators that can appear in the loop,
equations using the deformation of the chiral ring in presence of 
gravity ring . 

To estimate the gravitational corrections to the -term obtained by
integrating out the chiral multiplet we require the two point function
the chiral scalars .
This is obtained 
after integrating out the antichiral scalar and  it is given by
2pt 
( x, ) (x', =
 m   - + i 2  D^W_+ 
i W^D_+ mm    
^4(x-x') ^2(-This propagator in the presence of a gravitational background was
derived in and in writing the above equation
we have assumed that the gravitational
background is on shell which allows one to set the other terms which occur
in the propagator to zero, 
 is 2pt  stands of the full gauge and
gravitational covariant derivative. The action of  is
dictated by the representation of , in this paper we will
restrict ourselves to the adjoint action. The delta functions in
2pt  refer to the full covariant delta function in curved
superspace.
In order to obtain the leading estimates for the connected component of various
correlators due to the modification of the chiral ring
it is sufficient to use the free d' Alembertian operator
and a constant gaugino background.
We argue this as follows, we can expand the propagator of 2pt  
in a weak field as
expweak 
m   -+ i D^W_+ m m     &=&
m  -_0 + iW^D_+ mm    
 &+& 
m  -_0 + iW^D_+ mm     
( - _0 ) 
1  -_0 + i W^D_+ mm     
+ here  refers to the free d'Alembertian operator. We have also
dropped the terms 
in 2pt  as we have considered a covaraintly constant gaugino background.
From the expansion we see that the corrections in using
the free d' Alembertian operator in the propagator 
always occur with the factor , 
which is proportional to
the gravitational background and therefore subleading to the estimate
obtained using the free d' Alembertian operator in the first term. One
has to make a similar expansion for the covariant delta function in 
2pt  and again one can see corrections in using the 
flat space delta function are subleading.
However we will see later that if  there is no gravitational
contribution form the deformed chiral ring  the leading estimate for
the connect part of correlators arise from 
corrections in the propagator due to the presence of the full
covariant  and the covariant delta function.
For the free d'Alembertian operator in the propagator 
it is possible to go over to
momentum space and to write a Schwinger parameterization of the
propagator as follows.
prop 
(x, )  (x', ) = ds  d^4 p d^2 e^ip(x-x')     e
^-s m   (p^2 + W^_+ mm ) 
where . In the above equation
we have restricted to the superspace variable  to be the
same at  and  as we will be interested in correlators at the
same point in the superspace variable .
We will now use this propagator and the modified chiral ring ring 
to make estimates for the connected part of various correlators.
The modified ring allows more than two insertions of  in a
given index loop, using the identities in ident  such
contributions can be converted to gravitational corrections.
At this point one might wonder if contributions to the connected diagrams
of gauge invariant operators in presence of a gravitational background 
are in contradiction with
the result found in. There it was found that on an
arbitrary Ka hler manifold gauge invariant operators of the  theory
factorize. The background considered in 
was entirely bosonic,
we find the estimates of 
contribution to the connected diagram indeed vanish for 
a purely bosonic background, thus there is no contradiction with
. 
We will indicate this as we evaluate the estimates of various
correlators.

The various operators involved in the correlators of
interest are
defoper 
R (z)_ij  = - 1 32 ^2 
(W^2 z-  )_ij ,  && R(z) =
Tr R (z) 


 _ ij (z)= 1 4 
 (W_  z- )_ij , &&
w_ (z)=Tr  _ (z) 

T (z)_ij = (1 z- )_ij , 
&&  T(z)=Tr T (z)

here we have defined separate symbols for the matrix elements and the
trace for later convenience, the gauge invariant operators we will
consider are the ones with the trace in the above equation.
The contour integrals of ,  and  around -th
branch cut define  the gaugino bilinear , the  gauge field 
 and  respectively in  subgroup of 
as in. The fact that we are here restricting the
background gauge field to be in  rather than  
implies that . The chiral ring relation 
 implies that  for all .  

We first consider estimates of the connected part of two point function,
we will discuss in detail the estimate for the follow correlator
rr 
R(z, x, ), R(w, y, ) _c, 
where the subscript stands for the connected part and out line the
derivation of the estimates for the other two point functions.
The various contribution to this correlator in rr  can be found by
expanding in  and , by definition of the connected correlator
the expansion starts of with the power . 
Let us focus on a
Feynman diagram consisting of  loops, 
there will be  bosonic and fermionic momentum
integrations in this diagram. 
The extra momentum integral comes from
the final Fourier transform to convert to the position space
representation for the  above correlator. 
We can organize this diagram 
into index loops due to the adjoint action of . 
The fermionic momentum integral forces us to bring down 
powers of  from the propagator in prop . 
To obtain the leading gravitational correction we would like the
number of index loops to be as large as possible so that we can avoid
having more than two 's in a given index loop.
The number
of index loops  and the number of loops are related by 
, where  is the genus of the diagram. For a given number
of Feynman loops the number of index loops is largest for genus zero,
thus the leading estimate  to the connected graph arises from the planar
diagram.  For
a planar diagram  we need to saturate the fermionic momentum integrals by
bringing down   's. This can be done by inserting  in 
index loops. We still have two more external   in rr . This
can at best be inserted in two different index loops. Thus we have two
index loops with  insertions. Using the identities in
ident  we see that each of them reduces to . Thus 
there is a term proportional to   on one of the index loops.
Note that if one had a purely bosonic background both  and 
would start  at  in the superspace expansion, thus 
would vanish in agreement with. In fact
, as is trivial in the chiral ring by op2 ,  
the leading estimate for
the correlator in rr  vanishes. In the next section it is
shown that the two point function in rr  in fact vanishes.
Next we consider the following two point function 
rrho 
R(z,x, ) w_(w, x', ) _c,
we can apply the same counting again, finally in the planar diagram we
will be left with at best with one index loop with  and one
with  insertions. This reduces to a  insertion
and a  insertions, which implies that the leading
gravitational contribution to rrho  is proportional to .
Now we have seen in op1  that
 is zero in the chiral ring, thus this leading estimate
in fact vanishes in the chiral ring.
Similarly, consider the correlator
rt 
R(z, x, ) T(w, x', ) _c.
Here we will be left with  in a single index loop, which
reduces to . Thus the above correlator is proportional to
. For a purely bosonic background we see that this contribution
again vanishes, consistently with. For the case of
rhorho 
w^(z,x, )  w_(w, x', ) _c, 

we will be left with either  insertion in two different
index loops or a  insertion in a single index loop. The
former case vanishes in the chiral ring, but the latter case survives,
with a contribution proportional to . 
For the following two point function
rhot 
w_(z, x, ) T(w, x', ) _c, 
there is a  insertion in a single index loop, which is 
proportional to . Note that this leading contribution
vanishes in the chiral ring due to op1  and also for a purely
bosonic background.
Finally, we have the two point function
tt 
T(z, x, ) T(w, x', ) _c
For this case all the  index loops are saturated with one  and
there are extra insertions of  for any of the  index loops, 
as there
is no external . Thus we have no contribution for the connected
part of this correlator from the modified ring. However we will see
later that there is a direct gravitational contribution to the above
correlator. This can be seen roughly  as follows: the d' Alembertian in
2pt  carries the covariant derivatives which can possibly
contribute to the connected two point function,  
as seen in the
expansion of the propagator in expweak . 
This fact can be further justified by the evaluation of 
the 1-loop effective action obtained by integrating out the chiral multiplet 
in the absence of the gauge field background, 
which gives a term proportional
to . 
Therefore we expect the leading term in the  correlator in 
tt  to be proportional to  and  this will be shown 
explicitly in the next section. Again we see that for a purely bosonic
background  is proportional to , which implies that the
lowest components of the superfields in tt  factorize consistently
with (Note that the fact that the lowest
component factorize cannot be used to promote it to a superfield
equation as the is no  which preserves the background.) .
We summarize the estimates of the 
various connected two point correlators in the
following table for future reference

 
 

 Table 1. 

where  represents schematically any of the 's, and we have
used the chiral ring relations  and . 

Now we provide estimates for the fully connected part of various three point
functions. 
All the fully connected part of the three point
functions are proportional to at least , therefore using op2 
they all vanish in the chiral ring. 
We discuss  the method of arriving at the estimates for one
case in detail and
just outline the results for the others. Consider the following fully
connected three point function.
rrr 
R(z, x, ) R(w, x', ) R(u, x", ) _c.
By the definition of the full connected three point function, 
the first possibly non zero term of the 
expansion in  starts at . Consider a contribution
to any of the correlators appearing in this expansion.
A Feynman diagram consisting of  loops will now have  
bosonic and fermionic momentum
integrations. This is because a three point function 
in momentum space will in general 
have two external independent momenta, and then converting that to
position space will involve these additional momentum integrals. As we
have argued earlier for the case of the two point function, the
leading contribution will be from the genus zero graphs.
For a planar graph then there are  fermionic momentum integrals
to be done. Therefore in addition to inserting  index loops by
, at best four different index loops will have  insertions 
(we assume  is large enough).
Using the identities in ident  we see that 
each  insertion is proportional to . Thus the above
three point function 
is proportional to , but  is fermionic and has  independent
components, thus  vanishes due to Fermi statistics.
Similar arguments show that the following correlators vanish
3ptvanish 
R (z, x, ) R(w, x', ) w_(u, x", )
_c =0, 
 R( z, x, ) R(w, x', ) T(u, x", ) _c
=0, 
 R( z, x, ) w^(w, x', ) w_(u, x", ) 
_c =0, 
 R( z, x, ) w^(w, x', ) T (u, x", ) 
_c =0, 
 



The first correlator in 3ptvanish  is proportional to  and the rest 
are  proportional to , thus they vanish due to Fermi statistics.
Now consider the following three point function
3ptvan2 
w^( z, x, ) T(w, x', ) T (u, x", ) 
_c . 
 We have seen that in a planar graph 
the fermionic momentum integrations force one to insert at least one factor 
of  in all of the  index loops and 
there is at least one index loop with a  insertion. 
Using the identities in ident  this can be manipulated to a
gravitational contribution proportional to .
For the above correlator 
there is one more  index loop with an insertion of  and  
again using
the identities in ident , this term is proportional to 
. Thus the leading gravitational contribution to the three
point function in 3ptvan2  is proportional to  
and thus it is zero in the chiral ring using op1 .
Next we consider the following three point function
rtt 
R( z, x, ) T(w, x', ) T (u, x", ) 
_c , 
 As discussed above, since there are  momentum integration, all
the  index loops have at least a  insertion with one having a
 insertions, the above correlator has an external .
Therefore the leading gravitational contribution arises with 
two different index loops each with  a  insertion  and 
using the identities
in ident  this can be manipulated in the chiral ring to give a
factor of .  
The following three point function is also proportional
to 
rhorhot 
W^( z, x, ) W_(w, x', ) T (u, x", ) 
_c , 
 Here again due to the momentum integrations there is already a factor
of ,  the two external 's can be inserted in another index 
loop, but this loop already has an insertion of , which gives rise to
a contribution proportional to . Thus the three point function in
rhorhot  is proportional to . Therefore the correlators in
rtt  and rhorhot  vanish in the chiral ring due to op2 .
Finally, let us consider the following three point function
ttt 
T( z, x, ) T(w, x', ) T (u, x", ) 
_c . 
 As in the case for tt  we can not estimate the  dependence of
this correlator solely using the chiral ring. 
But from the fact that the correlator in tt  is
proportional to  and since there is at least one index loop with
 insertion, we can arrive at the conclusion that 
the above three point function will be
proportional to . To sum up we have examined all 
possibly non-vanishing full connected three point
fully and found them to be  least proportional to , 
and therefore using op2  they vanish in the chiral ring.




Anomaly equations and matrix model loop equations 




In this section we will use the generalized Konishi anomaly to extract
the gravitational corrections to the effective superpotential. We
recall that the anomaly equations obtained in
 in the absence of gravitational fields are as follows
 
Here  denotes the classical superpotential of degree .  We
have  indicated above the full two point functions that include the 
disconnected and connected two point functions. The latter vanish in
the absence of 
gravitational field but  as we will show below do not vanish in the 
presence of the gravitational field. These equations were obtained by 
the generalized Konishi anomalies upon transforming the adjoint chiral 
field   as
 equal to ,

 and  respectively,  with
 
being an arbitrary field independent spinor. In general for the 
infinitesimal transformation
, the generalized Konishi anomaly is given by
 
In the absence of gravitation 
 
Using the above anomaly and the equation 
 in 
the chiral ring, one obtains the equation 
().

In the presence of the gravitational field , 
these equations are modified for two reasons:
firstly there is a direct gravitational anomaly (ie. even in the
absence of gauge fields, in
other words when chiral multiplets couple only to gravitational
fields) and secondly due to the modification of the ring ring .

Under the infinitesimal transformation  the 
pure gravitational contribution to the anomaly is
 
where  as shown in the appendix B, and from now
on 
 will denote  
. This changes 
 

It is easy to see that the pure gravitational anomaly and the
modification of 
the chiral ring ()  together with the consequent identities 
given in the equations ident ,op1 ,op2 ,  give rise to the following modification of
the equations ():
 
Note that in the first two equations above the pure gravitational
anomaly cancels with the contributions coming from the
modification of the chiral ring via eq(). This happens 
due to the remarkable 
fact that the pure gravitational anomaly () comes with a 
factor of  !! We have also used the fact that  
vanishes in the chiral ring. In the last equation however there is no 
contribution due to the modification 
of the ring and  hence the last two terms on the left hand side arise 
solely from the pure gravitational anomaly.
Here again, a priori, the two point functions are the sum of connected
and disconnected parts.

For later purposes let us write the first equation in ()
more explicitly
 
where  is a polynomial of degree  defined by
 
and the subscript  denotes the connected part of the correlation
function. The latter, as we have seen in the last section, goes as
 and
therefore trivial in the chiral ring. As a result the equation for 
is unmodified by the gravitational field. Since the finite polynomial 
is determined completely by the periods of , i.e. the contour
integrals around the various branch cuts , ,
 
we conclude that  does not receive any gravitational corrections.

The strategy now is to expand all of the quantities appearing above
in a perturbation series in . Of course, this series ends at
order  since  is trivial. Thus for example we 
write 
 
and similarly for the connected parts of the 2-point functions
appearing in the above equations. As discussed in the last section,
the  latter start from order , and therefore the equations for  
and  are the same as in. To go beyond this we
need to solve for the connected two point functions. 


Equations for the connected two point functions in the
  presence of 
gravitational fields 

We will now derive equations for the connected two point functions
that appear in eq.(). Although, in eq.() the connected
2-point functions are of the form , i.e. both
the operators are at same , it turns out to be more convenient
to consider the two operators at different points in the complex
plane (say  and ). The reason is that we can impose conditions
on a connected 2-point function, like  that 
their integrals around various branch cuts in  and  plane 
vanish separately. As a result, we will be able to solve completely
the corresponding generalized Konishi anomaly equations.
              
We illustrate the general method of obtaining the generalized Konishi
anomaly equations for the connected 2-point functions in one example 
and then give the
complete set of equations which can easily be derived following the
methods given below.

Consider the infinitesimal transformation (local in superspace
coordinates  )  
 
The Jacobian of this transformation has two parts
 
The first term in the equation above together with the variation of
the classical superpotential  gives rise to 
 
where the subscript  denotes completely connected 2 or 3 point
functions as indicated.  The first term on the right hand side
vanishes by virtue of the first equation of  ().

The second term in the Jacobian when combined with the anomaly 
(,) gives rise to a single trace contribution 
 

Combining eqs.(),() and the first equation of (), 
one obtains the following equation for the 
connected correlation functions:
 
Here the integral operator  denotes the following:
 
with the contour  encircling  and . It is clear 
that for 
 equal to ,  or , the integral
operator reduces to 
 
as is familiar in the matrix model works. 

Since the last term in the eq.() is of order  and 
involves one point function
of  which is certainly not zero, we conclude
that the sum of the remaining terms which involve connected
correlations functions cannot all vanish
at order . This proves our basic assertion. In fact the connected
3-pt. function  vanishes, as argued in
eq.() in the last section, so eq.() implies
that the connected 2-pt function  does not
vanish at order .

In order to completely solve the relevant connected correlation
functions, we need to consider all transformations of the form 
 
where  is ,  or  and  is
,  or . The resulting
generalized Konishi anomaly equations can be derived in the same way
as above and can be summarized in the following 
matrix equation:


 

Here we have used the chiral ring equations  and 
 as shown in the section 2. We have also dropped various 
connected 3-pt functions that vanish via eq.(). 
 denotes the integral
operator ,  denotes
  and 
finally  and
 denote  and
 respectively. 


There are a few points to note about these equations: 

1)  Chiral ring equations are consistent with the above
matrix equation. For example, if one takes the 
equation for 
 and multiplies by  one
finds that the equation identically vanishes in the chiral ring.  

2) We have used the estimates given in the last section only
to drop all the completely connected 3-pt. functions as they were
shown to go as . The estimates for the connected 2-pt. functions
given in the Table 1, says that 
,  , and  
 all vanish in the chiral ring. We have not
used these estimates in the above equation but we note that the (1,3),
(2,2), (2,3), (3,1) and (3,2) matrix elements on the right hand side
vanish.
Thus the estimates given in the table are indeed consistent with the
matrix equation above. In fact, in the next subsection, we will show
that the solutions to this equation are unique thereby proving that
these connected 2-pt. functions vanish. Similarly had we used the
estimate for the 2-pt. function   which
was shown in the last section to go as , we could have replaced
 by  in the above equation.  
  
3) The integrability condition is satisfied: the above
equation is of the form
 
where  is the first matrix operator appearing on the left hand
side of eq(),  and  satisfy 
 and . The non-trivial consistency
condition then is
 
The crucial identity needed for this is the one involving the integral 
operator  and is as follows:
 
for any function  which is smooth at  and . This can be proved
by using the definition of the contours involved in  and . 
It follows that the (1,2), (2,1) and (3,3) components of the
integrability condition () implies the following
equation:
 
This equation is just  times the first equation of () if
one takes into account the fact that the connected part of the correlation 
function appearing in the latter already is of order . The only
other non-trivial part of the integrability condition is its (1,1) component: 
 
which is just  times the disconnected part of the third equation of
() thereby proving the integrability condition for the
(1,1) component. This is because all the connected parts appearing in that
equation will be trivial when multiplied by . Note also that the
last term in eq.() could have been dropped as it is
trivial.
Its origin comes from the extra term in  appearing in the
(1,1) component
of  which as argued in the point 2) above could have been
dropped. 

Uniqueness of the solutions for the connected two point functions 

Since the integrability conditions are satisfied, solution to eq.()
exists. However the solution has a finite ambiguity which will be fixed
by the physical requirement that the contour integrals around all the branch
cuts of the connected two point functions in the the  and  planes
must vanish separately. The reason
for this is that the following operator equations hold: 
 
where  is the chiral superfield whose lowest component is the
gaugino bilinear in the -th gauge group factor in the broken phase
 and 
 is the  chiral gauge superfield of the 
subgroup. Since these fields are background fields, in the connected
correlation functions the contour integrals around the branch cuts
must vanish. Similarly since these background fields are independent
of the gravitational fields, order  corrections to 
the one point functions of ,  and  must also have
vanishing
contour integrals around the branch cuts.

For later use, we can write a complete set of normalized 
differentials using eq.
() upto order   as
    

To illustrate the method, we will again focus on
. The action of operator  is given as:
 
where the first term on the right hand side comes from the contour integral 
around  and the second term from that around , with  being the
order of . Here we have used the fact that  asymptotically 
vanishes as   ( Actually the coefficient of  is 
 and hence in the connected 2-pt function it vanishes. 
As a result
the connected 2-pt function goes as  (and for similar reasons 
asymptotically in ) which means that the sum over  is between  and 
. However in the above expression we have kept the sum upto  since,
as it will turn out, the condition of vanishing contour integrals around all 
the branch cuts will in particular imply that ) . The coefficients
 are arbitrary functions of  which asymptotically vanish as .
Similarly we have
 
with  being arbitrary functions of  that vanish 
asymptotically as . 

From (), the two equations that this two point function
satisfies are as follows:
 
The solutions to these two equations are
 
Equating the two right hand sides , we see that  and
 are not arbitrary functions of the respective arguments
but are fixed upto a finite polynomial ambiguity in  as well as
. They must be of the form
 
where  are arbitrary coefficients to be determined later.
In deriving the above equation we have used the equation ()
with the right hand side set to zero. This is because the 
correction coming from the right hand side is of order  and hence
trivial.

Substituting this expression in eq.() and repeatedly using 
eq.(), we obtain after some algebra:
 
Note that the second term in the bracket is symmetric in 
.

As mentioned earlier, the connected two point function must obey the following 
conditions:
 
for all , where  is the contour around the -th branch cut.

Let us first consider contour integrals around the branch cuts in -plane.
To this end we can use the first equation in (). The first term
on the right hand side is a total derivative in  and therefore its contribution to the contour
integral vanishes. Thus we arrive at the condition:
 
Using the expression () for , and the fact that 
 for  form a complete
basis of holomorphic 1-forms in the present case, these equations  
determine  completely. Very explicitly if
 
then using the basis of normalized differentials eq.(),
 

We will now show that  are symmetric in  and  exchange.
Let us define a matrix  by the following equation 
 
We first simplify eq.() by using () as
 
where we have omitted a total derivative term with respect to 
since it does not contribute to the contour integral. Substituting
this in eq.() and noting that the residue of the first order pole 
 vanishes due to eq.(), we find that  is
symmetric. Eq.() can be solved explicitly
for  as
 
Plugging this equation in eq.() and using the fact
that  is symmetric, we find that the coefficients 
 are symmetric in  and  exchange as claimed
above. .

Finally note that the symmetry of  implies that 
 is symmetric in  and .This will be crucial in the
following. In particular this also implies that the contour integrals
around the branch cuts in the -plane vanish.

To summarize this subsection, although we have discussed in detail the example
of , it is easily seen that
the eq.() and the conditions like eq.() 
fix the solutions for all the connected two point functions uniquely.

Solutions for the connected two  functions 

Note that the right hand side of  equation () vanishes for all
components except  
 and (3,3) (the last being proportional
to ). The uniqueness of the solution then implies
 
This is in accordance with the estimates given in the Table 1.
We have already obtained the solution for 
in equations (,,). Let us denote this
solution as . 

The remaining two equations are:
 
Comparing the first equation with that of 
namely eq.() we conclude that
 
Finally taking the derivative of eq.() with respect to 
, and using the fact that to the
leading order (i.e. order(1)) 


, we
obtain the following equation:
 
where we have used the fact that  is trivial.
This equation is the same as the second equation of ().
Uniqueness of the solution then implies that upto order ,
 

We are now in a position to compute the gravitational corrections to the
one point functions of ,  and  from eq.().
Note that in this equation the two point functions contain both the 
disconnected and connected pieces. Since 
 and  vanish, 
the first two equations do not contain any connected parts. 
Uniqueness then implies that one point function of  and 

do not get any gravitational correction. The non-trivial equation is the third
one. Using the results of this subsection we get
 
Expanding ,
with 

 we obtain
 
Here the
term indicated in the square bracket goes as  (note that only the
 dependent term in  contribute since  is
trivial) and therefore represents genus 0 contribution. On the other
hand the term proportional to  does not come with any factors
of  as is seen from the explicit solution given in
(), () and (). This contribution
therefore comes from genus 1. Writing 
where the subscript denotes the genus, we have the following solution
to the above equation:
 
where  is a polynomial of degree  and is uniquely
determined by the requirement that the contour integrals of
 around every branch cut vanishes. In the next
subsection we will show that this is exactly the answer the Matrix
model provides. 

Let us note that the genus 0 contribution  above can be absorbed in
 by a field redefinition 
 
In particular this means that the contribution of  to the
effective superpotential can be absorbed by the above field
redefinition into the original genus 0 effective superpotential in the
absence of the gravitational field. This also implies that this term
does not contribute to the superpotential when evaluated at the
classical solution of  in agreement with the statement made in 
.

Comparison with the Matrix model results 

In the Matrix model a systematic approach to computing higher genus
contributions has been developed in, 
however in the
following we will rederive their results in a way parallel to the
gauge theory discussion above. This will make the comparison between
the two very transparent. Consider a hermitian matrix model with
action given by  
, where  is a
hermitian  matrix.
In Matrix model the resolvent 
 
satisfies a loop equation similar to 
gauge theory . 
  
Here  is the same integral operator as in the gauge theory
discussion above.
In the large  limit, the two point function
factorizes. However in the subleading order in  the connected
part of the two point function (in fact the planar connected graph) 
contributes and  which in turn yields  the genus 1 
contribution to the resolvent via the above equation.
By definition 
 

Let us expand the 1-point function as :
 
where dots represent terms of higher order in
. Inserting these expansions in the above equations we
get:
 
Now we need to solve for . This can be done by
applying the
differential operator  on the first equation of
(). To this end we need the following identity:
 
which is valid for .  It follows that 
 
Using this, we obtain the following equation by applying  
on the first equation of ()
 
Since  of the matrix model is the same as the  for
the gauge theory, we see that   satisfies the
same equation () as 
.
We now impose the conditions
 
which are the analogues of the equations (). It follows
from  the discussion of uniqueness that  is 
equal to . Note that as we showed in the last subsection,

is symmetric in  and . This is consistent with the fact that 
  is symmetric in  and . 
Finally, substitution of   
  in the second equation of
(), 
results in an equation for  which is identical to
that for the genus 1 part of the gauge
theory
equation () for . 
Using the fact that the integral of  around every branch cut
is zero, we
conclude, from the uniqueness of the solution, that 
 
with the right hand side being the genus 1 part of the solution given in ().
While in the matrix model the  correction to the 
effective potential is obtained by integrating the asymptotic
expansion of  with respect to the couplings , the
order  correction to the effective superpotential in gauge theory
is
obtained by integrating the asymptotic expansion of 
with respect to the coupling constants  (we already argued in the
last
subsection that the genus 0 contribution coming from  can
be absorbed by a field redefinition of ). Eq.()
implies therefore that the genus 1 contribution to the effective
potential in matrix model is equal to the genus 1 contribution to the
order  term in the gauge theory effective superpotential. 
In fact, the relative coefficient  in eq.() is exactly
reproduced if one follows the numerical factors in the diagrammatic
computations given in .






Conclusions 
In this paper we have analyzed the problem of computing the
first non-trivial gravitational corrections to the 
effective superpotential, 
,  
resulting from integrating out an
adjoint scalar superfield with polynomial tree level    
superpotential.and minimal coupling to  supergravity.
Whereas the problem has been earlier analyzed bywho showed, by using diagrammatic techniques, that
the effective superpotential is in fact given by the genus one 
correction to free energy in the corresponding matrix model,
we have here considered the issue from the point of view of
"loop equations" arising from the generalized Konishi anomaly 
in presence of an  gauge  and  supergravity 
  background superfields, whose
lowest components are the gaugino and the gravitino field strength
respectively. It should be possible to generalize these methods to the
case of
other classical groups, as well as different representations for the
chiral
fields. 

From this point of view, the appearance of non-planar
(genus one) diagrams is related to the lack of the usual factorization
property of gauge invariant correlators
in the presence of a non-trivial supergravity background,   
The fact that a non-trivial supergravity background deforms
the chiral ring was stressed and used explicitly in the 
work by, 
where the failure of the factorization property   
was implicit. In this paper we have exploited both these facts and 
included also the supergravity contribution to the Konishi anomaly. 
First, we have estimated various two-and three- point connected
correlators using the modified chiral ring relations, then we have derived
loop equations which, due to the absence of factorization, involve
connected two-point functions of "resolvents" ,  and
, generalizing the equations
obtained by 
in two ways: first because we found
additional contributions of order , and 
second because we found it useful to consider
two-point functions involving operators at two different points
in the complex plane. We have then shown that these loop equations 
satisfy quite non-trivial consistency conditions and that there is a unique
solution for the non-vanishing connected two-point functions. 
Using these results, we have then
solved for the , genus one, 
correction to the superpotential and found 
agreement with the matrix model result. We also find at 
,
a genus zero contribution to the superpotential, which can be removed
by a field redefinition.       

Concerning the issue of
factorization (i.e. position independence) of 
chiral correlators in a supergravity
background, we have observed in section 3 that our
results do not contradict the known fact that 
this property holds in
 gauge theories on Ka hler manifolds 
(with non-trivial twisting if the manifold is not Hyper-Kahler)
,
since we indeed find that for purely bosonic background
connected correlators vanish.

Finally, it is a non-trivial open problem to
extend the above results to higher genera. Indeed,
whereas the chiral ring deformation that we have here employed 
follows directly from standard  supergravity
tensor calculus.  
it has  been shown by, using diagrammatic
techniques, that in order to capture these higher order corrections one
has to modify the chiral ring relations rather drastically,
i.e. one has to include a
self-dual two form , which
is a remnant of the graviphoton field strength of the
parent  supergravity. The modified relation,

,.
does not have a conventional interpretation in 
supergravity. It would be interesting to see how this
non-standard modification can be incorporated in the approach
followed here, based on generalized Konishi anomaly relations.      

It is a pleasure to thank George Thompson for numerous valuable 
discussions and for collaboration in the early phase of this project.
The work of the authors is supported in part by EEC contract EC
HPRN-CT-2000-00148.


Conventions 

In this paper we follow conventions of. Raising and
lowering of spinor indices are done by the  tensor as
follows
con1 
W^= ^  W_, 
W_= _  W^, 
 ^  _  = 2, 
^  _= 
^ _
We also define the following products of the  gauge multiplet and
the  Weyl multiplet
con2 
W^2 &=& W^W_= - W_W^, 
 G^2 = G^  G_ ,  &&
G_  G^ _  = - G_ 
G^ _  = _  2  
G^2. 
The gravitational contribution to Konishi
anomaly  

In this appendix we fix the normalization constant of the
pure gravitational contribution to the the Konishi anomaly  which was used in
Gan . 
The Konishi anomaly equation including the pure gravitational contribution 
in superspace is given byfulkon 
D ^2 (  e^V ) = 1 32^2  Tr _Ad  
(W^2) + 1 32^2  G^2
Here  is the unknown normalization constant which we will fix below.
The  component of the above equation together with its
anti-holomophic counterpart should
reduce to the familiar equation of the
chiral anomaly including the gravitational contribution given below.
anbos 
_(   ^) - 
_(^  )
= 1 32^2  i 2  ^mnlk  
Tr  _ Ad    ( F_mn  F_lk ) +
1 32^2 1 24  i 2  ^mnlk  R_mnst 
R^st _lk 
The coefficients in the above equation have been obtained from 
Our strategy to fix the normalization constant  
will be to extract the contribution of  from the superspace
equation in fulkon  and require it to agree with the coefficient in
anbos .








Fromthe lowest component of the  Weyl multiplet  
starts off as the gravitino field strength and is given by
low 
G_  = 1 12  (
^ab _  _ab  + 
^ab _  _ab  +
^ab _  _ab ),
where we  have set the auxiliary field in the above formula to zero, as we are
working on shell and  refer to the local Lorentz indices. 
The gravitino field strength is defined by 
def-gravf 
_ab ^= D _a _b ^- D _b _a^, 
  
D _a _b^= _a _b^+ _b^_n ^,
where  is the spin connection. As we are
working with an on shell background, equations of motion for the
gravitino imply 
. Therefore on shell,
the lowest component of the Weyl multiplet is given by
lowon 
G_  = 1 4  ^ab _ 
_ab 
The supersymmetric transformation on the gravitino field strength is given by
susy-trans 
_mn ^= 
- ^R_mnab  ^ab _+ The  dots in the above equation all refer to terms that involve the fermions, 
which are not of interest for the present purpose of determining the
coefficient of . Substituting this variation in lowon 
we obtain







theta-comp 
G_  = 1 4  
^ab _  ^cd _  ^R_abcd  
The  component of 
 contains the  term, which is imaginary and thus 
contributes to the anomaly. This is given by
imag 
G^2 _^2  =
i 2  1 16  ^a'b'ab 
R_a'b'cd  R_ab ^cd 
The total contribution to the anomalous current 
is obtained by subtracting this
out with the , the anti-holomorphic
contributions. 
Therefore the coefficient of the  term from 
is . Comparing with the coefficient of  in anbos 
we see that  in fulkon  in order to reproduce the chiral
anomaly, including the gravitational contribution.


















utphys 




