



Quantum corrections to the mass of the supersymmetric vortex 
D. V. VassilevichAlso at V. A. Fock Institute of Physics,
St. Petersburg University, 198904 St. Petersburg, Russia; e.mail:
Dmitri.Vassilevich@itp.uni-leipzig.de 

Institut fu r Theoretische Physik,
Univerista t Leipzig, 
Augustusplatz 10, 04109 Leipzig, Germany  
 
We calculate quantum corrections to the mass of the vortex in 
supersymmetric abelian Higgs model in  dimensions. We put the system
in a box and apply the zeta function regularization. The boundary conditions 
inevitably violate a part of the supersymmetries. Remaining supersymmetry
is however enough to ensure isospectrality of relevant operators in bosonic
and fermionic sectors. A non-zero correction to the mass of the vortex
comes from finite renormalization of couplings.

PACS: 11.27.+d; 12.60.Jv 
Introduction 
The Abrikosov-Nielsen-Olesen (ANO) vortices play an important
role in modern particle physics.
In particular, supersymmetric ANO vortices are essential for understanding
of the monopole condensation (see, e.g., and
references therein). In  dimensions the relation between extended
 supersymmetry and the BPS bound has been demonstrated in
 following a more general 
discussion of. 

Quantum corrections to the mass of the supersymmetric ANO vortex(
Since no analytic form for the profile functions of the ANO vortex is
available, calculations of the mass shift in a non-supersymmetric case
is a rather complicated problem. Recently the fermionic contribution
to the vacuum energy was calculated in a toy model closely resembling 
the abelian Higgs model.)  in 
dimensions were calculated in, the Chern-Simons terms
were included in. Both papersgive zero result for the mass shift. The authors used the arguments 
similar to that of Imbimbo and Mukhi(Note, 
that the authorsused these arguments to show saturation of the
Bogomolny bound (i.e. to estimate the difference between quantum corrections
to the mass and to the central charge) rather than to calculate the mass shift
itself.) 
based on the non-local index
theorem ofand its generalisation by E. Weinberg.
Roughly speaking, the line of reasoning inwas as follows. The index theorem was used to show that
 
where  are the spectral densities in the bosonic and fermionic
sectors respectively. Then the mass shift was identified as
 
Due to () the mass shift () should be zero.
In this way, the authors avoided explicit use
of any regularization. There is however a loophole in this kind of
arguments. First of all, it is assumed that there is a regularization
which supports the mode-by-mode cancellations needed to apply 
(). Such regularizations are indeed available.
One of them is the zeta function regularization.
However, it requires transition to the discrete spectrum
at least at intermediate
steps. In other words, one has to put the system in a box and
impose some boundary conditions. There is no a priori guarantee that
these boundary conditions can be chosen in such a way to preserve
the index theorem arguments. Besides, without regularising the whole
theory with arbitrary, not only BPS background fields, one cannot
control finite renormalization of charges which are present in the
model.

Quantum corrections to  dimensional solitons
should have been re-considered already some time ago. Recent
years have seen a considerable increase of interest to quantum
effects around supersymmetric solitons in  dimensions
initiated by the papers resulted in some very interesting
developments in this field (see for a literature
survey). 

In this paper we re-calculate quantum corrections to the mass of the
supersymmetric vortex using the methodapplied previously to the supersymmetric kink.
We put the vortex in a box with a circular boundary and impose the
boundary condition which preserve as many symmetries as possible.
We find that one half of the supersymmetries of the vortex is
inevitably broken at the boundary(BPS states preserve a
half of the supersymmetries of the theory. Since boundaries break
another half, we have a quarter of the original 
supersymmetry.) . This is however, enough to ensure coincidence of
the eigenfrequencies of the bosonic and fermionic fluctuations. We
then conclude that the total energy of the vortex and the
boundaries is zero. At the next step, we define the energy
associated with the boundaries and find that it is also zero.
Therefore, the whole mass shift of the vortex is due to the finite
renormalization of couplings(I am gratefull to R. Wimmer
for pointing out imporatnce of the finite renormalization effects.) . 
It is not zero and is given by the equation
() below.

Formally the zero point energy can be represented as
 
where  are eigenfrequencies of bosonic and fermionic
fluctuations. The sums in () are divergent and must be
regularized. We use the zeta function regularization:
 
where  is the regularization parameter. Note, that zero frequencies
(which do not contribute to () anyhow) should be explicitly 
excluded.

This paper is organised as follows. 
In the next section we describe properties of classical solutions
and define the operators acting on quantum fluctuation in the
abelian Higgs model without boundaries. In sec.  we
define gauge invariant boundary conditions which ensure that all
non-zero eigenfrequencies in fermionic and bosonic sectors
coincide. In sec.  we analyse supersymmetry of these
boundary conditions and find that one half of the
superinvariancies of the vortex is broken. Section  is
devoted to calculation of the mass shift. Some concluding remarks
are given in sec. . Technical details of the
calculations related to the boundary supersymmetries are presented
in the Appendix.


The model 
This section is devoted to some known properties of the supersymmetric vortices
on manifolds without boundaries. Here we mostly follow 
.

Classical theory 
The Lagrangian of 
supersymmetric abelian Higgs model in  dimensions reads:
 
where   (respectively, ) is real (respectively, complex) scalar, 
 and 
are two-component complex spinors.  is a constant. 
The signature of the metric  is . As usual, 
 is the field strength.
 is gauge covariant derivative, 
. The action () is invariant
under the supersymmetry transformations
 
with complex constant spinor parameter . 
is the Levi-Civita tensor, .
The gamma matrices
 
satisfy the equation
 
We shall mark upper (lower) components of all spinors with the
subscript "" (respectively, ""), so that
 
for example.

Consider now static bosonic field configurations such that .
Such configurations are invariant with respect to one half of
the supersymmetry
transformations () corresponding to  if and only
if
 
These are just the Bogomolnyself-duality equations.

The classical vortices 
 
satisfy () and () if 
 
In these equations  is vorticity 
(which we assume to be positive), , ,
and ,  are usual polar coordinates on the plane. 
The functions  and  satisfy the conditions
 
The classical energy of this configuration reads:
 

Quantum fluctuations 
Let us now turn to quantum fluctuations about the background
(). We shift  and
, where  and  are
the fluctuations. Since all other fields are zero on the background,
we do not need to introduce more notations. It is convenient
to use the background gauge fixing term(This gauge condition
belongs to the so-called  family 
.) 
 
which generates the following action for the complex ghosts :
 

Next we expand the action () about the classical background.
The terms linear in fluctuations vanish due to the equations of
motion. In the next, quadratic, order we have in the bosonic sector:
 
where the covariant derivative  depends on 
on the background gauge potential ;
.

The quadratic part of the fermionic action coincides with
() where all bosonic fields take their background values
(so that , for example). Therefore, the equation which defines
eigenfrequencies  in the fermionic sector reads:
 
By taking square of this equation one obtains:
 
where
 
and
 
In this equation we have used holomorphic and anti-holomorphic
components of two-dimensional differential operators:
 

Let us now return to the bosonic fluctuation. As one can see from
(), the equations for  and for  decouple
from the rest of the bosonic modes. Moreover, the squared 
eigenfrequencies of these fields are given by the eigenvalues of
the operator
 
The same operator defines also the ghost eigenfrequencies.
Therefore, contributions of all these fields to the vacuum energy
cancel (provided they all satisfy the same boundary conditions).

A very important observation regarding the rest of the bosonic
perturbations was made by Lee and Min.
They demonstrated that the eigenfrequencies for  and
 follow from the equation:
 
where .
One can check this statement by a direct calculation using the
Bogomolny equations () and () for the background fields.

For the sake of completeness we give here explicit expressions for
 and :
 
We stress that these formulae are valid only if the background
satisfies the Bogomolny equations.

Boundary conditions The aim of this section is to define the boundary conditions which
support the factorisation properties of the eigenfrequency equations
() and (). We like to keep as much symmetry between
the bosonic and fermionic fluctuation as possible. 

Let us put the system in a spherical 
shell with the boundary at  (the time coordinate  remains,
of course, unrestricted). The relation
 
between complex and angular representations of an arbitrary two-vector 
will be useful in this and subsequent sections.

We start with gauge invariant boundary conditions for 
and . By gauge invariance we understand the following property
. Let  and 
 be boundary operators which define boundary conditions
for  and  respectively:
 
where  is boundary of the manifold(For Dirichlet
boundary conditions the operator  is just the identity operator,
so that  simply means 
. For Neumann boundary conditions 
contains a normal derivative ( in our case). More complicated
boundary operators will be introduced below.) . 
This system is gauge invariant if 
 
This property simply means that space defined by () is invariant
under the gauge transformations.

There are only two sets of gauge-invariant local boundary conditions
for the Maxwell field(This point is discussed in the monographs
, see also.
) . Let us take one of them(Calculations for the other (dual)
set of the boundary conditions go in a similar manner.) :
 
Obviously, if  satisfies Dirichlet boundary conditions,
 and  also satisfy
Dirichlet boundary conditions since  and 
which act in tangential directions to the boundary. 
A bit more work is needed to show that the
condition for  is also gauge invariant. 
Gauge transformation of the boundary condition ()
for  reads:
 
where we added and subtracted several terms such that the first
bracket contains the operator () which defines eigenfrequencies
in the ghost sector. We can expand  in a sum over eigenfrequencies:
 so that 
 and each 
satisfies Dirichlet boundary conditions as required by ().
Therefore,
 
This proves that the first term on the right hand side of ()
vanishes on the boundary. The second term there is also zero on the
boundary since it does not contain normal derivatives acting on 
. We conclude, that the boundary conditions ()
are indeed gauge invariant. 

Eigenfrequencies of , , and  are defined by
the same operator . Therefore, it is natural to impose
on  the same (Dirichlet) boundary conditions:
   

Radial and angular components of  can be expressed through
:
 
The operator  acts on the bosonic fluctuations
 as well as on the fermionic components
 (cf. ()). Hence, we impose the same boundary 
conditions on the lower component  as we have already
defined for . Namely,(Strictly 
speaking, eigenfrequencies of 
and  are the same even if we identify respective
boundary conditions up to a common constant phase factor. 
This freedom will be discussed in sec. .) 
 

To fix boundary conditions on the rest of the fields we shall use
intertwining relations between  and .
Let  and  be solutions of ()
with . We can write formally:
 
for . We are looking for boundary conditions
compatible with () and (). Such boundary 
conditions will ensure that the operators  
and  have coinciding non-zero eigenvalues.

Let us consider the first line in () which reads:
 
Let us suppose that the boundary conditions for all components
, , ,  are mutually independent. This technical
requirement will simplify the calculations below, but will not affect
our main result. Let us take  first. Then the first equation
in () yields:
 
Note, that we are not  allowed to take normal derivative of
() after  we have put  in order to get further
conditions on  since  is related to
 by the equations of motion, and, therefore, cannot be
considered as an independent quantity on the boundary.
Instead, we take the other component of ():
 
The boundary conditions () immediately give:
 
Next we return to () and put there  to
see that
 
as a consequence of () and (). Again, we identify 
the boundary conditions for  with those for the first component
of the boson doublet :
 
Similarly, we use () to fix the boundary conditions for
 and :
 

We have found a set of the boundary conditions which guarantees 
coincidence of non-zero eigenfrequencies for bosons and for
fermions. 
We summarise the results of this section in Tables 1 and 2.

 
 
 Table 1.
Summary of the boundary conditions for ghosts and bosons. 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of the boundary conditions for spinors.

Supersymmetry breaking at the boundary  In the previous section we have constructed boundary conditions
which support isospectrality of the operators acting in the
bosonic and fermionic sectors. This suggests that certain degree
of supersymmetry still remains in the problem even in the presence 
of boundaries. Due to the vortex, initial  supersymmetry 
() is
broken to the transformations with . However, the other
complex component  of the parameter  remains
unrestricted. In this section we show that in the presence of
boundaries supersymmetry is broken to a real subgroup.
 
Let us consider the  transformation of :
 
From this equation we see that if  is an arbitrary
complex  parameter, it is not possible to impose 
different supersymmetric boundary conditions on real
and imaginary parts of . For example, if 
 satisfies
Dirichlet boundary conditions (as in our case), then
because of ()
both real and imaginary parts of  should also
satisfy Dirichlet boundary conditions. This, in turn,
yields Dirichlet boundary conditions for
 contradicting gauge
invariance of the boundary value problem.

However, if we require
 
the boundary conditions obtained in the previous section
become invariant under the supersymmetry transformations
of the boson  fields (i.e., boundary conditions are
compatible with first there variations in ()).
This statement can be checked by direct and rather elementary
calculations(One has to take into account that complex
conjugation of the Grassmann variables also changes order in their
products. For example, .
Therefore, product of two real Grassmann variables is imaginary.
Forgetting this property one would get  instead
of () and a contradiction with superinvariance of the boundary
conditions for fermions.) . For example, compatibility of ()
is obvious since  and  satisfy the same
boundary conditions. 

Supertransformations () of the fermions are also compatible
with our boundary conditions if .
Proof of this statement (which is more involved than in the case of the bosons)
is sketched in Appendix . 

One can change the residual supersymmetry
by using the freedom mentioned above
in the footnote . Since multiplication by
a constant phase factor commutes with all operators and preserves 
normalisation of the eigenfunctions, one can replace the spinor
field  by 
in the boundary conditions derived in sec. . However,
this phase factor can be absorbed in a redefinition of the
supersymmetry transformation parameter: 
. Then the supersymmetry 
transformations () remain the same in terms of 
, . Supersymmetry of new transformed
boundary condition would therefore require .

Let us stress, that the remaining supersymmetry is enough
 to achieve isospectrality of relevant
operators in the bosonic and fermionic sectors. 
Of course, there is no guarantee that such cancellations
will occur at higher loops as well. To understand the situation
from the non-perturbative point of view one has to modify the
Witten-Olive construction  accordingly.


Quantum corrections to the mass of the vortex In the one-loop approximation the renormalised mass shift of the
vortex consist of three terms:
 
where the first term is the zero point energy in for the vortex in
the spherical box, the second term is the energy associated with
the boundaries of the box, and the third term is a contribution
from finite renormalization  of charges in the classical
expression for the mass of the vortex.

In sec.  we have found such boundary conditions that
all non-zero eigenfrequencies in the bosonic sector coincide with
non-zero eigenfrequencies in the fermionic sector. Therefore, for
a sufficiently large  (cf. eq. ()),
 
If now we analytically continue () to  we find
that both divergent and finite parts of the vacuum energy for the
vortex in the box are zero,
 
This equation is, of course, valid for arbitrary radius  of the
box.


Quantum energy of the boundaries 
Here we calculate the vacuum energy of the boundary of the box
in the limit . First we have to show that between
some characteristic radius  (which is defined essentially by
the size of the vortex) and  the theory may be approximated
by free massive fields.

As  goes to infinity both profile functions of the vortex 
and  go exponentially fast to their asymptotic values
(), (). Therefore, near the boundary we
can assume that  and  are constants and neglect their
derivatives. Consequently, the operator  which defines
the eigenfrequencies of ,  and of the ghosts 
can be approximated by
 

To understand what happens with the rest of the fields as 
one has to analyse the operators () and ().
The Bogomolny equation () yields:
 
Consequently,
 
as . The same is true for , and both
functions are approaching zero exponentially fast. This means that
for large  the off-diagonal terms in () can be
neglected. The operators () and () contain
the background vector potential () which does not
vanish sufficiently fast at the infinity. This potential can be
however transformed away by the following unitary change of 
variables for charged quantum fluctuations:
 
where the phase  is chosen in such a way that
 for  and  insides the vortex.
It is easy to see that in terms of new fields  and
 in the asymptotic region the eigenfrequencies are
defined by the free operator () up to exponentially
small terms. 

One can easily show that not only the operators, but also the
boundary conditions are identical in the bosonic and fermionic 
sectors up to exponentially small terms. Indeed, the fields
,  and  satisfy Dirichlet boundary conditions.
Therefore, their contributions to the vacuum energy cancel
also in the effective theory near the boundary. 
The fields , , and  satisfy:
 
To derive the effective boundary conditions for  we have
used that  goes exponentially fast
to a constant when . Similarly we have:
 
Taking into account a relative
factor of  in the contributions of spinors to the vacuum
energy, we see that the total quantum energy associated with the
effective field theory near the boundary is zero. This is true for
arbitrary values of the regularization parameter, and, therefore,
 


Finite renormalization 
As usual the renormalization is performed in the topologically
trivial sector. We put  and calculate the effective
potential. We shall not need other background fields. We use again
the zeta function regularization as in (). A real
bosonic field with the mass  contributes to the regularized
effective potential
 
where  is the zeta function for the operator
. It can be expressed through
corresponding heat kernel:
 
The heat kernel reads
 
The integral over  in () is divergent due to the
translational invariance of the background. Therefore, it is
convenient to consider the density : 
. The integration over  can be easily performed. The
subsequent analytic continuation to  yields a finite result,
 

By collecting the contributions from all elementary excitations on
this background we obtain:
 

Although the effective potential () is convergent
in  dimensions, there are finite renormalization effects
which shift classical values of  and . To fix these shifts
we consider
 
where we have re-inserted the  dependence. The first term
on the right hand side is just the classical potential 
 
with shifted values of  and . We require that to the first
order in  the potential  has a minimum
at  ("no tadpole" condition). This condition yields
 
To fix  one needs also another normalisation condition,
but for our purposes () is already enough.

The shift () induces a shift in the vacuum energy:
 
Since other contributions () and () vanish,
 
This completes the calculation of the mass shift of the supersymmetric
vortex.

Conclusions In this paper we have re-calculated one-loop quantum corrections
to the mass of the supersymmetric ANO vortex. We put the system
into a box with a circular boundary and applied the zeta function
regularization. We have demonstrated that boundaries violate
a part of the supersymmetries, but the remaining invariances are
enough to guarantee coincidence of the eigenfrequencies in the
bosonic and fermionic sectors. Therefore, contributions from
the bosons and the fermions to the vacuum energy cancel each 
other both in the full theory (vortex in a box) and in the 
effective theory near the boundary. Up to this point we agree with
the previous works (though our
conclusion is based on somewhat more reliable grounds). There is,
however,  a contribution () to the vacuum energy which comes from
finite renormalization of the couplings in the classical mass
of the vortex(This situation is similar to the BPS
black hole mass shift discussed in.) . 
Such contribution was neglected in the approach
of. To see what happens with the BPS
bound one has to calculate also quantum corrections to the central
charge.

Let us now give some comments on the vortex mass corrections in
a pure bosonic theory. These comments are motivated by the 
discussion on renormalization of the Casimir
energy. In the supersymmetric case  
it was essential, that we the bosonic and fermionic contributions
are cancelled mode-by-mode. In purely bosonic theory no such
cancellation may appear and the vacuum energy will be, in general,
divergent(In the zeta function regularization the one-loop
divergences are defined by the heat kernel coefficients. 
For the (mixed) boundary conditions used in this work the heat
kernel expansion can be found in.) .
There are two types of the divergences which are given by volume
or by boundary integrals. Normally, boundary divergences are the
same in the full theory and in the effective theory defined near
the boundary when . Therefore, 
 will contain volume divergences only which can
be removed by some standard renormalization procedure. However,
to define  or  separately one has
to introduce new surface counterterms which are absent in the
original model.  

Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to M. Bordag, A. Rebhan and especially to R. Wimmer
for fruitful discussions.
This work was supported in part by the DFG project BO 1112/12-1.


Supertransformation and boundary conditions In this Appendix we show how one can prove compatibility
of our boundary conditions with the supersymmetry transformations
of the spinor fields with pure imaginary .
Let us consider the supertransformation of :
 
We are going to prove that  satisfies the same
boundary conditions as  if . The condition
() on  can be checked easily:
 
where we have used the boundary condition (). Let us now
check the boundary condition ():
 
Consider the term on the right hand side of () which
contains :
 
where we first re-expressed the left hand side through 
and , then we used the vector Laplacian in the
polar coordinates (cf., e.g.,):
 
Finally, to obtain the last line of () we made use of
the boundary conditions (). The equations of motion for
 yield(More precisely, the equation to
follow is obtained by varying () with respect to
 and then using the Bogomolny equation ()
for the background .)  :
 
Now we collect all contributions to see
 
due to () and ().

Calculations for other components of the spinor fields can be done
in a similar manner. 

 99 
A. A. Abrikosov, Sov. Phys. JETP 32 , 1442 (1957);
H. B. Nielsen and P. Olesen,

Nucl. Phys. B 61 , 45 (1973).


A. Achucarro and T. Vachaspati,

Phys. Rept.  327 , 347 (2000)
[arXiv:hep-ph/9904229].


A. I. Vainshtein and A. Yung,

Nucl. Phys. B 614 , 3 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0012250].


J. Edelstein, C. Nunez and F. Schaposnik,

Phys. Lett. B 329 , 39 (1994)
[arXiv:hep-th/9311055].


Z. Hlousek and D. Spector,

Nucl. Phys. B 370 , 143 (1992);


Nucl. Phys. B 397 , 173 (1993).


M. Bordag and I. Drozdov, 
Fermionic Vacuum Energy from a Nielsen-Olesen Vortex,
arXiv:hep-th/0305002.

J. R. Schmidt,

Phys. Rev. D 46 , 1839 (1992).



B. H. Lee and H. Min,

Phys. Rev. D 51 , 4458 (1995)
[arXiv:hep-th/9409006].


C. Imbimbo and S. Mukhi,

Nucl. Phys. B 247 , 471 (1984);


Nucl. Phys. B 249 , 143 (1985).


C. Callias,

Commun. Math. Phys.  62 , 213 (1978).

R. Bott and R. Seeley,

Commun. Math. Phys.  62 , 235 (1978).


E. J. Weinberg,

Phys. Rev. D 19 , 3008 (1979);


Phys. Rev. D 20 , 936 (1979).


J. S. Dowker and R. Critchley,
Phys. Rev. D 13  (1976) 3224;

S. W. Hawking, Commun. Math. Phys. 55  (1977) 133.
For a recent texbook on these methods, see
E. Elizalde, Ten physical applications of spectral zeta-functions ,
(Springer, Berlin, 1995).

A. Rebhan and P. van Nieuwenhuizen,

Nucl. Phys. B 508 , 449 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9707163];

H. Nastase, M. A. Stephanov, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and A. Rebhan,
Nucl. Phys. B 542 , 471 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9802074];

N. Graham and R. L. Jaffe,

Nucl. Phys. B 544 , 432 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9808140];

M. A. Shifman, A. I. Vainshtein and M. B. Voloshin,

Phys. Rev. D 59 , 045016 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9810068].


R. Wimmer,
Quantization of supersymmetric solitons,
arXiv:hep-th/0109119.


M. Bordag, A. S. Goldhaber, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and D. Vassilevich,

Phys. Rev. D 66 , 125014 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0203066].


B. H. Lee, C. Lee and H. Min,

Phys. Rev. D 45 , 4588 (1992).


E. B. Bogomolny,

Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.  24 , 449 (1976)
[Yad. Fiz.  24 , 861 (1976)].


K. Fujikawa, B. W. Lee and A. I. Sanda,

Phys. Rev. D 6 , 2923 (1972);

Y. P. Yao,

Phys. Rev. D 7 , 1647 (1973);

L. Dolan and R. Jackiw,

Phys. Rev. D 9 , 2904 (1974).


D. V. Vassilevich,

Phys. Lett. B 421 , 93 (1998)
[arXiv:hep-th/9709182].


P. B. Gilkey, Invariance theory, the heat equation, and the Atiyah-Singer
index theorem (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1995).

G. Esposito, A. Kamenshchik, and G. Pollifrone, Euclidean quantum gravity on
manifolds with boundary (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1997).

D. V. Vassilevich,

Phys. Rev. D 52 , 999 (1995)
[arXiv:gr-qc/9411036].


D. V. Vassilevich,

J. Math. Phys.  36 , 3174 (1995)
[arXiv:gr-qc/9404052].


E. Witten and D. I. Olive,

Phys. Lett. B 78 , 97 (1978).


S. J. Rey,

Nucl. Phys. B 508 , 569 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9610157].


N. Graham, R. L. Jaffe, V. Khemani, M. Quandt, M. Scandurra and H. Weigel,

Nucl. Phys. B 645 , 49 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207120];

K. A. Milton,
Calculating Casimir energies in renormalizable quantum field theory,
arXiv:hep-th/0210081;

S. A. Fulling,
Systematics of the Relationship between Vacuum Energy 
Calculations and Heat Kernel Coefficients,
arXiv:quant-ph/0302117.


T. P. Branson, P. B. Gilkey, K. Kirsten and D. V. Vassilevich,

Nucl. Phys. B 563 , 603 (1999)
[arXiv:hep-th/9906144].

