
  
 




-10 mm 
2 mm 
0 mm 
155 mm 
225 mm 
 
 
 
 
P   
Z   
C   
R   
  
Kahler  
N  
P  

Bicocca-FT-03-10 
IHES/P/03/27 
RR 017.04.03 
hep-th/0304251






 
On the Geometry of Matrix Models for N=1*  



 
M. Petrini , A. Tomasiello , A. Zaffaroni   


 Centre de Physique The orique, Ecole Polytechnique, 48 Route de Saclay; F-91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France. 

 

 I.H.E.S.,
Le Bois-Marie, Bures-sur-Yvette, 91440, France. 

 

 Universita  di Milano-Bicocca and INFN
 Piazza della 
Scienza 3, I-20126 Milano, Italy. 

 




 
Abstract 

 
We investigate the geometry of the matrix model associated with 
an  super Yang-Mills theory with three adjoint fields,
which is a massive deformation of .
We study in particular the Riemann surface underlying solutions
with arbitrary number of cuts.
We show that
an interesting geometrical structure emerges where
the Riemann surface is related  on-shell to the Donagi-Witten 
spectral curve. We explicitly identify the quantum field theory 
resolvents in terms of geometrical data on the surface.
 


5.mm
 width 5.cm
2.mm
e-mail: Michela.Petrini@cpht.polytechnique.fr, 
Alessandro.Tomasiello@cpht.polytechnique.fr, 
alberto.zaffaroni@mib.infn.it 



Introduction 

Recently it has been proposed to use matrix models to extract information
about holomorphic quantities of a certain class of  gauge
theories. More precisely,


the exact superpotential
and the condensates of chiral operators in the gauge theory can be
computed from the free energy of an associated matrix model.
This proposal has been extensively tested in the case 
of a pure  theory with an adjoint field with potential
 (and possibly matter in the fundamental
representation), showing that the matrix
model results and the quantum field theory ones agree. 





This model has 
an interesting
geometrical structure in terms of a Riemann surface.


In particular, the resolvents in the matrix
model and in the field theory seem to be related to
geometrical quantities on this surface. This geometrical
structure is deeply related to the Seiberg-Witten curve of the 
 theory of which the  theory is a deformation.
In this paper we will focus on the geometry of the  theories
that are obtained as deformations of the  SYM. More precisely,
we consider the model with three adjoint fields, a mass term for two
of them and a generic potential for the third one. The associated
matrix model was solved in the case of a single cut in,
showing remarkable agreement with the quantum field theory results.
In this paper, we are interested in the geometry of the 
matrix model for arbitrary
number of cuts. Since the model can be considered as an  
deformation of an  theory with a massive hypermultiplet,
the corresponding geometry is expected to be related to
the Donagi-Witten curve.   The emergence of an elliptic curve 
in the case of a single cut is a first example of this
connection. We will investigate the relation between the matrix model and 
the Donagi-Witten curve, 
and the geometrical structure that emerges in this way.

To be more concrete, 
we will study an  supersymmetric gauge theory with
gauge group  and three chiral fields , ,  
in the adjoint representation. The theory is characterized
by the superpotential
 
where  
is a polynomial in  of degree . 
This model can be seen as a deformation of the 
theory with a massive adjoint hypermultiplet considered by
Donagi and Witten.
We are mainly interested in a
classical vacuum  where  and  vanish and ,
even though  our results can be applied also to other vacua. 
The  classical 
eigenvalues of
 can be distributed over the  points  where 
. 
The gauge group is correspondingly broken to , 
where  is the number of
eigenvalues corresponding to the  critical point of . 
At low energy, we can write an effective superpotential 
 
for the condensate superfields 
.

In quantum field theory, the vacuum expectation value of
 can be computed (in principle) from the knowledge of
the underlying  Seiberg-Witten curve. The addition of the
superpotential  indeed selects particular points in the
moduli space of the  theory, which can be found by
explicitly solving the equations of motion. Once these points
are found,  can be determined via
 
In our case the  theory is described by the Donagi-Witten curve 
for , which is an -sheeted covering of a torus.
The points selected by the equations of motion are typically
points of partial or maximal degeneracy of the curve. In the 
generic vacuum  we indeed expect that
 monopoles are massless. 

In the corresponding matrix model, the vacuum
 is associated with an -cut
solution of the equations of motion. We will show that, 
as in, the matrix model can be associated with a 
Riemann surface of genus equal to the number of cuts.
 is then computed from geometrical data on this surface.
It is then interesting to investigate the relation of this
geometrical structure with the Donagi-Witten curve.
The single cut case was solved in. 
It corresponds to a field theory massive vacuum where 
the  spectral curve has maximal degeneracy
and itself becomes a torus with modular parameter . 
The emergence of such torus on the matrix model side was explicitly 
determined in . 
The connection with the  curve becomes more explicit when
one considers the opposite case of maximal number of cuts.
As in, we can introduce a degree 
superpotential with 

. In the vacuum where
all the  eigenvalues of  are distinct the gauge group
is broken to the maximal abelian subgroup .  
In the limit where the superpotential is turned off (), 
we should recover the dynamic of
the  theory. We will show that the Riemann surface of
the associated matrix model 
with  cuts becomes in this limit the Donagi-Witten curve.

We will also analyze the geometry of the matrix model 
for an arbitrary number of cuts.
We will show that, upon minimization,
the Riemann surface always becomes a covering of a torus
and we will discuss the relation of this surface
with the Donagi-Witten construction. 
We will also identify the field theory
resolvents with geometrical quantities on the
Riemann surface. All the results have 
a direct analogue in the case of a pure  theory 
. 




We will mainly consider 
the on-shell theory, where a minimization with respect to the moduli
has been performed. 
The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we discuss
the Riemann surface associated with the off-shell theory. In Section 3,
we will discuss the conditions following from the minimization and
the relation of the on-shell theory with the Donagi-Witten curve. In
Section 4, we discuss the identification of the field theory
resolvents with geometrical quantities on the Riemann surface.
Finally, in the Appendix we briefly discuss the loop
equations and some identities for the off-shell theory.

The Riemann surface  
Following, we can compute  from
 the large  expansion of a matrix model:
 
where   are  hermitian matrices. The model can be solved integrating out the matrices 
 and diagonalizing the  remaining matrix 
. 
The saddle point 
equation of motion reads
 
where  are the eigenvalues of .
As usual, in the large  limit, the eigenvalues will be spread 
over  cuts around each solution of . We will
denote the fraction of eigenvalues for each cut as .
According to the Dijkgraaf-Vafa prescription the
filling fractions  are identified with the field theory
condensates and the effective superpotential 
corresponding to  the  vacuum is 
 
where  is the matrix model free energy. 
Unless explicitly stated, we will
consider the case with the maximal allowed number of cuts.

Information about the model is encoded in the resolvent
. 
As usual,  has cuts corresponding to the distribution of the 
matrix model eigenvalues.
For this particular model, 
it is useful to  define the function 
 
where  is the 't Hooft coupling and 
 is defined by
the property
 
Then as a consequence of ()  
































 
Cuts in the  plane for the function .
Lower cuts are identified with upper cuts as shown using dashed lines.
 and  form a basis of cycles for . 


Equation () means that  is well-defined
on a surface obtained from the  plane after  identifications, as
shown in figure . If one adds the point , 
this space is topologically 
a Riemann surface  
of genus . Notice that this way of describing a Riemann surface
is somewhat reminiscent of the light cone parameterization of moduli
space of punctured Riemann surfaces.

The function  and the Riemann surface  allow to write
the effective superpotential () in a more convenient form.
First of all, integrating equation () around the cuts
we obtain the relation
 
where  are the cycles encircling the cuts in the  plane.
Moreover, as shown in, 
can be written in terms of integrals over the cycles  going
from a lower cut to an upper one. The superpotential then reads
 

We are interested in the geometrical structure of the problem. 
To this purpose, we can re-formulate the matrix model data 
in the following way. 
The coordinate  of the matrix model plane is not a well-defined 
function on the Riemann surface . Its differential , though, 
is well-defined. It has a double pole in the point  and 
is regular 
otherwise; its  periods are zero, and its  periods are .
Moreover we can see from eq. ()
that the function  has a single pole of order  
at the point . By Riemann-Roch this property
singles out  up to an additive constant. 
Thus our geometrical data are 
 
a Riemann surface  of genus  
a differential  with a double pole and periods 
   

Let us count the number of moduli of our data. 
We have  moduli from the moduli
space of Riemann surfaces of genus  with one puncture. Again 
from Riemann-Roch one gets  for the number of 
differentials with a double pole; integrating this to obtain  
involves an extra additive constant. Taking away  from () 
one gets finally 




From the matrix model point of view, 
these  moduli are easily interpreted as the classical vacua
(points  in which ),  
and the filling fractions . 











Alternatively, we can also interpret the  moduli as


the zeros of . A meromorphic 
differential with a double pole must indeed have  zeros: 
in the  plane 
they are the end-points of the cuts, denoted by small circles 
in figure . We see
then that  has precisely the role played by  in the light-cone 
parameterization of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces with punctures in
(The condition of having specified periods has an analogue 
in that case, where the differential was required to have purely
imaginary periods.  A differential with a double pole and purely imaginary
periods is uniquely determined on any Riemann surface
by a procedure similar to that in; 
then imposing the actual value of these
periods as in () constrains to a sub-variety of the moduli space.
The only real difference with is that  has two single
poles while our  has one double pole.) . 

It is interesting to compare our data
with the case of a pure  gauge theory. In that case,
the Riemann surface has genus  and can be explicitly written as
 
where  is a polynomial of degree , whose coefficients
are related to the moduli . The role of the meromorphic function  
is played by : all the relevant formulae are obtained with  
the substitution
.
An important difference with respect to our case,
is that the matrix model plane for pure  corresponds to just
one sheet of the surface (). On this sheet we have
the relation
, instead of equation ().
All quantities are then continued to the second sheet. In our case,
the matrix model plane is topologically identified with the entire
Riemann surface.   


Minimizing the superpotential 

The results obtained so far from the matrix model apply to
an off-shell theory. In order to obtain
the  vacuum value of the superpotential we further have to 
minimized equation () with respect to .
We refer to the theory after minimization as the on-shell theory.













Define the differentials
 
The  have no poles and 
are therefore holomorphic differentials.





Indeed, when we differentiate equation (), the  
get contributions
only from the difference of the resolvents; 
the simple pole in the resolvent, which behaves at infinity
as , cancels 
in the difference (Notice the difference
with the case of pure gauge where one of the
derivatives of  with respect to the  is a meromorphic
differential with a simple pole. This difference is consistent with
the fact that  has genus, while the hyperelliptic curve
considered in has only genus .) . 
From equation () it also
follows that the  form a basis of canonically normalized
holomorphic differentials: . Minimizing
equation () with respect to  we obtain
 
where we used the symmetry of the period matrix .



The effects of the minimization translate into the behavior of
the holomorphic differential .
Its -periods are . The minimization tells us
that, on-shell, the -periods of  are 
all equal, . 






















To see what this means, consider the map
 
from the Riemann surface to . 






The map () could be considered an "incomplete Jacobi map", in the
sense that we only consider the integral of one of the 
holomorphic differentials.


For a generic Riemann surface, one would not be able to do better and identify 
points to make the image compact. However, in our
case, since all the -periods are equal and all the -periods
are integers, () is a well-defined map to a torus 
defined by the identifications
 
where  is the highest common factor of the .














Thus, we have shown that using the equations of motion for , 
 becomes a covering of a torus of modular parameter 
. 



The  case 
To understand our result better, it is convenient to consider
first the case , maximal number of cuts  and .
The gauge group is completely broken to the maximal abelian
subgroup . This is the 
situation where we expect to recover information about the
underlying  theory. Following,
we take a potential  of degree  
with . Since all ,
the eigenvalues of  are all distinct and 
classically coincide with the  number . 
The  theory we are considering differs from an
 theory only for the presence of
the potential . 
If we turn off the deformation by sending , 
we recover the  theory in the point 
of the moduli space specified by the VEVs .









The  theory we obtain in this way has gauge group ,
a massive adjoint hypermultipletand coupling constant . The corresponding Seiberg-Witten curve 

was determined in. 
The curve can be written as an -sheeted covering 
of a base torus (of modular parameter ) expressed by the equation 
 
where  is a section of a -Higgs-bundle on the torus.
The theory is a massive deformation of  SYM and the 
presence of the torus reflects the S-duality of the original 
theory. Equation () gives the Donagi-Witten curve as a
degree  polynomial in  with coefficients that are elliptic 
functions on the base torus. 
The curve () is uniquely characterized by the existence of
a meromorphic function, , with  single poles 
at the  counter-images  
of the point  on the base torus. In one of the points, , 
the residue has to be , while the other  points 
have residue . The existence of a meromorphic function with these
properties uniquely determines the curve ().

We will now show that, after minimization, 
the matrix model Riemann surface  for  and 
becomes the Donagi-Witten 
curve describing the  theory.
We have already seen that
the surface  becomes a covering of a torus
of modular parameter  ( in this case). 
We will shortly see that the order  of 
this covering is actually . We can 
construct, on shell, the meromorphic function  
that characterizes a Donagi-Witten curve.
It is easier to find first the differential , which 
should have poles of order 2 with coefficient equal to minus the 
residue of . 
We have at our disposal at least two differentials 
with double poles in some or all the points . 
One is the pull-back of the differential  on the base torus. 

Once pulled back from  to
, this indeed provides double poles with coefficient one on 
every point  over .
Another one is  which has a double pole at . 
It is natural to suppose that  corresponds to (Notice 
that  is not vanishing in . 
This is consistent with
the fact that the point at infinity is not a branch point in the
Donagi-Witten curve.) .


We can construct a differential with the desired properties
by adding  and . This easily provides us with
a differential with double poles in  with coefficients
.
We should also require  to
have zero periods, since we want to integrate it to give a well
defined meromorphic function  on .



We can still add a piece with  without adding any pole. 
This way we end up with a differential , 
where the constants  and  have to be 
determined imposing the vanishing of all periods. 
Only two of the  conditions on periods are non trivial. 


Indeed, the pull-back of 
any  has possibly non-vanishing periods only around the two cycles of . 
The same statement holds for ; since the periods of  are all 
equal (), the only 
independent non-vanishing period is around the cycle , corresponding 
to one of the 
cycle of the base torus. 
Thus, we reduce to only 
two equations, which determine uniquely  and .
The result is
















 
where  is a standard Eisenstein series. This can be 
integrated up to a constant to give (Here  for a torus with periods  and .
 is the Weierstrass zeta function: it is defined by
having a simple pole in  and quasi-periodicity properties .  is periodic along  and
. Other useful
identities are: , , .) 
 
This expression is well-defined since  and  are
both periodic along the  cycle and the coefficients are chosen
in order to cancel their jump along . 









To determine the order  of the covering, it is now enough to
compute the value of the residue of  at . 
From equation () it follows 
 
so that . It follows that, 
in local coordinates,
. This fixes the residue of  near  to be 
. Thus , and our proof is completed.

Once the algebraic curve is given, eq. () determines the
map to the matrix model plane . The function  is also 
uniquely determined by the requirement of having a single pole of order
 at , even though its explicit form can be difficult
to find. Using the results of,  we can determine  the expression 
of the curve and  for small values of . The spectral curve 
() can be written as a pair of equations  
where the first equation is the standard representation 
of the torus as a cubic, while the second 
is a polynomial of degree  in , giving the -sheeted covering 
of the torus. 
As shown in,  is also a polynomial in  and .

For example, for  and , 




we have 
 

Analogously, for  and 
we have 
 
The degree  
polynomial in  can be related to  by analyzing the large 
behavior of  (see equation ).




In both cases,  is determined by equation (). The structure
of these two examples suggests that in general  is a linear combination of
the polynomials  defined in.

For generic  it is probably more convenient to use
an alternative expression for the Donagi-Witten curve,
 
where  is a degree  polynomial, which we can roughly identify
with . 
Another advantage of this expression is that it is naturally 
written in terms of the matrix model variable . Indeed,
as shown in,
to go from the polynomial equation () to the expression
above, a change of variables  is required, 
which, by equation () 
exactly defines the function . 





The general case 
We can also study the general case with arbitrary  and .
In this case, the group is broken to  and
there are some non-abelian gauge factors at low energy.
For these vacua, we could also introduce, as in,
integer numbers  labeling the type of confinement in each factor.
The numbers  appear in the matrix model expression for 
as 
The minimization procedure then fixes the periods of 
to be   and . As before, we conclude that the map
 is well defined if we make the
identifications  and , where 
is the highest common factor of the integers  and .
It was shown in that  defines the index of confinement
of the vacuum.

We see that  becomes a covering of a torus of modular parameter
. We can further show that  is a 
-sheeted covering
of the base torus, and express  as an
algebraic equation. Indeed, the argument  we used to identify the function
 can be repeated almost verbatim in the general case.
The only difference is now the ratio
of the residues in the points : 
equation () is replaced by
 
Since the behavior of  at infinity is still given by ,
the residue at infinity is now . It follows
that the number of sheets is . The genus  
curve 
is then expressed as an element of the spectral family .
Since the arithmetic genus of a curve of the family  is
, the algebraic curve will be singular and  will
correspond to its normalization.    

This result deserves some comments.
We know that the relevant geometry 
for arbitrary  and  can be determined as a particular point
in the moduli space of the underlying   theory.
In a vacuum with  only  photons remain massless
and this requires that  monopoles are massless and condensate
in order to give mass to all the other degrees of freedom. 
The associated curve has then  nodes. The
sub-variety of the moduli space where  monopoles are massless
has dimension . The point in this sub-variety associated to the
 vacuum can be determined by explicitly solving the equations
of motion for the potential . This minimization was
explicitly done in the case of a pure gauge theory in.
In that case,
one can explicitly check that a potential  of degree 
selects a point in the  moduli space of the form
 
where the  double zeros correspond to a degeneracy of the curve
associated with  massless monopoles. The reduced genus  curve 
 is exactly that describing the matrix model geometry.
It would be interesting to repeat this analysis for the case with
a massive hypermultiplet. The  vacuum 
should be associated with an element of the spectral family
 with  nodes, thus degenerating to a genus  surface. 
The matrix model computation suggests that the normalization of such curve 
can be also find by  normalizing a  curve  of 
Donagi-Witten type
but with a different base torus of modular parameter .



Finally we would like to comment about the 
cases where some of the cuts coincide.
In such cases, the genus  curve  degenerates.
The normalization of the resulting curve
has genus equal to the number of cuts. We can for example make contact
with the examples discussed in. These 
correspond to completely massive vacua and are associated with
a single cut. The previous discussion can be repeated with
 replaced by the number of cuts () and
the only non trivial . We exhibited  
as a -sheeted covering (i.e. an isomorphism) of a torus 
of modular parameter . 
For , the Donagi-Witten curve becomes quite
trivial, , and indeed describes a torus. 
Equation () then gives 


. 
This is exactly 
the map from the torus to the matrix model plane 
given in. 





The field theory interpretation of this result is simple.
Indeed, as it is well known, the massive vacua
of the  theory with bare coupling  
correspond to points in the moduli space of the  theory 
where the genus  curve  maximally degenerates
and becomes a torus of modular parameter
. 

















Resolvents 

The interesting quantities to compute in quantum field theory
are the resolvents 
The knowledge of  and  allows to compute all
the vacuum expectation values of operators in the chiral
ring. In this section, we will discuss a possible
identification of  and  with geometrical quantities. 
In the case of pure gauge,  can be related to the meromorphic function
 defining the curve (see equation ()) while 
becomes a meromorphic differential on the curve.
 
Identification of the resolvents  
We expect that, as in,  is identified with 
the matrix model resolvent 
 
In the case of pure gauge, 
this identification descends from  the comparison of the matrix model
loop equations with the Ward identities in field theory.
As shown in, the equations for ,  which  
can be deduced in the quantum field
theory using the Konishi anomaly, are formally identical
to the matrix model Ward identities for . 
In our case, the Ward identities are more complicated 
to write (some explicit
relations are discussed in the Appendix), but we expect that 
the general philosophy still applies.




Quantum mechanically, we may expect that
small cuts are opened around the classical eigenvalues of ,
analogously to what happens for the matrix model. Integrals of
 around a critical point of  define the condensates 
.
The contour integrals of  around a cut 
 are mapped to integrals of
 around its cut in the matrix model plane (these cuts are
indicated with dotted lines in figure 2),
which define the quantities 
 










 
The  contours encircle the cuts of ,
denoted by dotted lines.
The contours  delimit a simply connected region in the  plane. 

From quantum field theory it is also obvious that the integrals of
 around a critical point of  are integers
 
In analogy with, we may expect  to be associated
with a differential on the Riemann surface.
Consider the differential 
 
in a similar way as for the matrix model resolvent, the residue 
cancels from the two  pieces, and the differential is 
holomorphic around . We now conjecture that  can be extended
to a holomorphic differential defined on the entire Riemann surface.
Its periods  
around the  cycles are , by equation ().




These are the same  periods as . 
Since an holomorphic differential is completely specified by its
 periods


we conclude that
 
It then follows that also the  periods
are completely specified (this argument was also 
used in a similar way in)
 

The validity of equation () is strengthened by the following
formal 
argument. Using the definition of  and
the identification (), we have
 
which, by comparison with (), leads to the suggestive equation
 

















Field theory expectation values  
We can use  to compute the field theory expectation values 
of . To this purpose, we can integrate
 on a small contour around ,
 
We can deform the previous contour integral in the  plane 
until it encircles the cycles  and  (see figure 2), 
obtaining
 
where  are maps from the  cycle of the base torus
to contours  around the cuts of the resolvents on the real axis
(indicated by dots in figure ). 
We call  these contours.
Comparing equations () and ()
we obtain the useful formula
 


Formula () was derived inin the case of a single cut. 



We can also compute the vacuum value of the effective potential 
in terms of the function . This will also strengthen our 
identification of  with .
On shell, we can write
 as




By Riemann bilinear relations, this expression is also equal to
Res. The  piece in the definition () of 
is the only one which can contribute to this residue. 
We can at this point
try to invert the proof of the Riemann bilinear relations. To this purpose
we choose a base point, say on the real 
axis of , and modify all the  and  periods in such a way that
they bound a simply connected region (see figure ). 
This way we build a polygon whose sides 
are ,  and their opposites , , 
identified in such a way as to reconstruct the Riemann surface ,
similarly to. In the interior of this polygon 
(a simply connected region) the function  is 
well-defined. The Riemann bilinear relations are then demonstrated by
deforming  a contour integral of  around  to
the perimeter of the polygon and by exploiting the periodicities of .
If we now substitute  
with , we obtain extra contributions 
coming from the fact that  is a well defined function 
on the plane  but not on the Riemann surface. But we can now
exploit that to our advantage:
 
In second line of , we first used equation () and 
the fact that   is not well-defined on  

to evaluate the integrals over ; the integrals over 
instead just behave as for the usual Riemann argument. 
We have also used that . We then integrated
by parts the integrals over , and then used appropriate integrals of
() again to put the second piece in the final form. 


The final expression for  in () is consistent
with the identification (). Indeed, if
,
we know . 
So equation () can be written as
 
modulo pieces which, for a given , 
depend on , but not on  and on the
choice of a particular vacuum. Formula
()
was derived in a different way in the one-cut case in.

Formula () gives a prescription
for computing the quantities  purely in terms
of matrix model data; the function
 can be interpreted as the quantum distribution of field theory
eigenvalues. We should note, however, that there is
an ambiguity in the definition of 
in field theory. The condensates can be computed as the order
parameters 
of the  vacuum that is selected by the
potential . In presence of a mass ,  can mix
with all the other order parameters .
The results for the condensates obtained with different methods
could be related by a change of basis in the ; consistency
requires the coefficients of such redefinition to be
vacuum independent.
In the case of a single cut, it was explicitly checked in 
that the condensates computed with the matrix model prescription 
are indeed related by a vacuum-independent redefinition to
the condensate computed using the Donagi-Witten curve.
  

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Annamaria Sinkovics and 
Stephan Theisen for interesting discussions.
This work is partially supported by the EU contract
HPRN-CT-2000-00122. M.P. is supported by the European Commission Marie
Curie Postdoctoral Fellowship under contract number HPRN-CT-2001-01277.
A. Z. are partially supported by INFN and MURST, and
by the European Commission TMR program HPRN-CT-2000-00131,
wherein he is associated to the University of Padova.

Appendix: Loop equations 

The identifications of Section 4 could be strengthened
by comparing the matrix model loop equations with the Konishi
anomaly equations in field theory. A complete set of loop equations
uniquely determining the resolvents would also give a convenient
description of the off-shell theory. In the case of pure gauge,
the loop equations for the matrix model give relation ()
for , which uniquely determines the
Riemann surface associated with the matrix model; this result
is also valid off-shell. In the case of , the
loop equations are more complicated. 
Here we will make a first step in the study of the
loop equations and we
derived a suggestive relation satisfied by the resolvent.
In the following, we will refer to the Ward identity for the matrix model, 
which are identities for . As shown in,
identical equation for  can be deduced from the quantum field
theory Ward identities. Identities for  are then obtained
by differentiating those for , as a consequence of the
superfield formalism introduced in.



The best
way to find the loop equations is to consider the matrix model before 
integrating out  and  (), 
and making appropriate changes of coordinates.
The ones we consider here are





The equations that we get from these are

 

By considering repeated translations of () by , 
we can find a combination in which  and  disappear:
 
One can actually write this equation in terms of  by completing a
square. 
Defining   for any function , we have
 
where we have defined 
. 
The formal analogy
with the pure gauge case is evident. In that case, the loop equations are
. In our case,  plays the role of  and  the role
of . This would become of course more
than an analogy if one considers the limit .

It is not clear whether equation (), involving
and infinite series of shifts, is well-defined. If so, it
could be interpreted as an equation determining , and implicitly 
, in dependence of the polynomials  and . It would
be interesting to investigate whether  is uniquely determined 
by such equation. It would be also interesting to study 
equation () after minimization, where it should be
related to the Donagi-Witten curve.
The form of equation () is very suggestive in comparison to the
Lax matrix form of the Donagi-Witten curve given in equation ().




We leave the investigation of all these issues to future work. 








 99 

R. Dijkgraaf and C. Vafa,
"A perturbative window into non-perturbative physics,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0208048].


F. Cachazo, K. A. Intriligator and C. Vafa,
"A large N duality via a geometric transition,"
Nucl. Phys. B 603  (2001) 3
[arXiv:hep-th/0103067]; 
F. Cachazo, B. Fiol, K. A. Intriligator, S. Katz and C. Vafa,
"A geometric unification of dualities,"
Nucl. Phys. B 628  (2002) 3
[arXiv:hep-th/0110028].

F. Cachazo and C. Vafa,
"N = 1 and N = 2 geometry from fluxes,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0206017].


F. Cachazo, M. R. Douglas, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Chiral rings and anomalies in supersymmetric gauge theory,"
JHEP 0212  (2002) 071
[arXiv:hep-th/0211170].


F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Chiral Rings and Phases of Supersymmetric Gauge Theories,"
[arXiv:hep-th/0303207].


N. Dorey, T. J. Hollowood, S. Prem Kumar and A. Sinkovics,
"Exact superpotentials from matrix models,"
JHEP 0211  (2002) 039
[arXiv:hep-th/0209089];
"Massive vacua of N = 1* theory and S-duality from matrix models,"
JHEP 0211  (2002) 040
[arXiv:hep-th/0209099].



R. Donagi and E. Witten,
"Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory And Integrable Systems,"
Nucl. Phys. B 460  (1996) 299
[arXiv:hep-th/9510101].


V. A. Kazakov, I. K. Kostov and N. A. Nekrasov,

Nucl. Phys. B 557  (1999) 413
[arXiv:hep-th/9810035].




S. B. Giddings and S. A. Wolpert,
"A Triangulation Of Moduli Space From Light Cone String Theory,"
Commun. Math. Phys.  109  (1987) 177.




E. D'Hoker and D. H. Phong,
"Calogero-Moser systems in SU(N) Seiberg-Witten theory,"
Nucl. Phys. B 513  (1998) 405
[arXiv:hep-th/9709053].


R. Gopakumar,
"N = 1 theories and a geometric master field,"
arXiv:hep-th/0211100.


F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
"Phases of N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories and matrices,"
JHEP 0302  (2003) 042
[arXiv:hep-th/0301006].

  
Ph. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of algebraic geometry ,
Wiley and sons, New York, 1979.

O. Aharony, N. Dorey and S. P. Kumar,
"New modular invariance in the N = 1* theory, operator mixings and  supergravity singularities,"
JHEP 0006  (2000) 026
[arXiv:hep-th/0006008].


  S. G. Naculich, H. J. Schnitzer and  N. Wyllard,
"Cubic curves from matrix models and generalized Konishi anomalies", 
[arXiv:hep-th/0303268].
 
 R. Casero and E. Trincherini, 
"Quivers via anomaly chains", [arXiv:hep-th/0304123]. 
 










