







1.2 
16.5cm
-1.5 cm
0cm
0cm






thm Theorem 
cor Corollary [thm]
lem Lemma 





The Euler-Lagrange Cohomology

  and General Volume-Preserving Systems 
Bin ZhouEmail: zhoub@ihep.ac.cn 

  Institute of High Energy Physics,
  Chinese Academy of Sciences,  

  P. O. Box 918-4, Beijing 100039, P. R. China, 

  Han-Ying GuoEmail: hyguo@itp.ac.cn 

  Institute of Theoretical Physics,
  Chinese Academy of Sciences,  

  P. O. Box 2735, Beijing 100080, P. R. China, 

  Jianzhong PanEmail: pjz@amss.ac.cn 

  Academy of Mathematics and System Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,  

  Beijing 100080, P. R. China, 

  and

  Ke WuEmail: wuke@itp.ac.cn 

  Department of Mathematics, Capital Normal University,  

  Beijing 100037, P. R. China  

(Draft   April 7, 2003) 



 
We briefly introduce the conception on Euler-Lagrange cohomology
groups on a symplectic manifold  and
systematically present the general form of volume-preserving
equations on the manifold from the cohomological point of view. It
is shown that for every volume-preserving flow generated by these
equations there is an important 2-form that plays the analog role
with the Hamiltonian in the Hamilton mechanics. In addition, the
ordinary canonical equations with Hamiltonian  are included as
a special case with the 2-form . It is
studied the other volume preserving systems on 
. It is also explored the relations between our approach
and Feng-Shang's volume-preserving systems as well as the Nambu
mechanics.










Introduction 

As is well known,  the classical mechanics is well
established (see, for example,,). In the
classical mechanics, the systems with potential can be described
by both the Hamiltonian and Lagrangian formalism. in the
Hamiltonian mechanics (see, for example,,
), the canonical equations with Hamiltonian  read
 
For an autonomous system, the Hamiltonian  manifestly
independent of the time  is a function on the phase
space.  , the cotangent bundle of the
configuration space.  In fact, a Hamiltonian system  defined on a
symplectic manifold  as its phase space
where  is a -dimensional orientable
differentiable manifold endowed  with a symplectic 2-form
For the details of Hamiltonian mechanics on a
symplectic manifold, see, for example,. According to
Darboux's theorem,  for each point  in ,
there is a coordinate neighborhood 
 of  such that( Repeated
indices are always assumed to be summed over 1 to  unless
otherwise stated. For convenience, symbols such like
 are always abbreviated as  later. ) and
locally we always have
 
Thus a Hamiltonian system 
on   can always be described locally by
eqs. (). The solutions of eqs. () are the
integral curves of the Hamiltonian vector field
 
on . It is well known that the above Hamiltonian
system preserves both the symplectic form  and the volume
form
 
where  is
the -fold wedge product of .

In the symplectic geometry, for a vector field 
on , there is always a 1-form 
, where  denotes the
contraction. The vector is symplectic, if  is closed.
 On the other
hand, for a Hamiltonian vector field  on
, the 1-form  is exact and the
ordinary canonical equations () can be expressed as
 
Thus, a cohomology
 may be introduced :
 
In, in order to study its time discrete
version in discrete mechanics including the symplectic algorithm,
this cohomology has been introduced and is called the
Euler-Lagrange cohomology. It is simple but significant to see
that by definition the canonical equations () are in the
image of the cohomology. In addition, it is also straightforward
to show that the Euler-Lagrange cohomology is isomorphic to the de
Rahm cohomology on  and that
both  and  in () are preserved not only
along the phase flow defined by the eqs () but also
along the symplectic flow. Namely,
 
 and
 
respectively. 


However, it should be emphasized  that there exist certain
important mechanical systems that preserve the volume of the phase
space only and cannot be transformed into the ordinary Hamiltonian
systems. For example, let us consider the following kind of linear
systems
 
on  with constant coefficients .
Obviously, eqs. () can be turned into the form:
 
with
 
When one of  is nonzero, 
the system () is not an ordinary Hamiltonian system on
.  In fact, the corresponding vector field
 
of () is not even a symplectic vector field since the
Lie derivative
 

However, it is easy to verify that the  system () always
preserves the volume form of the phase space, i.e.
.

It is worth while to mention that 
even some conservative system can be transformed as such kind of
non-Hamiltonian linear systems. Consider a system consisting of
two 1-dimensional linearly coupled oscillators with different
mass:
 
Obviously, such a system does satisfy Newton's laws. Let 
, ,  and .
Then it is a system as described by eqs. (), with 
. When , we have such a system
that .

The  volume-preserving systems are very important. This can also
be seen as follows. If a system  on 
is not volume-preserving, it can be extended as a
volume-preserving system  on
 in such a way that
the orbits of  are precisely the projection of the orbits of
 onto . As a demonstration, let  and
 () be the Darboux coordinates on
 and ,   the ones on .
Then take 
 as the symplectic structure
on . Note that  in the
expression should be written as  in which 

 is the projection. But, as a demonstration, we
do not need to give a rigorous description, although it can be
made.

Suppose that for the system  on ,
 where  is a
function and




is the vector field of . Then a system  on
 corresponding to




can be constructed. It can be easily checked that  is a
volume-preserving system. And the orbits of  are just the
projections of the orbits of . If all the properties of system
 are known, so the properties of .



In this paper, we generalize the Euler-Lagrange cohomology to
higher forms on a symplectic manifold  and
present a general form of equations that generate a
volume-preserving flow  from the cohomological point of view. It
is shown that for every volume-preserving flow there is a 2-form
that plays an analog role with the Hamiltonian  in the Hamilton
mechanics. The ordinary Hamiltonian equations with Hamiltonian 
are included as a special case with a 2-form
.

The main results on the Euler-Lagrange cohomology will be quoted
and outlined without detailed proof. Some of the general content
and results can be found in and more details as well as extended topics will be given in
the forthcoming paper. In what follows, we first
generalize the Euler-Lagrange cohomology to higher order ones in
section 2. Then we present the general volume preserving equations
from cohomological point of view in section 3. We also show that
the canonical equations in the Hamilton mechanics and the kind of
linear systems just mentioned are special cases of the general
volume preserving equations. In section 4, we compare our general
volume-preserving equations with other volume-preserving systems
presented before. Especially, we explore the relations with
Feng-Shang's volume-preserving systems in their volume-preserving
algorithm and with Nambu's mechanics.
Finally, we end with some conclusion and remarks.



The Euler-Lagrange Cohomology on Symplectic Manifolds 

In order to  present the general equations for volume-preserving
systems from the cohomological point of view, we need first to
generalize the Euler-Lagrange cohomology from  of
1-forms to higher forms. In this way a sequence of Euler-Lagrange
cohomology groups  can
be introduced. Then we consider the trivial class of the highest
one with . The general volume-preserving equations will be
picked up from it. This is, in fact, a direct generalization for
the ordinary Hamilton system, where the canonical equations can be
represented by the 1-forms in the trivial class of
 as defined in eq. ().



Briefly speaking, a volume-preserving system characterized by a
volume-preserving vector field, corresponds to a unique closed
-form on  and vise versa . Such
a system that corresponds to an exact -form can be
determined then by a 2-form up to at least a closed
2-form.




In this section, the concept of Euler-Lagrange cohomology groups
 for 
 will be briefly introduced. Some of their important properties
will be quoted. But the details on the Euler-Lagrange cohomology
groups will be explained in the forthcoming paper.


For , where 
,  we may define the sets
* 
For simplicity, hereafter  denotes the space of
smooth vector fields on  of dimension .  The
vector fields in  and
 are known as symplectic vector fields
and Hamiltonian vector fields, respectively. Those in
 are just volume-preserving vector
fields. It is easy to prove that
* 
and
 
In fact,  is a Lie algebra
under the commutation bracket of vector fields,  and
 is an ideal of
 because
 

The quotient Lie algebra
 
is  called the -st Euler-Lagrange cohomology
group ,,. It is called a group
because its Lie algebra structure is trivial: For each ,
, ,  is an
Abelian Lie algebra. For ,
 is the Euler-Lagrange
cohomology. And it can be proved that
 is linearly isomorphic to
the first de Rham cohomology group
 as was mentioned in the
introduction.


For ,  is the Lie algebra
of volume-preserving vector fields, including all the other Lie
algebras mentioned  above as its Lie subalgebras. Similarly to the
case of , the -st Euler-Lagrange cohomology group
 is isomorphic to the
-st de Rham cohomology group
. To prove this, let us first
introduce a lemma:

 
  For each integer   and , the
linear map 
 defined by  is
injective. That is,  iff .

The Euler-Lagrange cohomology groups can also be
defined as
 
where 
 Using the above lemma, it is easy to
see that this definition is equivalent to ().

Since , lemma
 implies that 
 is a linear isomorphism, which induces a
linear isomorphism

defined by
 
Hence we obtain
 
The linear map 
 is an
isomorphism. Under this isomorphism,
 and
 are isomorphic to
 and , respectively.
In the above theorem,  is the space of closed
-forms on  and  is the space of
exact -forms on . As a consequence, we obtain the
following corollary:
 
  The -st Euler-Lagrange cohomology group
 is linearly
isomorphic to , the
-st de Rham cohomology group.

When  is closed(i.e., compact and without boundary) ,
 is linearly
isomorphic to the dual space of
, because
  

for such a manifold (see, for example,).
If  is not compact, this relation cannot be assured.

When , there is another lemma:
 
Let . Then, for an arbitrary integer  and
a point , 
satisfies  iff .
Again this induces injective linear maps
* 
for . Thus we can obtain that
 
When , it can be easily verified from lemma
 that
 
is a linear isomorphism. If , we use the convention that
. Namely, 
. Then we can define a linear map  making the
following diagram commutative:
 

In general, it can be shown that there exist certain symplectic
manifolds on which the -st Euler-Lagrange cohomologe group
 is not
isomorphic to either de Rahm cohomology group
 or the harmonic cohomology
group  on the
manifold. Therefore, the Euler-Lagrange cohomology
groups for  are new cohomological property of the
symplectic manifold in general.




The General Form of Volume Preserving Equations 

Now we concentrate on the general form of volume preserving
equations from the cohomological point of view. We will first
present such kind of equations in the first subsection. Then we
illustrate some concrete volume-preserving systems. Especially, we
show that the ordinary canonical equations () are
included as a special case. Finally, we explore some of the
properties of important 2-forms for these volume-preserving
systems.


The general volume preserving equations and
    


It is important to see that as shown in the diagram (),
for a given 2-form
 
where  and  are antisymmetric for each pair of  and ,
the vector field
 
is in .

For convenience, we set
 
i.e., 
. It is
easy to obtain that
 
 In fact,
* 
By virtue of the following two equations
 
we can write  as
* 
Comparing it with
 
we can obtain the expression of , as shown in eq. ().



Since both  and  are linear isomorphisms, we can see
from the commutative diagram () that for each 2-form
 on  as in eq. () the vector field
 in eq. () belongs to
 and for each
  
there exists the 2-form  on  satisfying
eqs. (). But, there may exist several 2-forms that are
mapped to the same vector field . For example, the
vector field  in () is invariant under the
transformation
 
where  is a closed 2-form.

Note that for  , the
2-form  is a globally defined differential form on
. If ,
such a 2-form cannot be found if
 is nontrivial. In this case,
 can  still be found as a locally defined 2-form,
according to the Poincare lemma. Then the relation between
 and the locally defined 2-form ,
eq. (), is valid only on a certain  open subset of
; And on the intersection of two such open subsets,
the corresponding 2-forms are not identical. That is, the
transformation relation of ,  as well as 
is not that of tensors on . Instead, a transformation
like () or more complicated should be applied.

No matter whether  belongs to
 or
, i.e., whether the 2-form
 is globally or locally defined, the flow of 
can be always obtained provided that the general solution of the
following equations can be solved:
 
This is just the general form of the equations of
a volume-preserving mechanical system on a
symplectic manifold .



Some concrete volume-preserving
systems. 

Let us show some concrete volume-preserving systems.

First, since the canonical equations () in the
Hamiltonian mechanics is volume preserving, it should be a special
case of (). In fact, this is just the case.

For the Hamiltonian  of the canonical system on ,
take the 2-form as
 
then eqs. () just turn out to be the canonical equations
() as it should be. Thus the ordinary Hamilton
equations have been included as a special case, as what is
expected. 

Secondly, let us recall the kind of linear systems mentioned in
sect:Intro  on  with 
.

Taking
  , 
and 
with the constants  and the function  as shown in eqs. ()
and (), namely,
 
then the eqs ()  turn out to be eqs. ().
Therefore the 2-form  in eq. () is one of
general forms corresponding to such kind of linear systems. But,
it is not the unique.


It is interesting that when  in the above equation, all the coordinates
 are the first integrals of the linear system. Then all the canonical
momenta
   where 
are constants. This can generalize to an arbitrary symplectic
manifold for the equations (), even though the system is
no longer a linear system.

Thirdly, let us now consider some kind of volume preserving
systems on a generic symplectic manifold .

If the 2-form  satisfies on a Darboux coordinate
neighborhood  in 
 
for each , then  and . Hence, on that
coordinate neighborhood , all the  are constant.








The trace of 2-forms 

If we define a function  as
 
for each 2-form , then using the formula
 
we obtain that
 
The above expression is obviously independent of the choice of
the Darboux
coordinates.

Let  be the Hamiltonian vector field
corresponding to the function . Eq. ()
indicates that
 
where  is the extra part on the right hand side of
eq. (), corresponding to the 2-form
 
  
Hence, when the 2-form  with 
a function on
,  and the traceless
part of
 vanishes.
   


If  is a function on , then the derivative
  
along any one of the integral curves of
eqs. () satisfies the equation
 
In fact, .
And, since  is volume-preserving,
 
Then according to eq. (),
* 
Thus eq. () has been proved.

Especially, when , the system
()
turns out to be the usual Hamiltonian system, as we have
mentioned. For such
a Hamiltonian system, on the one hand, we can use eq. ()
to obtain
 
namely,
 
On the other hand,  can be expressed in terms of the
Poisson bracket:
 
So we obtain the relation between the Poisson bracket and the
trace of 2-forms:
 






The Relations with Other
Volume Preserving Systems 

Let us now consider the relations between our volume-preserving
equations and other relevant topics such as Feng-Shang's volume
preserving systems and the Nambu mechanics.

Feng-Shang's volume preserving systems 

In order to develop the volume-preserving algorithm, Feng and
Shang presented the following lemma.

 [Feng-Shang's lemma]
The volume-preserving vector field
   
on  can always be expressed by an antisymmetric
tensor  on  as
 
where  are the standard coordinates on .

Note that here we have adopted the notations so as to accommodate
ours in this paper. In fact, this lemma can be  understood as
follows: A vector field on , known as a Euclidean
space or a Riemannian manifold, is volume-preserving if and only
if it is divergence-free. Using the Hodge theory, the divergence
of the vector field  reads
  ,
where  is the codifferential operator and
  
is the 1-form (covariant vector field) obtained from  by
lowering indices with the metric  for .
When  is volume-preserving, 
. This implies that  is a closed -form. Then,
according to the Poincare lemma, there is a 2-form ,
say, such that . If  is assumed
to be  with 
, we can obtain
that 
.
Then the vector field  satisfies eq. ().

According to the precise sense of volume, Feng-Shang's lemma can
be grouped into the same class with the approach to the
volume-preserving systems proposed by Nambu. This
lemma has presented the most general form of volume-preserving
systems in this class.

It is worth seeing that the formula  () is quite
similar to eq. (), only with some slight differences: (1)
This formula is a statement on the Euclidean space 
with an arbitrary dimension  while eq. () is for a
symplectic manifold, of -dimensional. (2) It can be
generalized to an -dimensional Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian
manifold provided that the -st de Rham cohomology group is
trivial, with the ordinary derivatives being replaced by the
covariant derivatives. As for eq. (), when
, not every
volume-preserving vector field satisfies it. This is similar to
eq. (). But a covariant derivative is not necessary
in eq. (). (3) When the symplectic manifold 
, we can set
 
where , ,
 and  is the  unit matrix.
Accordingly, we set
  .
Then eq. () reads
 
with the index  running form 1 to . Comparing it with
eq. (), it
seems that a condition
 
could be imposed on the 2-form  in eq. ().


The Nambu mechanics 

It should be mentioned that the idea of generalizing the
Hamiltonian systems can be traced back to Nambu. In
, Nambu pointed out that there are various
possibilities of generalizing the Hamiltonian systems to the
volume-preserving systems. Especially he discussed in detail the
volume-preserving system on . His discussion can
smoothly generalizes to a -manifold 
, where  for each  is a
3-dimensional Riemannian (or pseudo-Riemannian) manifold. The most
exciting is that the quantization can be achieved within such a
mechanics. - The ordinary quantization of mechanics, including
the geometric quantization, is based on the
Hamiltonian mechanics. 

Our approach presented in this paper, however, differs from
Nambu's work in three aspects. First, our interest  is the
volume-preserving systems on a symplectic manifold. We are not
about to generalize the Hamiltonian systems, although certain a
generalization has been inevitably resulted in. Secondly, the
systems in Nambu's approach preserve a volume induced by the
metric on that manifold. In Nambu's paper, in order to perform the
vector product, the metric is necessary. The volume preserved in
our approach is induced by the symplectic structure. So, such a
generalization is  different from that of Nambu. Thirdly, as
having been discussed, the ordinary Hamiltonian systems have been
included as the special cases into our general form of
volume-preserving equations. This is not the case in Nambu's
approach.


Conclusion and Remarks 

In this paper, we have briefly introduced the definition and
properties of the Euler-Lagrange cohomology groups on a symplectic
manifold  and presented the general form of
equations that relate to the image of the highest Euler-Lagrange
cohomology group, which generate a volume-preserving flow on the
manifold. It has been shown that for every volume-preserving flow
there are
 some 2-forms playing the role similar to the Hamiltonian functions in
the Hamilton mechanics and the ordinary canonical equations with
Hamiltonian  are included as a special case with the 2-form
. Thus, this is a generalization of the
Hamilton mechanics from the cohomological point of view.
where  is the corresponding Hamiltonian. 

 Finally, it should
be mentioned that the volume-preserving systems play very
important role in  physics, especially in the both classical
mechanics and statistical physics via the famous Liouville
theorems in both of them. However, this has not been noticed widely
yet. In this paper we have not explained why the volume-preserving
systems are so important in statistical physics, but left it as a
topic for the forthcoming papers.


Acknowledgement 

We would like to thank Professor Z. J. Shang, S. K. Wang and Siye
Wu for valuable discussions. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant Nos.
90103004, 10171096, 19701032, 10071087) and the National Key
Project  for Basic Research of China (G1998030601).




 99 

A. I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical
  Mechanics , Springer-Verlag, New-York, 1989.

 R. Abraham and J.E. Marsden,
  Foundation of Mechanics , (Second Ed.) Addison-Wesley, 1978.

Han-Ying Guo, Yuqi Li and Ke Wu, "On Symplectic and
  Multisymplectic Structures and Their Discrete Version in Lagrangian
  Formalism", Comm. Theor. Phys.  (Beijing) 35 , 703-710 (2001).



Han-Ying Guo,Yuqi Li, Ke Wu and Shi-Kun Wang, "Difference
  Discrete Variational Principle, Euler-Lagrange Cohomology and Symplectic,
  Multisymplectic structures I: Difference Discrete Variational Principle",
  Comm. Theor. Phys.  (Beijing), 37 ,  1-10 (2002);
  "II: Euler-Lagrange Cohomology", ibid, 129-138;
  "III: Application to Symplectic and Multisymplectic Algorithms", ibid,
  257-264. See, also, the eprint hep-th/0106001.

 Han-Ying Guo, Jianzhong Pan, Ke Wu and
 Bin Zhou, "The Euler-Lagrange Cohomology  on Symplectic
 Manifolds". Invited talk given by HYG at The ICM Satellite Conference
 "Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables", USTC, Hefei,
 August30-Sep. 2, 2002. The proceedings will be published by SPC. Singapore.

 Han-Ying Guo, Jianzhong Pan, Ke Wu, Siye Wu and
 Bin Zhou, "The Euler-Lagrange Cohomology  on Symplectic
 Manifolds" . In preparation.

D. McDuff and D. Salamon,
Introduction to Symplectic Topology , Clar. Press. Oxford,
1998.

F. W. Warner, Foundations of
Differentiable Manifolds
  and Lie Groups , Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983.

K. Feng and Z. Shang, "Volume-preserving algorithms for
  source-free dynamical systems", Numer. Math. , Vol. 71 ,
   451-463 (1995).

Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev.  D3 ,  2405-2412 (1973).

See, for example, N. M. J. Woodhouse,
Geometric
  Quantization , 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford 1997.

Bin Zhou, Han-Ying Guo and Ke Wu,
General volume-preserving mechanical
 systems, the eprint on arXiv: math-ph/0208033.


