
Projective Quantum Mechanics 
Jose M. Isidro

Instituto de Fisica Corpuscular (CSIC-UVEG)

Apartado de Correos 22085, Valencia 46071, Spain

jmisidro@ific.uv.es  


 
We study the quantisation of complex, finite-dimensional, compact, classical 
phase spaces , by explicitly constructing Hilbert-space vector bundles over 
. We find that these vector bundles split as the direct sum of two holomorphic 
vector bundles: the holomorphic tangent bundle , plus a complex line bundle 
. Quantum states (except the vacuum) appear as tangent vectors to . 
The vacuum state appears as the fibrewise generator of . 
Holomorphic line bundles  are classified by the elements of , 
the Picard group of . In this way  appears as the parameter space 
for nonequivalent vacua. Our analysis is modelled on, but not limited to, the case when  
is complex projective space . 

Keywords: Quantum mechanics, projective spaces, holomorphic vector bundles.

2001 Pacs codes: 03.65.Bz, 03.65.Ca, 03.65.-w. 

2000 MSC codes: 81S10, 81P05.



Introduction 

Motivation 

 Fibre bundles are powerful tools to formulate the gauge theories 
of fundamental interactions and gravity. The question arises whether or not 
quantum mechanics may also be formulated using fibre bundles 
. Important physical motivations call for such a formulation.

In quantum mechanics one aims at contructing a Hilbert-space vector bundle 
over classical phase space. In geometric quantisation 
this goal is achieved in a two-step process that can be very succintly summarised 
as follows. One first constructs a certain holomorphic line bundle (the quantum line
bundle ) over classical phase space. Next one identifies certain sections of this line bundle  
as defining the Hilbert space of quantum states. Alternatively one may skip 
the quantum line bundle and consider the one-step process of directly constructing a 
Hilbert-space vector bundle over classical phase space. Associated with this vector bundle 
there is a principal bundle whose fibre is the unitary group of Hilbert space.

Standard presentations of quantum mechanics usually deal with the case when this 
Hilbert-space vector bundle is trivial. Such is the case, 
e.g. , when classical phase space is contractible to a point. However, 
it seems natural to consider the case of a nontrivial bundle as well. 
Beyond a purely mathematical interest, important physical issues that go 
by the generic name of dualities  motivate 
the study of nontrivial bundles. 

Triviality of the Hilbert-space vector bundle implies that the transition 
functions all equal the identity of the structure group. In passing from 
one coordinate chart to another on classical phase space, vectors on the 
fibre are acted on by the identity. Since these vectors are quantum 
states, we can say that all observers on classical phase space are quantised 
in the same way. This is no longer the case on a nontrivial vector bundle, 
where the transition functions are different from the identity.
As opposed to the previous case, different neighbourhoods 
on classical phase space are quantised independently and, possibly, differently. 
The resulting quantisation is only local on classical phase space, instead of global.
This reflects the property of local triviality satisfied by all fibre bundles.

Given a certain base manifold and a certain fibre, the trivial bundle over the given base 
with the given fibre is unique. This may mislead one to conclude that quantisation 
is also unique, or independent of the observer on classical phase space. In 
fact the notion of duality points precisely to the opposite conclusion, i.e. , 
to the nonuniqueness of the quantisation procedure and to its dependence on the observer 
. 

Clearly a framework is required in order to accommodate dualities within quantum mechanics 
. Nontrivial Hilbert-space vector bundles over classical phase space provide 
one such framework. They allow for the possibility of having different, nonequivalent quantisations,
as opposed to the uniqueness of the trivial bundle. However, although nontriviality 
is a necessary condition, it is by no means sufficient. A flat connection on a nontrivial 
bundle would still allow, by parallel transport, to canonically identify the Hilbert-space 
fibres above different points on classical phase space. This identification would depend 
only on the homotopy class of the curve joining the basepoints, but not on the curve itself. 
Now flat connections are characterised by constant  transition functions, 
this constant being always the identity in the case of the trivial bundle. 
Hence, in order to accommodate dualities, we will be looking for nonflat  connections. 
We will see presently what connections we need on these bundles.

This article is devoted to constructing nonflat Hilbert-space vector bundles over classical 
phase space. In motivating the subject we have dealt with unitary groups as structure groups 
and linear fibres such as Hilbert spaces. However quantum states are rays rather than vectors. 
Therefore it is more precise to consider the corresponding projective  spaces and 
projective  unitary groups, as we will do from now on.


Notations 

Throughout this article,  will denote a complex -dimensional, 
connected, compact classical phase space, endowed with a symplectic form  
and a complex structure . We will assume that  and  
are compatible, so holomorphic coordinate charts on  will also 
be Darboux charts. We will mostly concentrate on the case when  
is projective space . Its holomorphic tangent bundle will be denoted 
. The following line bundles over  will be considered:
the trivial line bundle , the tautological line bundle  
and its dual . The Picard group of  will be denoted 
.  will denote the complex, -dimensional 
Hilbert space of quantum states , with unitary group . 
They projectivise to  and , respectively. 


Summary of main results 

Our analysis will deal mostly with the case when . 
In section  we summarise its useful properties as a classical 
phase space. In section  we recall some well-known facts from 
geometric quantisation. They concern the dimension of the space of holomorphic 
sections of the quantum line bundle on a compact, quantisable Kahler 
manifold. This dimension is rederived in section  using purely 
quantum-mechanical arguments, by constructing the Hilbert-space bundle 
of quantum states over . For brevity, the following summary 
deals only with the case when the Hilbert space is 
(see sections ,  for the general case).
The fibre  over a given coordinate chart 
on  is spanned by the vacuum state , 
plus  states ,
, obtained by the action of creation operators. We identify 
the transition functions of this bundle as jacobian matrices plus a phase factor. 
The jacobian matrices account for the transformation (under coordinate changes on 
) of the states , while the phase factor 
corresponds to . This means that all quantum states (except the vacuum) 
are tangent vectors to . In this way the Hilbert-space bundle over 
 splits as the direct sum of two holomorphic vector bundles: 
the tangent bundle , plus a line bundle  
whose fibrewise generator is the vacuum. 

All complex manifolds admit a Hermitian metric, so having tangent vectors 
as quantum states suggests using the Hermitian connection and the corresponding 
curvature tensor to measure flatness. Now  is nonflat,
so it fits our purposes. The freedom in having different nonflat Hilbert-space bundles 
over  resides 
in the different possible choices for the complex line bundle . Such choices 
are 1-to-1 with the elements of the Picard group .  

Quantum states are unit rays, rather than vectors in Hilbert space. 
Projectivising the Hilbert-space bundle (with fibre )
gives rise to a bundle whose fibre is . We classify these 
bundles in section  in the case when .
That is, we classify -bundles over  as complex 
manifolds.

The previous picture of quantum states (except the vacuum) as tangent vectors
remains substantially correct in the case of an arbitrary, compact, complex manifold 
 whose complex and symplectic structures are compatible;
this is proved in section .
Flatness of the resulting Hilbert-space bundle depends on whether or not the 
holomorphic tangent bundle  is flat. We continue to have the Picard group 
 as the parameter space for different Hilbert-space bundles 
over .

Finally section  discusses our results. 


 as a classical phase space 

We will consider a classical mechanics whose phase space  is 
complex, projective -dimensional space .
The following properties are well known.

Let  denote homogeneous coordinates on . 
The chart defined by  covers one copy of the open set 
. On the latter we have the holomorphic coordinates 
, ; there are  such coordinate charts. 
 is a Kahler manifold with respect 
to the Fubini-Study metric. On the chart  the Kahler 
potential reads
  
The singular homology ring  contains 
the nonzero subgroups 
 
while 
 
We have , with  a hyperplane 
at infinity. Topologically,  is obtained by attaching a (real) -dimensional 
cell to .  is simply connected,
 
it is compact, and inherits its complex structure from that on . 
It can be regarded as the Grassmannian manifold 
 

Let  denote the tautological bundle  on . We recall that 
 is defined as the subbundle of the trivial bundle 
 whose fibre at  is the line in  
represented by . Then  is a holomorphic line bundle over . 
Its dual, denoted , is called the hyperplane bundle . 
For any , the -th power  is also a holomorphic line bundle 
over . In fact every holomorphic line bundle 
 over  is isomorphic to  for some ;
this integer is the first Chern class of . 


The quantum line bundle 

In the framework of geometric quantisationit is customary to consider the case when  is a compact 
Kahler manifold. In this context one introduces the notion of a quantisable, 
compact, Kahler phase space , of which  is an 
example. This means that there exists a quantum line bundle  
 on , where  is a holomorphic line bundle, 
 a Hermitian metric on , and  a covariant derivative compatible 
with the complex structure and . Furthermore, the curvature 
 of  and the symplectic 2-form  are required to satisfy
 
It turns out that quantisable, compact Kahler manifolds are projective 
algebraic manifolds and viceversa. After introducing 
a polarisation, the Hilbert space of quantum states is given by 
the global holomorphic sections of .

Recalling that, on ,  is isomorphic to  for some 
, let  denote the sheaf of holomorphic sections  
of  over . The vector space of holomorphic sections of 
 is the sheaf cohomology space .
The latter is zero for , while for  it can be canonically 
identified with the set of homogeneous polynomials of degree  on 
. This set is a vector space of dimension 
:
 
We will give a quantum-mechanical derivation of eqn. () in 
section .

Equivalence classes of holomorphic line bundles over a complex manifold 
 are classified by the Picard group . 
The latter is defined as the sheaf cohomology group 
,
where  is the sheaf of nonzero holomorphic functions on .
When  things simplify because the above
sheaf cohomology group is in fact isomorphic to a singular homology group,
 
and the latter is given in eqn. (). Thus
 
The zero class corresponds to the trivial line bundle ;
all other classes  correspond to nontrivial bundles. 
As the equivalence class of  varies, 
so does the space  of its holomorphic sections vary. 


Quantum Hilbert-space bundles over  

As discussed in section , in quantum mechanics one skips the 
quantum line bundle  of geometric quantisation and proceeds directly to 
construct Hilbert-space bundles over classical phase space. We will therefore 
analyse such vector bundles (that we will call quantum Hilbert-space bundles , 
or -bundles for short), their principal unitary bundles and, 
finally, their projectivisations. Our aim is to demonstrate that there are different 
nonequivalent choices for the nonflat -bundles, to study how the corresponding 
quantum mechanics varies with each choice, and to provide a physical interpretation.
Although we will be able to reproduce the results that geometric quantisation derives 
from , our approach will be based on the -bundles instead.
In particular, triviality of the quantum line bundle  does not imply, 
nor is implied by, triviality of the -bundle; the same 
applies to flatness. 

Our analysis will be modelled on the case when . 
An example of a classical dynamics on  is given by the projective 
oscillator. On the coordinate chart  of eqn. (), 
the classical Hamiltonian equals the Kahler potential ().
Its eigenfunctions and eigenvalues will be obtained in section . 
Compactness of  implies that, upon quantisation, the Hilbert space 
 is finite-dimensional, and hence isomorphic 
to  for some . This property follows from the fact that 
the number of quantum states grows monotonically with the symplectic volume 
of ; the latter is finite when  is compact.
We are thus led to considering principal -bundles 
over  and to their classification. Equivalently, we will consider 
the associated holomorphic vector bundles with fibre .
The corresponding projective bundles are -bundles and principal -bundles. 
Each choice of a different equivalence class of bundles will give rise to a different 
quantisation. How many such equivalence classes are there? This question will be addressed 
in section . For the moment let us observe that there is more than one. 
For example one can consider the class of the trivial bundle 
, or the class of a nontrivial bundle over  
such as the Hopf bundle. For the same reasons we can expect more than one equivalence 
class of projective bundles to exist. That this is actually true will also be proved 
in section .

So far we have left  undetermined. In order to fix it we first 
pick the symplectic volume form  on  such that 
 
Next we set , so . This normalisation corresponds 
to 1 quantum state per unit of symplectic volume on . Thus, e.g. , 
when  we have the Riemann sphere  and . 
The latter is the Hilbert space of a spin  system, and the counting 
of states is correct. There are a number of further advantages to this normalisation. 
In fact eqn. () is more than just a normalisation, in the sense that the 
dependence of the right-hand side on  is determined by physical consistency arguments. 
This will be explained in section .
Normalisation arguments can enter eqn. () only through overall numerical 
factors such as , i, or similar. It is these latter factors that we fix by hand 
in eqn. (). 

The right-hand of our normalisation () differs from 
that corresponding to eqn. (). Up to numerical factors such as 
, , etc, it is standard  to set .
However we will find our normalisation () more convenient. 
Indeed we will make no use of the quantum line bundle , while we 
will be able to reproduce quantum-mechanically the results of geometric quantisation.


Computation of  

Next we present a quantum-mechanical computation of
 without resorting to sheaf 
cohomology. That is, we compute  when 
and prove that it coincides with the right-hand side of eqn. ().
The case  will be treated in section .

Starting with , i.e. , a point  as classical phase space, 
the space of quantum rays must also reduce to a point. Then the corresponding Hilbert space 
is . The only state in  is the vacuum , 
henceforth denoted  for brevity. 

Next we pass from  to . 
Regard , henceforth denoted , as the point at infinity  
with respect to a coordinate chart  on  that does not 
contain . This chart is biholomorphic to  and supports a representation 
of the Heisenberg algebra in terms of creation and annihilation operators ,  
. This process adds the new state  to the spectrum. 
The new Hilbert space  is the linear span of  
and .

On  we have the charts  and . 
Point  is at infinity with respect to , while it 
belongs to . Similarly, the point at infinity with respect to 
, call it , belongs to  but not to 
. Above we have proved that the Hilbert-space bundle  
has a fibre  which, on the chart , is the linear span 
of  and . On the chart , the 
fibre is the linear span of  and , 
 being the creation operator on . On the common overlap 
, the coordinate transformation between  and 
 is holomorphic. This implies that, on ,
the fibre  can be taken in either of two equivalent ways: either 
as the linear span of  and , or as that of  
and . 

The general construction is now clear. Topologically we have 
, with  a hyperplane at infinity, 
but we also need to describe the coordinate charts and their overlaps.
There are coordinate charts ,  
and nonempty -fold overlaps  for . 
Each chart  is biholomorphic with  and has
a -hyperplane at infinity; the latter is charted by the 
remaining charts , .
Over  the Hilbert-space bundle  has a fibre 
 spanned by 
 
Analyticity arguments similar to those above prove that, on every nonempty 
-fold overlap , the fibre  can 
be taken in  different, but equivalent ways, as the linear span of 
 and ,  , for 
every choice of .

A complete description of this bundle requires the specification of the 
transition functions; this will be done in section .


Representations 

The -dimensional Hilbert space of eqn. () may be regarded as a kind of 
defining representation , in the sense of the representation theory 
of  when . To make this statement more precise we observe 
that one can replace unitary groups with special unitary groups in eqn. ().
Comparing our results with those of section  we conclude 
that the quantum line bundle  now equals , 
 
because . This is the smallest value of  that produces a nontrivial 
, as eqn. () gives a 1-dimensional Hilbert space when . 
So our   spans an -dimensional representation of , that we can 
identify with the defining representation. There is some ambiguity here since the 
dual of the defining representation of  is also -dimensional. 
This ambiguity is resolved by convening that the latter is generated by the 
holomorphic sections of the dual  quantum line bundle 
 
On the chart , 
, the dual of the defining representation is the linear span of the covectors
 
These conclusions must be slightly modified in the limiting case when , since all 
 representations are selfdual. This point will be explained in section .

Taking higher representations is equivalent to considering the principal
-bundle (associated with the vector -bundle) in a 
representation higher than the defining one. We will see next
that this corresponds to having  in our choice of the line bundle .


Computation of  

We extend now our quantum-mechanical computation of 
 to the case . As in section , we do not resort to 
sheaf cohomology. The values  respectively correspond to the trivial and the 
defining representation of . The restriction to nonnegative  follows 
from our convention of assigning the defining representation to  and 
its dual to . 
Higher values  correspond to higher representations and can be accounted for as follows. 
Let us rewrite eqn. () as  
 
where now  and  act on . Now
 admits -dimensional representations 
(Young tableaux with a single column of  boxes) that, by restriction, 
are also representations of . Letting  vary for fixed ,
this reproduces the dimension of eqn. ().

By itself, the existence of  representations with the dimension
of eqn. () does not prove that, picking , the corresponding 
quantum states lie in those -dimensional representations.
We have to prove that no other value of the dimension fits the given data.
In order to prove it the idea is, roughly speaking, that a value of  on 
 can be traded for  on . That is, an  
representation higher than the defining one can be traded for the defining 
representation of . In this way the -bundle on 
 with the Picard class  equals the -bundle on 
 with the Picard class .
On the latter we have  excited states (i.e. , other than the 
vacuum), one for each complex dimension of . We can sort 
them into unordered sets of , which is the number of excited states on 
, in  different ways. This selects
a specific dimension for the  representations and rules out the rest.
More precisely, it is only when  that some representations are ruled 
out. When , i.e.  for , all representations are allowed, 
since their dimension is . However already for 
 some representations are thrown out. The number 
matches the dimension  of the  
irreducible representation if  and  or  and ,
but arbitrary values of  are in general not allowed.

To complete our reasoning we have to prove that the quantum line bundle 
 on  descends to  as the -th power 
. For this we resort to the natural embedding of  
into .
Let , ,  be the 
coordinate charts on  described in section ,
and let , , 
, , , 
 
be charts on  relative to this embedding. This means that the first 
 charts on , duly restricted, are also charts on ; 
in fact every chart on  is contained  times within . 
Let , with , be the transition function for  
on the overlap  of . 
In passing from  to ,
points on the fibre are acted on by . Due to our choice of embedding, 
the overlap  on  contains 
 copies of the overlap  on . 
Thus points on the fibre over  are acted on by , 
where now  are restricted to . This means that the line 
bundle on  is  as stated, and the vacuum  
on  equals the vacuum  on . Hence 
there are on  as many inequivalent vacua as there are elements in 
 (remember that sign reversal  
within  is the operation of taking the dual 
representation, i.e. , ).


Transition functions 

At each point  there is an isomorphism between the holomorphic cotangent 
space  and a complex -dimensional subspace of 
, where  is cotangent to 
 and  is normal to it. As  varies over  we have 
the following holomorphic bundles: the quantum Hilbert-space bundle 
 (with fibre ), the cotangent bundle  
(with fibre ), and the normal bundle  
(with fibre ). Modulo a choice of representation for 
, which will be done below, next we prove that
 
The above eqn. follows from the fact that, in the dual () of the defining 
representation, the operators  act as , i.e. , 
as tangent vectors. Correspondingly, in the defining representation (), 
their adjoints  in  act as multiplication by 
. 
Since adjoints in  transform as duals on tangent space, the  
transform as differentials , or cotangent vectors. In what follows we will 
identify the cotangent and the tangent bundles, so we can write
 
where  and  are subbundles of .
It follows that tangent vectors to  are quantum states 
in (the defining representation of) Hilbert space. In eqn. () we 
have given a basis for these states in terms of creation operators acting 
on the vacuum . The latter can be regarded as the basis vector 
for the fibre  of the line bundle .

As a holomorphic line bundle,  is isomorphic to  for some 
 . Now the bundle  has  
as its structure group, which we can consider in a certain representation .
If  denotes the representation space for  
corresponding to the class , we can write
  
The importance of eqn. () is that it classifies -bundles 
over : holomorphic equivalence classes of such bundles are in 1-to-1 
correspondence with the elements of . The 
class  corresponds to the defining representation of ,
 
and  to its dual. 
The quantum Hilbert-space bundle over  is generally nontrivial, 
although particular values of  may render the direct sum () trivial 
. The separate summands  and  are both 
nontrivial bundles. 
Nontriviality of  means that, when , the state 
 transforms nontrivially (albeit as multiplication by a phase factor)
between different local trivialisations of the bundle. When  the vacuum 
transforms trivially.

The preceding discussion also answers the question posed in section : 
what are the transition functions  for  ? According to eqn. 
(), they decompose as a direct sum of two transition functions, 
one for , another one for :
 
If the transition functions for  are , those for 
 are . On the other hand, the transition functions 
 are the jacobian matrices (in representation 
) corresponding to coordinate changes on . 
Then all the  -bundles of eqn. () are nonflat 
because the tangent bundle  itself is nonflat.

Knowing the transition functions  we can also answer 
the question posed in section  concerning the selfduality of the 
 representations. It suffices to consider the defining 
representation. The latter is 2-dimensional. By eqn. (), the 
corresponding transition functions, which are  complex matrices, 
split block-diagonally into  blocks, with zero off-diagonal entries.
Hence these matrices are symmetric, i.e. , invariant under transposition, 
which is the operation involved in passing from a representation to its dual. 
No complex conjugation is involved, since  would involve 
creation and annihilation operators with respect to the antiholomorphic coordinate 
. The notations ,  indicate that, 
if the latter acts as multiplication by a holomorphic coordinate ,  
the former acts by differentiation with respect to the same  holomorphic 
coordinate . 


Diagonalisation of the projective Hamiltonian 

Deleting from  the -hyperplane at infinity produces the noncompact 
space . The latter is the classical phase space of the -dimensional harmonic 
oscillator (now no longer projective , but linear ). The corresponding Hilbert space 
 is infinite-dimensional because the symplectic volume of  is infinite.

The deletion of the hyperplane at infinity may also be understood from the 
viewpoint of the Kahler potential () corresponding to the 
Fubini-Study metric. No longer being able to pass holomorphically 
from a point at finite distance to a point at infinity implies that, 
on the conjugate chart , the squared modulus 
 is always small and we can Taylor-expand eqn. () as
 
The right-hand side of eqn. () is the Kahler potential for 
the usual Hermitean metric on . As such, 
 equals the classical Hamiltonian for the -dimensional linear harmonic 
oscillator. Observers on this coordinate chart effectively see  
as their classical phase space. The corresponding Hilbert space is the 
(closure of the) linear span of the states , where 
 
and 
  
is the quantum Hamiltonian operator corresponding to the classical 
Hamiltonian function on the right-hand side of eqn. (). Then the stationary 
Schrodinger equation for the projective  oscillator reads
 
where 
 
is the quantum Hamiltonian operator corresponding to 
the classical Hamiltonian function on the left-hand side of eqn. ().

The same states  that diagonalise  also 
diagonalise . However, eqns. ()-() 
above in fact only hold locally on the chart , which does not cover 
all of . Bearing in mind that there is one hyperplane at infinity 
with respect to this chart, we conclude that the arguments of section apply in order to ensure that the projective oscillator only has  excited states.
Then the occupation numbers  are either all 0 (for the vacuum state) 
or all zero but for one of them, where  (for the excited states), 
and  as it should. Moreover, the eigenvalues of eqn. ()
provide an alternative proof of the fact, demonstrated in section , 
that the Picard group class  on  can be 
traded for  on .


-bundles over  

Projectivising the quantum Hilbert-space bundle  
gives a -bundle over , where the base  
is classical phase space and the fibre  is quantum phase space. 
Next we classify these bundles.


The case  

-bundles over  are complex manifolds called 
Hirzebruch surfaces . Holomorphic equivalence classes 
of these bundles are 1-to-1 with  , the set of nonnegative 
integers, , with  corresponding to the trivial bundle 
. The appearance of the nonnegative integers instead 
of all the integers can be traced back to the selfduality of the representations of .
We will see that, for  with ,  will be replaced 
by all the integers . This fact reflects the non-selfduality of the 
corresponding representations.

It is interesting to observe that, regarding  as the 
real  manifold , real  equivalence classes of -bundles 
over  are 1-to-1 with , i.e. , there are just 2 such 
classes, the trivial one and the nontrivial one.


The case  

On  there are  overlaps . 
Each chart  is biholomorphic with  and hence contractible. 
Thus, locally on , the -bundle over  is trivial, 
but nontrivialities may arise on the overlaps . 
How does the fibre  vary as we change coordinates from 
 to ?

In eqn. () we have  as the equator of the sphere . 
On the latter there are  real dimensions orthogonal to the equator. 
All of them are compact and can be parametrised by angular variables. 
A complete rotation around an axis orthogonal to the equator leaves the fibre  
unchanged, yet it is a transformation different from the identity. Assembling these  
real dimensions orthogonal to the equator into  complex parameters, one can perform  
independent transformations of this type, each contributing by a full 's worth 
of different ways the fibre  can be patched across the overlap
. Only when every such rotation is by a zero 
angle, for all values of , do we have a trivial bundle.

Therefore holomorphic equivalence classes of -bundles over 
 are 1-to-1 with  copies of .
As advanced in section , above one can set  only if
one replaces  with the positive integers .

An important point to observe is the following. Given that  is fixed, 
-bundles are classified by . 
This gives one copy of  as the parameter space for inequivalent 
-bundles. 
We can now projectivise these Hilbert-space bundles into -bundles 
and still we are left with one copy of  as the 
parameter space. This differs from the  copies of 
found above. However there is no contradiction. The operations of projectivisation 
and classification of bundles over , call them  and , do not commute:
. In our approach we first construct a family of Hilbert-space 
bundles, classified by the elements of , then we projectivise 
them into -bundles. Therefore the correct order for these operations is 
, i.e. , first classify, then projectivise.


Tangent vectors as quantum states 

We have seen in section  that (co)tangent vectors to  
are quantum states. The converse is not true, as exemplified by the vacuum. 
Let us generalise and replace  with an arbitrary classical phase space . 
We would like to write, as in eqn. (), 
 
where  is a holomorphic line bundle on , whose fibre 
is generated by the vacuum state, and  is the 
holomorphic tangent bundle. Does eqn. () hold in general?

The answer is trivially affirmative when  is an analytic submanifold 
of . Such is the case, e.g. , of the embedding of 
 within  considered in section ;
Grassmann manifolds provide another example.
The answer is also affirmative provided that  is a 
complex -dimensional, compact, symplectic manifold, whose complex and symplectic 
structures are compatible. Notice that  is not required to be Kahler;
examples of Hermitian but non-Kahler spaces are Hopf manifolds.
Let  denote the symplectic form. Then  
thanks to compactness; this ensures that 
. Assuming that the vacuum is nondegenerate, 
as was the case with , we can adopt a normalisation similar to that 
of eqn. (),
 
Let us cover  with a finite  set of holomorphic coordinate charts 
, ; the existence of such an atlas follows 
from the compactness of . We can pick an atlas such that  is 
minimal; compactness implies that . 

The construction of the -bundle proceeds along 
the same lines of section . The chart  is 
biholomorphic with (an open subset of) . The  
components of the holomorphic coordinates ,  
give rise to creation and annihilation operators 
, , satisfying the Heisenberg algebra 
 for every fixed value of . 
The vacuum , plus the  states , span 
the fibre  of the Hilbert-space bundle over the patch 
.  On overlaps 
, analyticity arguments identical to those of section ensure that the fibre can be taken in either of two equivalent ways. 
 is either the linear span of  plus the  states 
, or the linear span of  plus the  states 
.  

It is now clear that much of section  concerning  carries over 
to . Choosing  we determine a 
holomorphic line bundle 
 as in eqn. (), and the latter holds (with a subindex  
on the left-hand side) under the assumptions made above. By eqn. () we can 
write for the transition functions 
 
as we did in eqn. (). Transition functions for  are jacobian 
matrices, and tangent vectors are quantum states. Holomorphic line bundles such as 
 are classified by the Picard group , although 
the latter need not be . Now  may or may not be trivial. 
If both  and  are trivial, then the full quantum 
Hilbert-space bundle is trivial. A nontrivial 
-bundle arises if  
is nontrivial and this nontriviality cannot be compensated by a nontrivial 
, or viceversa. On the other hand  is flat if, 
and only if, both  and  are flat.

However there may also be differences with the case of . 
One would like to identify  (for some class 
) with the quantum line bundle , but  
need not be quantisable and/or  need not possess holomorphic sections. 
Another potential difference is the possible degeneracy of the vacuum.
While all vacua on  were nondegenerate, this need not be the 
case on a general . We will analyse these cases in a 
forthcoming article.


Discussion 

Quantum mechanics is defined on a Hilbert space of states whose construction
usually assumes a global character on classical phase space. Under 
globality  we understand, as explained in section , the 
property that all coordinate charts on classical phase space are quantised 
in the same way. A novelty of our approach is the local character of the Hilbert space:
there is one on top of each Darboux coordinate chart on classical phase space.
The patching together of these Hilbert-space fibres on top of each chart may be global 
(trivial bundle) or local (nontrivial bundle). In order to implement 
duality transformations we need a nonflat bundle (hence nontrivial).
Flatness would allow for a canonical identification, by means of parallel 
transport, of the quantum states belonging to different fibres.

Given a classical phase space as a base manifold and a Hilbert space as a fibre, 
the trivial bundle corresponding to these data is unique. On the contrary, 
there may be more than one (equivalence class of) nonflat (and hence 
nontrivial) bundles possessing the given base and fibre. This means that, 
considering nonflat bundles, the choice of a quantum mechanics need not be unique, 
even if the corresponding classical mechanics is kept fixed. The freedom in choosing 
different Hilbert-space bundles is parametrised by the Picard group of classical 
phase space. This group parametrises (equivalence classes of) holomorphic line bundles. 
The corresponding 1-dimensional fibre is spanned by the vacuum state. The remaining 
quantum states are obtained by the action of creation operators on the vacuum chosen. 
The quantum states so obtained can be identified with tangent vectors to classical 
phase space. When the Picard group is trivial, there exists just one Hilbert-space bundle 
(though not necessarily trivial). A nontrivial Picard group means that there 
is more than one equivalence class of Hilbert-space bundles. Any two different choices 
of a Hilbert-space bundle correspond to two different choices of a line 
bundle on which the vacuum state lies.
The previous conclusions are valid on an arbitrary complex, compact classical phase space 
whose complex structure is kept fixed and is compatible with the symplectic 
structure, and assuming nondegeneracy of the vacuum.

In the presence of a nontrivial Picard group, each choice of a line bundle carries 
with it the choice of a representation for the unitary structure group of the 
Hilbert-space bundle. This may lead to the wrong  conclusion that 
duality transformations are just different choices of a representation for 
the unitary group of Hilbert space. A choice of representation 
is not  a duality transformation. The choice of a 
representation for the unitary group is subordinate to the choice of a class 
in the Picard group. Picking a class in the latter, one determines a representation 
for the former. In other words, in eqn. (), one does not vary the 
representation  independently of the Picard class .

A duality thus arises as the possibility of having two or more, apparently different, 
quantum-mechanical descriptions of the same physics. Mathematically, a 
duality arises as a nonflat, quantum Hilbert-space bundle over 
classical phase space. This notion implies that the concept of a quantum is not absolute, 
but relative to the quantum theory used to measure it. That is, duality 
expresses the relativity of the concept of a quantum. In particular, 
classical  and quantum , for long known to be deeply related 
, 
are not necessarily always the same for all observers on phase space.


Acknowledgements 


It is a great pleasure to thank J. de Azcarraga, U. Bruzzo and M. Schlichenmaier 
for encouragement and discussions. This work has been partially supported by research grant 
BFM2002-03681 from Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia and EU FEDER funds.


 99 


M. Reuter, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A22  (1998) 3835;
J. Math. Phys.  40  (1999) 5593.

N. Woodhouse, Geometric Quantization , Oxford University Press, Oxford (1991).

C. Vafa, hep-th/9702201 .

J. de Azcarraga and J. Izquierdo, Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, 
Cohomology and some Applications in Physics , Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1995).

S. Kobayashi, Differential Geometry of Complex Vector Bundles , 
Princeton University Press, Princeton (1987).

S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry , Wiley, 
New York (1996).

M. Schlichenmaier, Berezin-Toeplitz Quantization and Berezin's 
Symbols for Arbitrary Compact Kahler Manifolds , in Coherent 
States, Quantization and Gravity , M. Schlichenmaier et al.  (eds.),
Polish Scientific Publishers PWN, Warsaw (2001).

D. Joyce, Compact Manifolds with Special Holonomy , Oxford Science 
Publications, Oxford (2000).

M. Schlichenmaier, An Introduction to Riemann Surfaces, Algebraic 
Curves and Moduli Spaces , Springer, Berlin (1989).

P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic Geometry , Wiley 
Interscience, New York (1994).

C. Nash, Differential Topology and Quantum Field Theory , Academic 
Press, London (1994).

W. Barth, C. Peters and A. Van de Ven, Compact Complex Surfaces , 
Springer, Berlin (1980).

D. McDuff and D. Salamon, Introduction to Symplectic Topology ,
Oxford University Press, Oxford (1998).

  
A. Faraggi and M. Matone, Int. J. Mod. Phys.  A15  (2000) 1869;

G. Bertoldi, A. Faraggi and M. Matone, Class. Quant. Grav.  17  (2000) 3965.

A. Perelomov, Generalized Coherent States and their Applications , Springer, Berlin (1986). 

W. Dittrich and M. Reuter, Classical and Quantum Dynamics , Springer, 
Berlin (2001).





