












1.2 
0pt
0pt
0pt
0pt
-0.5in
6.5in
9.0 in
 equation section 




 
 
USCHEP/0304ib2
hep-th/0304005 

UT-03-08April, 2003 


 
Fermionic Ghosts in Moyal String Field Theory  


  



I. Bars(e-mail address: bars@usc.edu) ,
I. Kishimoto(e-mail address:
 ikishimo@hep-th.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp)  and
Y. Matsuo(e-mail address:
 matsuo@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp)    

  

 Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0484, USA 

 

 Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Tokyo 

Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

  

 

 
We complete the construction of the
Moyal star formulation of bosonic
open string field theory (MSFT) by providing
a detailed study  of the fermionic ghost sector.
In particular, as in the case of the matter sector,
(1) we construct a map
from Witten's star product to the Moyal product,
(2) we propose a regularization scheme
which is consistent with the matter sector
and (3) as a check of the formalism,
we derive the ghost Neumann coefficients algebraically
directly from the Moyal product. The latter
satisfy the Gross-Jevicki nonlinear relations
even in the presence of the regulator, and
when the regulator is removed they coincide numerically
with the expression derived from conformal field theory.
After this basic construction, we derive a regularized action
of string field theory in the Siegel gauge and
define the Feynman rules. We give explicitly the
analytic expression of the off-shell four point function
for tachyons, including the ghost contribution.
Some of the results in this paper have already  been used in
our previous publications.
This paper provides the
technical details of the computations which were omitted there.
footnote 0  
 


Introduction 

Witten's open bosonic string field theory, its operator
version, and its split string reformulations
, led to the development of the
Moyal star formulation of string field theory (MSFT) during the past two
years-
. This formulation has the following features:

 
The star product in Witten's string field theory is mapped to the
Moyal star product after an appropriate change of variables. The
string field  in the new basis is a
function of the string midpoint  and the phase space 
 of even string modes . While Witten's
star product, written in terms of Neumann coefficients, is very
complicated to manipulate in computations, the Moyal star product in MSFT,
which is diagonal in mode space labelled by , is the simplest form of the
star product that occurs in standard noncommutative geometry. This feature
vastly simplifies the structure of string field theory and is very helpful
in explicit computations.

The change of variables introduces a set of simple but infinite
matrices  labelled by  and 
 which contain basic information about even 
 and odd  string modes. These matrices obey a
matrix algebra that has an associativity anomaly, which in turn feeds into
an associativity anomaly among string fields. The origin of the
anomaly is the infinite number of string modes that cause the appearance of
ambiguous terms of the form  In order to resolve this
problem, we proposed a regularization by truncating the
number of the oscillators to finite , and defined a deformed set of
finite matrices  as functions of the oscillator frequencies 
 of the  modes. After such regulation, the
associativity is restored and all manipulations become well-defined. The
original open string field theory is restored by taking the original
frequencies,   and the large  limit at
the end of the computation. Through explicit computation of specific
examples, it has been shown that this regulation procedure correctly
reproduces results computed independently in conformal string theory.

In the regularized basis, we computed the Neumann coefficients
analytically by using only the Moyal product. These coefficients are not
needed for computations in MSFT, but they provide a check of MSFT relative
to the operator formulation given in. We have shown that the
Neumann coefficients derived in the regularized MSFT framework satisfy the
Gross-Jevicki nonlinear relations, and thus provide a generalization of
Neumann coefficients for any set of frequencies 
and any  This provided the first consistency check of MSFT.
Furthermore, we found that the Neumann coefficients for any -point vertex
are all simple functions of a single matrix 
 Diagonalizing the matrix 
diagonalizes all the Neumann coefficients simultaneously for all -point
vertices. At large  our diagonal form agrees with the one
given in, and explains in particular why there is
Neumann spectroscopy for the 3-point vertex, and generalizes
it to any -point vertex.

One of the nice features of MSFT is that the star product is diagonal
in mode space (i.e. independent and same for each mode). The only cost for
this simplification is that the kinetic term given by the Virasoro operator 
 becomes off-diagonal in mode space 
. However, this has not hindered explicit computations. In particular,
we have derived the Feynman rules, including the propagator 
 and shown that we can evaluate efficiently and
explicitly the Feynman graphs in open string field theory.

The off-diagonal part of the kinetic term depends on a specific
combination of momentum modes, namely 
 which we refer to as the anomalous midpoint mode". This mode appears in the
kinetic operator in the form  with 
, while the remaining part of the kinetic term is diagonal in mode
space. We named the term  the midpoint
correction" . We found that if it were not for this midpoint correction, the
rest of the kinetic plus interaction terms would define a theory, equivalent
to an infinite matrix theory, that is vastly simpler and completely solvable 
. However we determined that the  term is essential for
the correct definition of string field theory. Thus we have isolated the
hard part of string field theory in the form of the quadratic
midpoint correction" term  We have shown that
all classical solutions, including the true vacuum, of the interacting
string theory, are obtained analytically by first solving the nonlinear
equation explicitly by ignoring  and then including the effect of 
 in a closed formal expression that can be evaluated to any order in
a perturbative expansion in powers of .

In our published work so far, we have demonstrated all of the above results
explicitly mainly in the matter sector. We have implied, and sometimes
explicitly included, the corresponding contribution of ghosts either in the
bosonic or fermionic version but the details
were not given explicitly. The purpose of the present paper is to provide
all the relevant material on fermionic ghosts which we used previously, in
an organized and comprehensive manner. In this sense, this paper completes
the basic formulation of MSFT.

Because we will try to be quite explicit, the content of this paper will be
rather technical. The construction of the Moyal product for fermionic ghosts
is basically parallel to the bosonic case, except that we
need to be careful in some minor differences, including midpoint issues,
which appear in the ghost fields .

The first point relates to the boundary conditions. While we needed to
consider Neumann type boundary conditions for the matter fields (open
strings on the D25 brane), Dirichlet type boundary conditions appear
for the ghost field. Therefore, the Fourier basis is different. The
regularization method developed in was based on the Fourier
modes, hence some care is needed to make the regularization compatible in
the matter and ghost sectors. The regularization developed in this paper can
be applied also to the treatment of the matter sector for lower D branes (
).

The second point relates to the overlapping conditions of split strings. For
the matter fields, we have to treat only overlapping conditions for the
split string degrees of freedom. For the ghost fields, on the other hand, we
should also consider the anti-overlapping conditions. This induces some
changes in the mapping of Witten's star to Moyal's star.

The third point is the fermionic nature of Moyal variables. The usual
bosonic derivatives which appear in the definition of the Moyal product get
replaced by derivatives of fermionic variables, and care is needed in the
ordering and signs.

The fourth point is the treatment of the midpoint mode. This is a rather
delicate issue since, as in the matter sector, it cannot be determined from
the split string formulation. The fermionic midpoint mode is not part of the
Moyal  product, and it is integrated in the definition of the
action. In the Siegel gauge, the dependence on this extra fermionic variable
becomes trivial, and it drops out in actual computations.

We mention the work of Erler where he defined the Moyal star
formulation for the ghost system mainly in the continuous basis
.(
There are some works on Moyal structure of Witten's
string field theory.) 
There are overlaps of the current paper with his work especially in the
second and third points mentioned above. The correct treatment of the
midpoint appeared first in our work, and his paper was modified
subsequently. Beyond the preliminary level, for correct computation with
ghosts, the results of the present paper are needed.


The definition of the fermionic Moyal product outlined above is given in
section . Because of its technical nature, we first summarize
the fundamental formulae at the beginning of the section, and explain the
full detail in the subsections. Readers who wish to skip the details of the
derivation can proceed to later sections by skipping the latter part. In
subsection , we first discuss the issue of boundary conditions
in general for fermions and the corresponding regularization scheme. We also
give a brief review of in appendix . Together
with it, this paper provides the basic formulae for both the ghost and
matter sectors in a compact form. We then discuss the mapping from Witten's
star to Moyal's star in subsection . Finally we apply
these techniques to the actual  ghost system in subsection 
, and derive the correspondence between the conventional
oscillators and Moyal variables in subsection .


After this preparation, in section , we define the monoid
algebra among gaussian string fields, which provides a useful tool for
computations (this is almost a group, except for inverse). We compute the
star product of  monoid elements, which as a by-product give the Neumann
coefficients in the ghost sector. These were conjectured in by
using a nontrivial relation with the Neumann coefficients in the matter
sector. In this paper, we derive them directly from the fermionic Moyal
product. They satisfy the Gross-Jevicki- nonlinear relations exactly for any
frequencies  and any . This fact confirms the
consistency of our construction including the midpoint prescription. As in
the matter sector, they are simple functions of the matrix  for
any -point vertex, and they can be related to the corresponding
matter Neumann coefficients by the simple procedure of replacing the
matrix  by its inverse.

We also give the direct numerical comparison between the analytic form of
the Neumann coefficients  obtained from conformal field theory
and our algebraic expression. We confirmed that the approximate value for
finite  converges to its exact value as  with the
following universal behavior, 
 where the exponent is approximately 
 for matter sector and  for the ghost
sector for any components of the Neumann coefficients. While this analysis
is of different nature from the other parts in this paper, it is included
here since it gives strong support on the consistency of MSFT inand this paper. It also provides the basis for numerical computation of MSFT
in our future study.

In section  we apply the formalism. First , we present the
derivation of the open string field action in the Siegel gauge by including
both matter and ghost fields. This action was the starting point in our
recent work where we used the results of the present paper
without providing the details. Finally, we also compute the ghost
contribution to the Feynman graphs for the four-point scattering amplitude
for off-shell tachyons, whose matter sector was discussed in.

Moyal's star from Witten's star in fermionic ghost sector 
 

In this section we construct the map from Witten's star product to the Moyal
star product for fermionic variables. The fermionic version of the Moyal 
 product was called "anti-Moyal star product" in the literature 
. More general star products have also been considered in the
context of deformation quantization of super-Poisson brackets
. The anti-Moyal star product will simply be referred to as the
Moyal star product in the following. A first basic construction for the
ghost  system, following the one in the matter sector, was
previously discussed in, while the correct treatment of the
midpoint was first given in. In this section we give the
complete treatment, including the consistent regularization with the matter
sector.

We also define the even basis of ghost modes that is most transparent for
our computations, after defining some other bases as well. We first
summarize the main results of this rather lengthy and technical section:

 
The Moyal  acts on fermionic ghost modes 
 () as 
 
where  is a parameter which absorbs units, and if
desired, could be absorbed away by a rescaling of the variables which
amounts to a choice of units. We note the canonical structure 

 This odd basis 
of ghost modes, which was used in, is naturally defined in the
process of mapping the Witten star to the Moyal star, including the
treatment of the midpoint. However, a more transparent basis that is more
parallel to the matter sector, which simplifies the overall formalism, is
obtained by rewriting the odd basis, through the following linear 
canonical  transformation, in terms of an even basis 
 (), where the
labels  refer to the modes of the usual  ghosts 
 
This even basis is different than the one defined in. The Moyal
product is rewritten as 
 
We note the canonical structure 

 The linear transformation
matrices,  (and matrices  and vectors  which appear in the
following) were defined in, while the matrix  appears for the
first time in this paper. Their properties are derived explicitly in
subsection . They play a central role in MSFT since they
define a Bogoliubov transformation from the oscillators in the operator
formalism to the Moyal coordinates, and thus carry essential information
about string theory. For instance, see Eqs.(,
) in the next paragraph. For the moment, we just mention that they satisfy
the inverse properties  which prove that the two
versions of the star product () and () are canonically
equivalent. Throughout this paper, the bar () means the
transpose of matrices or vectors. The relation of split strings to the Moyal
star is discussed in subsection .

In the operator formulation, the ghost sector of the string field 
 is represented in the Fock space of the  ghost
oscillators. The transformation to the Moyal field  as
a function of noncommutative coordinates  is
obtained through the Fourier transformation of the coordinate
representation of . The whole procedure is more neatly
expressed, as in the matter sector, by the inner product with a
particular bra state  in the Fock
space, where 
 are the noncommutative fermionic coordinates, and 
 is a fermionic variable related to the zero mode dependence of 
 
 
Here  is the SL invariant bra Fock vacuum, 
 are the conventional ghost oscillators, and the matrices 
 and  are defined as 
 
The matrices  are functions of the oscillator
frequencies  as given below. Through Eqs.(
,) we map Witten's star () into the Moyal's star 
 as follows 
 
We note that the product is local in while  plays a
similar role to the midpoint coordinate  in the matter
sector. The Moyal star reproduces correctly the three string vertex 
 and the reflector  of the operator
formalism. The details are given in subsection
. The precise correspondence including the zero
mode is in section  .


Eq.() is enough to derive the connection between the
conventional operator formalism and the Moyal star formalism. For example,
the action of the standard oscillators on the Fock space field 
 can be rewritten in terms of their Moyal images acting on the
field  through the
star product, as follows 
 
where  are fields in Moyal space which obey
oscillator relations under the  product 
 
On the other hand  are not independent from
the  Rather, they are their Bogoliubov
transforms which obey the following relations 
 
and  
where the
matrix  will be given below. With these formulas, one can directly
translate operators in Fock space into their images which act in Moyal
space. The proof of these formulas and some variants are discussed in
subsection . In this way we derive the explicit form of the
Virasoro operator  which acts in Moyal space 
 
This was used in. Here 
 are not the Moyal fields  or 
 given in Eqs.(,
); rather, they are differential operators that obey the standard oscillator
relations, and which are derived from the star products of the fields 
 or  as will be shown
below.

Half string formalism and regularization  

We start from full string functions  
 with Dirichlet boundary conditions at  and discuss their
split string formulation in the interval . Such
functions have a Fourier expansion with only sine  modes in the full
string formalism. By contrast, the corresponding problem in the matter
sector involved only cosine  modes because of Neumann boundary
conditions at . We collect the basic formulae in the
appendix . The essential step was the construction of the
regularization which is needed to avoid the associativity
anomaly. We give a regularization of the ghost sector for the sine mode
expansion which is compatible with the previous results.

A full string function  which satisfies Dirichlet boundary
conditions 









 is expanded as 
 
We decompose such a field  into left half  and
right half  as follows 
 
As we have seen in, we have some arbitrariness in the choice
of the boundary condition for the split string functions 
 at the midpoint . They can be expanded using
either odd or even modes according to the two possible choices of the
boundary condition at the midpoint  as discussed
below.

Dirichlet at end point, Neumann at midpoint (DN) 
 

First we consider 


Neumann boundary conditions at the midpoint  while we have
Dirichlet boundary conditions at the end point for the split string
functions : 
 
We can expand them using odd sine modes  
 
By comparing the mode expansions
Eqs.(,,) with
(), we obtain the correspondence between
the full and split string variables, 
 
or the inverse 
 
where  and the matrix  is given by 
 
The above mappings are consistent because  is an orthogonal matrix: 
 
The continuity condition at the midpoint 
is 
 
where we defined the odd vector  associated with the midpoint 
 
Eq.() holds thanks to the identity 
 This equation implies
that  has a singular eigenvector even though it has an inverse, which is
just its transpose  as stated in (). This
esoteric relation is possible because  is an infinite matrix. However it
causes an associativity anomaly with respect to matrix products, which in
turn feeds into associativity anomaly of string field star products, as
discussed in.

An example of the associativity anomaly is 
but  
Each single sum indicated by the parentheses
has a unique answer, but the double sums are ambiguous. The reason is that,
due to infinite sums, in the first expression there are terms of the form 
 which are ambiguous. Since these matrices appear in many
physical computations we must give an unambiguous definition of the matrix
product. We will resolve this ambiguity in computations successfully by a
regularization procedure.

Dirichlet at end point, Dirichlet at midpoint (DD) 
 

We consider another possibility: we define the midpoint of the string 
 and impose Dirichlet boundary conditions at both 
 on the split string functions , 
 
We note that the midpoint value  is an additional degree of
freedom in the split string basis and cannot be chosen arbitrarily. We
expand  using even sine modes,  
 
Again, by comparing the mode expansions Eqs.(,
,) with (), the correspondence between
split and full string variables is obtained 
 
or the inverse 
 
where 
 
The maps  are
consistent by the relation 
 

We can prove the following relations among infinite matrices 
and vectors  by straightforward
computation: 
 
where  are the diagonal matrices 
 and . This algebra
is similar to the one among the infinite matrices  which appeared
in the matter sector, where a full string function 
 is expanded in terms of cosine modes (see ).

Regularization  

In the split string formulation given in  
  , we encountered a set of
infinite dimensional matrices  and vectors 
. These represent Bogoliubov transformations
between odd and even modes, with  appearing when the full string
is expanded in terms of cosine modes, and 
 appearing when the full string is expanded in terms of sine
modes. Such transformations are essential in the Moyal formulation since
they carry basic information about string theory. We note that, the Moyal
star product itself, which is applied independently for each mode, has no
specific information about string theory, and as such is a more general
structure.

In the analysis of the matter sector as well as the sine mode
expansion given so far, there appears an associativity anomaly in the matrix
algebra of these matrices. This originates from the infinite dimensionality
of these matrices. It produces ambiguities in computations in string field
theory. To have a well defined theory, it is mandatory to define a deformed,
unambiguous, associative algebra that preserves the basic matrix algebraic
structure of these matrices. Such a deformation contains a
parameter  that corresponds to the rank of the matrices. The original
definition of these matrices given above is reproduced by taking the limit 
 of this parameter. All computations in the open string
field theory are performed unambiguously with finite  and the correct
value in string theory is obtained at the end of the computation by taking
the limit . This is the basic strategy for practical
computations in the MSFT proposal.

The deformed set of matrices for  that have correctly reproduced
string theory was proposed in. Since an additional set of
matrices  have appeared in the
ghost sector we need to obtain their deformation consistently with the
matter sector. For that purpose, we start from the infinite dimensional
matrix  and vectors  defined in, 
 
where  () now run over both positive and negative integers 
 (resp. ). In single sums these matrices
satisfy 
 
which we denote ,   for short in the
following. More importantly, there exists the following matrix relations
among them, 
 
where , and 
 are the diagonal matrices
which specify the spectrum These relations will be used as the defining
relations. From them it is possible to derive the matrices themselves, as
given in Eq.(). Therefore, they will be used as the basic
relations that are also satisfied by the deformed matrices, as given below.
The first relation implies that  defines an invertible Bogoliubov
transformation between even and odd spectra (see also Eq.(
)). The second relation shows that the transformation  is almost
orthogonal except for the vectors  which are
associated with the midpoint mode. Finally the last two define the relation
between the vectors.

On the other hand, the matrices () also satisfy 
 
which break the associativity. Therefore, these relations
will be deformed in the regulated theory, as seen below. Of course these
equations will hold when the regulator is removed.

All the other matrices are written in terms of , (for ), 
 
where  and  are restrictions of 
 and  to the positive sector. These
definitions in terms of  together with the
relations () among  are
sufficient to derive all the relations among 
. Therefore, we may use these relations as the 
definitions  of these matrices and vectors even when we use the
regularization of .

In, the regularization of  is
given explicitly. We truncate the size of  to 
while keeping their property of Bogoliubov transformation between even and
odd spectrum. It turns out that one may take the even and odd frequencies 
 as arbitrary functions of the positive integers 
 while keeping the reflection property of 
 to extend the definition to negative integers 
, 
. Therefore we put 
 
We suppose implicitly that 
 and that these are not degenerate.

The matrices  and vectors  can then be 
derived  from the defining relations () as functions of
the arbitrary spectral parameters  as (see appendix 
 for details of the derivation) 
 
where now the indices  run over the finite set 
 and .
It is easy to check explicitly that in the limit  
and   these expressions reduce to 
Eq.().

The regulated expressions for these matrices look considerably more
complicated than their large  limit. Therefore, it may appear that this
would create a problem in analytic computations. Actually this is not the
case at all, because in analytic computations one uses the matrix relations
satisfied by these matrices rather than the explicit matrices themselves.
The relations are preserved in the regularized version for any  and they
look the same as their  counterpart. Therefore analytically the
expressions in any computation look the same in the regulated or infinite
versions as long as they are written in terms of these matrices without
using their explicit form. The explicit construction of the regulated
version insures associativity and eliminates the ambiguity of the
associativity anomaly as explained below. Thus, in addition to the basic
defining relations () which are the same for any  including 
, there are more relations among 
 that can now be derived from the defining relations alone for any 
 : 
 
In particular note that Eqs.() are now deformed into Eqs.(
), and that 
 in the large  limit. Thus, the deformed algebra
actually holds also at  it simply makes explicit the behavior as
a function of  With this, the associativity anomaly hidden in the
original algebra is now resolved and the matrix algebra for all the matrices 
 defined through
Eqs.(-) becomes associative.

In particular, from Eq.(-) we obtain the
regularized matrices, such as , 
 
From the relations among  we can derive the
relations among . The
deformed algebra among  () is already given in
, while the deformed algebra among 
 which replaces (,) is(
Note that for finite , the continuity condition at the midpoint (
) is not satisfied because . However, we recover
it, as well as all other infinite matrix relations by taking the open string
limit .) , 
 
Furthermore, note that for any  we have 
 
The right hand side converges to  if we take the open
string limit . More relations of
this type can be found in the next subsection.

GL supergroup property of the regulator 
 

In this subsection we take a small detour to make an observation on the
regulator whose significance for computations in MSFT is not yet fully
apparent, but which is mathematically interesting, and could be useful in
future applications. Many computations in MSFT boil down to expressions of
the form  where 
is a matrix constructed from the frequencies 
through the regulated matrices we discussed above. Therefore, we are
interested in developing analytic methods of computation involving such
expressions, in particular for arbitrary frequencies 
. In such computations the properties of the supergroup GL
 mysteriously makes an appearance, as follows.

By using explicitly the expression for  given in Eq.(), we
have 
 
where the contour encircles only the poles at  The
contour may then be deformed to evaluate the integral. When 
 or  the results have already been
given in Eqs.(,). We note that these may be written in
the form 
 
where we used the superdeterminant (Sdet) and supertrace 
by treating the matrix 
 
as if  it is a graded GL super matrix. When 
 with 
 we note that the contour integral is precisely the integral
representation of
the supercharacter of GL for the representation of GL
 described by a Young supertableau with a single row with 
 superboxes 
 
The expression for the supercharacter  for any
supermatrix  can also be written in terms of supertraces of powers of 
in the fundamental representation, as given in. By
taking advantage of this observation we evaluate 
 in terms of the supertraces of powers of  For
example, 
 which gives the following
interesting expression for the sum 
 
We can check the correctness of Eq.() in the limit 
. In this limit, since 
 we can evaluate the sum on the left side directly in terms
of the zeta function, 

 and then compare it to the value generated by the
supercharacter  in the limit.

For example, for  the right hand side of Eq.() is already
given following Eq.(), and this agrees with the left hand side
which is . Similarly, for  the
left hand side of Eq.() gives 
 while the right hand side gives 

 which agree. The GL
 supergroup property of these sums is intriguing. It may be the
signal of an underlying mathematical structure that could be helpful in
computations in MSFT.

Moyal  from Witten's  for fermionic modes 
 

The second step in constructing the map from Witten's star to Moyal's star
is to perform the Fourier transformation from position space to momentum
space for a subset of string modes. We recall the definition of
Witten's -product for functions of split strings in the ghost sector 
 
For the  ghost sector, we consider two types of overlapping conditions 
. The anti-overlapping condition (resp. overlapping condition) is
defined by choosing the minus (resp. plus) sign in this formula. In both
cases the Witten  product is mapped to the Moyal  product as
follows.

We denote the string field as  in the split string
formulation and as  in the Moyal formulation. The
variables  are all fermionic and we consider the simplified
situation where each of them represents a single degree of freedom. The
generalization to multiple variables is straightforward. For the simplified
setup we define Witten's star product in the split string formalism
(ignoring the midpoint for the time being) as 
 
The sign factor  (Grassmann parity of ) is
needed to make the  product associative. We define the mapping from a
string field in the split string picture  to the Moyal
picture  by using the Fourier transform(
If  and  consist of  variables, the sign factor on the right hand
sides of Eqs.()()()
become  respectively. In
particular, they are trivial in the case that  is even.)  
 
Witten's star for  is then mapped to Moyal's star for : 
 
The derivation of this correspondence is completely parallel to the bosonic
case: 
 
The form of the product in Eq.() is similar to the
ordinary Moyal product although the derivatives in the exponential are for
fermionic variables. This Moyal  product is associative and
non-commutative.

From Eq.(), we also obtain the correspondence between the
definition of trace in the split-string formulation, which we take with the
anti-periodic condition, and that of Moyal one which is given by an
integration in phase space 
 

Moyal  product in the  ghost sector 
 

In this section we define the Moyal  product which represents
Witten's star product using the results in , 
, . We first review the
conventional operator formalism to fix the
notation in the  ghost sector. We take the ghost coordinates 
 and their conjugates  
 
We introduce the fermionic variables  and their
conjugates  as follows 
 
The nonzero modes  are
related to : 
 
and the canonical commutation relation 
 can be rewritten as 
 
We represent the string field by treating  and  as the
"position" coordinates. The translation between Fock space representation
and position representation is made through 
 
Here we introduced the bra state  (and the
corresponding ket state) as states in Fock space which satisfy the
eigenvalue conditions for the operators 
, 
 
Explicitly these are given by 
 
where  represents the conformal vacuum
(
We take the convention that  is Grassmann even and 
 is odd.)  normalized as 
. These bras and kets satisfy the
normalization and completeness relations 
 
Witten's star product for the ghost sector is defined by the
(anti-)overlapping conditions, 
 
for  or
equivalently 
 
These (anti-)overlapping conditions for  ghost will be used to define
the mapping from Witten's  to Moyal's  by using Eq.(
) defined in the previous section.

To apply the formulation in , we need to specify the
boundary conditions of the split string variables, since we have to use the
Bogoliubov transformation given in /accordingly. At ,  (resp. )
satisfies the Dirichlet (resp. Neumann) boundary condition. On the other
hand, at the midpoint, there are two options, namely Neumann or Dirichlet
type boundary conditions. In the following we choose the Neumann condition
for  and Dirichlet condition for (
The other choice (Neumann for  and Dirichlet for  at the midpoint) is
discussed in the appendix . It gives equivalent but more
complicated expression for the Moyal formulation.) .

In the split string language, the left and right halves of 
,   satisfy Dirichlet at 
and Neumann at , while the left and right halves of
,  
satisfy Neumann at  and Dirichlet
at . With this choice,  are expanded
by using odd  sine modes: ,
and  by using odd  cosine modes: 
 : 
 
From Eqs.()()()(
), we have the relations between split- and full-string variables 
 
where we used a matrix notation. Witten's  product for the split
string formulation is written as(
Here we consider naive  overlapping condition. To obtain the
conventional Witten's star product, as we will show, we should treat
midpoint variable  more carefully. The phase factor  in the
measure is only convention so that it is "real" 
. Here we define complex conjugate for fermionic variables 
 as 
.)  
 
The string field in the split-string formulation is identified with the
usual position representation  which is
written in terms of modes 
 
In order to map it to the Moyal formulation, we compare Eqs.(
)() with Eq.(), and note the
similarities (we add prime  to distinguish the variables with
anti-overlapping condition from the variables with overlapping conditions) 
 
or equivalently(
We note that the odd  modes correspond to the "-variable" of
phase space in the Moyal formulation of ghosts. By contrast, in the matter
sector, the even modes played the corresponding ro le (see Eq.(30) in 
).)  
 
Thus, using Eqs.()(), we obtain the
map from the field in the position representation to the Moyal representation 
 
At this point, we used the MSFT regularization scheme, by truncating the
ghost modes  to , and using the parameters 
 given in the previous section. Thus,  are
redefined in Eqs.()()() and 
 are finite. We fixed the normalization factor 

consistently with the trace that will be given later.  Hence, from Eqs.(
)(), the Moyal  product that
corresponds to Witten's  product is 
 
We introduced an arbitrary parameter  which is the analog
of  in the matter sector to absorb units. We note that
the product is local as a function of the midpoint , while 
is related to the center or mass variable  by 
 
By rescaling variables and performing Fourier transformation with respect to 
, we arrive at the definition of the string field in MSFT 
 
By this Fourier transformation with respect to zero mode, the Grassmann
parity of  and the corresponding 
 coincide. The Moyal  product which is modified after
Eqs.()() is 
 
We define the trace in MSFT as integration over the "phase space": 
 
The Moyal field  
which is mapped from  by (
) is normalized as 
 
where 
 corresponds to  (
).

It is convenient to introduce the bra  as a state in
Fock space such that the Moyal field is related directly to the Fock space
field via . This
can be obtained from the bra state  (
) by Fourier transformation (), 
 
where we used notation: 
 
This is the result given in the summary at the beginning of this section.

Examples 

Here we give some examples of string fields in MSFT.

For the conventional ghost number 1 vacuum  and 
 invariant vacuum , the corresponding fields are
given by 
 
We note that in the open string limit   
, these expressions become singular. For example, the coefficient
of  is divergent, 
 
Therefore, it is advisable not to take the open string limit at the level of
the state, but wait for the end of a computation. We note that the physical
quantities such as the scattering amplitude become regular in this limit 
.

For the identity-like state in the Siegel gauge: 

, which is a delta function with respect
to the even modes in position basis, 
, the
corresponding field is 
* 
Except for the zero mode and the normalization factor, this 
 is the identity element with respect to the Moyal  product. The
conventional identity state  ()(which is BRST invariant, and not in the Siegel gauge) becomes more
complicated in MSFT.

Oscillators
  

In this subsection, we obtain the Moyal images of the conventional
oscillators which are used in applications in MSFT. In this way we can write
various operators in oscillator language and in particular discuss the form
of  and the butterfly state which came up in our work in.

Oscillators on the fields in MSFT
 

For an operator  which consists of 
 acting on a state  in Fock space, we define its Moyal
image  which is a differential operator
acting on the Moyal field 
, as follows 
 
For the basic operators, 
,
this rule gives the corresponding operators in MSFT 
 
The nonzero modes of the oscillators  become 
 
In the first and third equations we introduced the symbols 
, to denote the differential operators 
 
The even and the odd sets satisfy canonical anti-commutation relations 
 
Using the above maps of operators, we can translate operators in the usual
oscillator representation into MSFT language. For example, the ghost number
operator (we assigned ghost number 1 to ) 
 
is mapped to its MSFT image 
 

Oscillator as a field 

It is often useful to rewrite differential operators in Moyal space in terms
of the star product. The idea is to replace the derivative by the 
-(super)commutator:(
We define the supercommutator as 


. 
Note that 

 
.) 
 
More concretely 
 
This observation leads to the star product representation of the
differential operators as follows 
 
where we defined the fields in Moyal space that play the
fundamental role of oscillators 
 
The odd  and even 
differential operators are related to each other as in
Eqs.(,). 
Therefore we also define fields with even labels via the Bogoliubov
transformation 
 
where the sum runs over odd integers from  to . These give the
star product representation of the even differential operators 
 
 
The fields  or  satisfy the oscillator
anticommutation relations with respect to the star product 
 
But they do not anticommute with each other 
 
since they are related to each other by the Bogoliubov transformation given
above.

One may regard the fields  as the harmonic oscillators in
Moyal space which act on the string field  from either side by the star
product. It is then natural to introduce the vacuum field associated with
the odd (and similarly the even) oscillators, as the field that satisfies
the following conditions under the star product 
) 
By definition, this field is the Moyal image of the Fock space operator 

 where  is the vacuum state with
respect to the oscillators . These are first order
differential equations whose solution is the gaussian 
 
If we write , we see that  is a projector (
) with respect to the Moyal  product: 
. It turns out this is the butterfly projector that came up in
other formulations of string field theory
 as shown in appendix
.


 and   

In string field theory computations the zeroth Virasoro operator 
plays a critical role since it defines the propagator. In this section, we
derive various forms of  in MSFT. In the usual oscillator
representation acting on Fock space,  is given by(
We take the convention such that 
fixes the constant that comes from normal ordering.)  
 
In MSFT which is regularized by , we truncate
the number of oscillators to  and replace the frequencies by 
. Then the Moyal image of  becomes the following differential
operator 
 
The last two terms come from the identities 
 
The similarity to the matter sector is enhanced by introducing an even basis 
 which is related to
the odd basis through the following linear canonical transformation(
We used these even modes in. They are just a linear
transformation of the odd modes in  and different from
the even modes which are considered in appendix .)  
 
The Moyal  product () and trace (
) are invariant under this canonical transformation. With the new variables, 
 is rewritten as 
 
Under this change of variables, the usual perturbative vacuum that was given
in the odd basis () becomes: 
 
Then the apparent divergence () of the coefficient at the
limit  does not occur, since 
 

Following the ideas of the previous subsection, the differential operator 
 can be represented in terms of star products by introducing the field 
 and the "midpoint correction"  as follows 
 
where  can be rewritten in terms of the
even mode variables in Eq.() 
 
The -dependent term vanishes when  acts on the fields in
the Siegel gauge. The field  is multiplied with the star
product, but  is still a differential operator. It is possible to
rewrite  in terms of star products (a double supercommutator)
 
but this does not have the single star product structure as the star products
with  and therefore  cannot be absorbed into a
redefinition of . As discussed in, 
depends only on a single combination of modes in the direction of the vector 
 which is closely related to the midpoint. If it were not for the
"midpoint correction" term , string field theory would reduce to
a matrix-like theory that would be exactly solvable, as shown in
. The above form of writing  focuses on the  term as the
remaining difficult aspect of string field theory.

A similar structure exists in the canonically equivalent odd basis by
using  
 

Monoid and Neumann coefficients  

The perturbative states and nonperturbative squeezed states in Fock space
(perturbative vacuum, sliver state, butterfly state and so on) are mapped to
gaussian functions in Moyal space. In fermionic Moyal space, such
as the basis 
the generic form of such a gaussian is written as, 
 
As in the bosonic case, such shifted gaussians form a monoid algebra 
.(
Some issues on Moyal product are discussed in.
)  A monoid is almost a group except for the property of inverse. This
implies that under star products the shifted gaussians satisfy the
properties of closure, identity and associativity. Although the generic
gaussian has also an inverse under star products, not all of them do (for
example, projectors such as Eq.() do not have an
inverse). 
The identity element under star products is the natural number  which
corresponds to the trivial gaussian.

The monoid structure is an effective tool for computations in MSFT. In
particular it was used to calculate the product of  gaussian functions,
whose trace gives the -point vertex. A corollary of this result is the
determination of the Neumann coefficients for the -string vertex. These
coefficients were computed in from conformal field theory, but
now they can be determined by using only the Moyal product. The MSFT
approach gives simple expressions for all Neumann coefficients in terms of a
single matrix . Neumann
coefficients are not needed for computations in MSFT, but the computation
can be used to test the MSFT formalism. This was used as successful test of
MSFT in the matter sector.

In this section we will carry out a similar program in the ghost sector.
While the treatment of the unity elements becomes more subtle because of the
zero mode, the closure of gaussian functions () under the
star product will be proved exactly the same way as in the bosonic sector.
In particular, the algebraic structure is formally the same. With this
information, one can compute the product of  fermionic gaussians and
derive the Neumann coefficients by using this algebraic machinery.

In particular, we verify consistency of the Moyal  product (
) with the conventional reflector and the 3-string vertex in
oscillator language. We will show the correspondence by including the zero
mode part, 
 

Monoid structure for gaussian elements 

We first derive the structure of the monoid () under the
fermionic star product defined by 
 for a general symmetric  This matrix takes a block
diagonal form 
 in the bases we discussed so far, but it is useful to develop the
formalism for any . For the moment, we suppress the 
-dependence because it is not relevant to the Moyal -product (
). The structure of the monoid is summarized in the following
algebra, 
 
To prove this formula, it is convenient to use Fourier transformation. We
define 
 
The  product is rewritten in terms of Fourier coefficients, 
 
For the gaussian  (), the
Fourier transform is also gaussian: 
 
The main result (-) follows by 
carrying out the gaussian integration over fermionic variables.

We note that Eq.() have exactly  the same form as the
bosonic case (Eqs.(3.11-3.17) in) if we put . Similarly,
the formula for the trace also related to the bosonic case as if  
 
With this observation, we find that all the algebraic manipulations in
 which use the structure of the star product for monoids also apply in
the ghost sector with no other modification.

In particular the product of  monoids with the same  but different 
 is one of the useful results that is used to
compute the -point vertex. The result in is now adopted to the
ghost sector as follows 
 
This will be used in the next section to compute the Neumann coefficients as
a by-product.

The algebraic structure is also used to construct projectors (such as sliver
state or butterfly). As in, the generic form of the projector in
the ghost sector can be written as a particular class of gaussian functions 
 

Neumann coefficients 

In this section, we construct the Neumann coefficients by using the MSFT
formalism for the -point vertices given above. The basic idea is to use
the correspondence of vertices in the operator formalism and in MSFT given
by, 
 
where 

 and . For the ghost
sector, we have to be careful in the treatment of the zero mode in
().
We use this identification to express Neumann coefficients by taking the
following steps.
 
In Fock space we choose  coherent states for  
 labelled by parameters . The
left hand side of () can be computed in the operator
formalism. The result takes the form of an exponential that contains a
quadratic form in the parameters of the coherent states 
. The Neumann coefficients that define  appear as
the coefficients in the quadratic form. We treat the Neumann coefficients as
unknown matrices.

We calculate 

 
which gives the Moyal image of the coherent states in the form of  monoids, 
with the  related to the parameters  
of the coherent state.

We compute the right hand side of () by using
the result in Eqs.(-). 
As in item (1) this is also an exponential
containing a quadratic form in the coherent state parameters 
, but with the coefficients determined by the monoid algebra
given above.

We compare the coefficients of the parameters in both sides and thus
determine the Neumann coefficients completely. 
They turn out to be simple functions of a single matrix 


Throughout this subsection, we use the regularized framework (
) to make the algebraic manipulation consistent. This gives
a new generalization of Neumann coefficients since the new expression
includes arbitrary spectral parameters and arbitrary . To compare to the
Neumann coefficients computed through conformal field theory, the open
string limit () is taken at the end.
Through analytic and numerical methods it is shown that these very different
looking forms of Neumann coefficients are indeed the same. This successful
test of MSFT provides confidence about its correctness and shows that MSFT
is an alternative tool for computation in string theory.

Coherent states 

Coherent states  are defined by 
 
They have the following explicit form 
 
The inner product between the standard -string vertices 
(appendix ,) and the coherent states 
 is given as follows for  
 
where 
 
As we noted, the Neumann coefficients appear as the coefficients of
quadratic functions of  in the exponential.

Moyal image of coherent state 

We define a Moyal field which corresponds to the coherent state 
. First, we have the corresponding ket  by
using the reflector (): 
 
Then we get the Moyal field by using the ket  (
) which defines the Moyal basis: 
 
where we denoted 
 
It takes the form of the standard element of monoid although with the
pre-factor  and the  in the exponent depend on the
zero mode . We can apply the Moyal  product formula for
monoids which was developed in the previous subsection.

Explicit form of -th product 

After using the results of (-), 
we have obtained the trace
formula for -th product of Moyal fields which correspond to coherent
states 
 
where we used the relations(
Similar relations were used to obtain the Neumann coefficients in matter
sector. ())  
 
Here  which defines  has
appeared in Eq.() in the context of the matter sector in MSFT.
We should emphasize that although we are using a notation similar to the one
in the matter sector, the meaning of  here is not  the same
as the one in the matter sector which is defined by Eq.(
). However, because there are some relationships between the  in the
matter and ghost sectors there are some relations among Neumann coefficients
in these sectors. Note that in Eq.() we assigned
different 's for each Moyal field in the trace. This prescription
is necessary to find agreement with Witten's star product as we will see
soon. Noting 
 
we perform the -integrations for all zero
modes, and find 
 

Comparison of coefficients 

Now, we consider the above formulas in the cases .


 case : Eq.() becomes 
 
In this case from Eq.() there is a correspondence 
 
up to pre-factor  which comes from the -ghost insertion in
conventional operator formalism. On the other hand, up to a
constant factor, we have 
 
for the identify-like state  which corresponds to the 
identity  element for the reduced product. In
MSFT, the Moyal field  is the
identity element in the Siegel gauge. In this sense, 
appears naturally rather than the BRST-invariant  in the context
of MSFT.


 case : Using Eq.(),
we get
 
From Eq.() we have obtained the correspondence 
 
In this case the normalization also coincides. 
 We can interpret 
 as the pre-factor 
 in the form of 

 ().
Eq.() can be rewritten as
 
for .
This is consistent with the normalization () 
which we adopted to fix
the map from the conventional field to the Moyal field (). 


 case : We can identify the Neumann coefficients
for the nonzero modes by comparing 
 
From Eqs.(,) we get the
Neumann coefficients in MSFT: 
* 
More explicitly 
 
To identify the Neumann coefficients including the zero mode part, we should
perform the  integration: 
. We can interpret that this comes from the pre-factor:

 in the form


(). 
In fact, by identifying(
The ghost zeromode  dependence is similar to momentum 
dependence in matter sector. But in this case, we do not need "momentum
conservation factor" 
.  This fact correspond to the lack of 
 factor in Ref. Eq.(2.18)
which gives the correct 3-string vertex in oscillator representation.)  
Eq.() with Eq.(): 
 
up to constant factor, we obtain(
We used the notation: 




.)  
 
The Neumann coefficients  agree with Eq.(
) which was obtained by using the trace of 6
coherent states in the matter  sector. This implies that the
Gross-Jevicki nonlinear relations for Neumann coefficients in MSFT are all
satisfied for arbitrary  as was shown in
. Namely, our Moyal star product is consistent with the conventional
Witten star product in both the matter and ghost sectors.(
This also implies that Moyal  product () is
essentially the same as the reduced  product in
 which was defined by omitting ghost zero mode-dependence in
original Witten's star product.)  We have confirmed the correspondence
between Moyal  product in MSFT and Witten's one () : 
 
up to constant factor for. As we
will show in the next subsection we have numerical confirmation that the
generalized Neumann coefficients in MSFT for arbitrary 
 converge to the conventional one in the operator formalism when we
take the limit.

Numerical comparison of Neumann coefficients 
 

In this subsection we compare the generalized Neumann coefficients derived
algebraically in the Moyal star formalism for any 
  with the independent computation from the point of view of conformal
field theory valid at . We
summarize the Neumann coefficients computed from CFT in appendix 
, together with some differences in the convention.

In we have already given an analytic proof that our algebraic
expression of Neumann coefficients coincides with the exact value in
 in the limit, by comparing the spectroscopy of Neumann coefficients.
Namely, in our case by diagonalizing the matrix 
 we diagonalize the Neumann coefficients
for -point vertices, since they all depend on the same matrix  The
eigenvalues obtained in this way for the case of the 3-point vertex in the
limit  coincide with the
corresponding eigenvalues obtained from Neumann spectroscopy in
.

A numerical study provides another approach to confirm that the Moyal star
and CFT calculations agree in the limit. In the following numerical analysis
we show that there is agreement in the limit, and furthermore that there is
a clear universal behavior of the approach to the limit as a function of 
. In the tables given in appendix  we give the MSFT
results for the numerical values of the Neumann coefficient 
 in the matter sector, and the Neumann
coefficient  in the ghost sector for 
, at different values of the cut-off parameter .
We set the spectral parameters as . The
expression of the Neumann coefficients in the Moyal star computation is
given in (5.32-5.34) in for the matter sector, and Eqs.(
,) in this paper for the ghost sector. In
the tables we write the ratio with their limiting value, 

and ,
where the limiting value is taken as the CFT value given in. The
tables at different values of  clearly show the convergence 
 
Namely in the open string limit, the Neumann coefficients derived
algebraically in MSFT becomes identical with their analytic value computed
in CFT.

We note that the convergence of the Neumann coefficients of the ghost sector
is much slower than those of matter sector. However log-log plot of 
 against  clearly shows that the
deviation scales as power of  with a very good accuracy.

As examples, we write the fitting of  and  components of above
ratios as(
These are based on the numerical data for .
)  
 
We have numerically checked that all the Neumann coefficients including the
zero mode behave exactly the same way as above, 
 
where the coefficients 's are order one quantity which depends on
the type of the Neumann coefficients. 
On the other hand, the power  and  are universal for
matter and ghost sector. In the numerical study so far, 
and  for all types of Neumann coefficients. We suspect
that there may be an analytic evaluation of the deviations which will prove
such a systematic behavior. In any case, Eq.() gives a
useful numerical estimate of the deviation at finite  from the 
values.

Applications  

In this section, we consider the applications of the Moyal star formulation
in the ghost sector. We discuss two topics which are essential in the
development of MSFT.

The first issue is the derivation of the regularized  string field
theory action in the Siegel gauge including ghosts 
 
The regularized version was the starting point of our recent discussions in 
.

The second issue is the derivation of the Feynman rules in the ghost sector.
Together with our previous work on Feynman diagrams in the matter sector 
 this provides the complete set of Feynman rules. We show some
explicit examples of computations of amplitudes.

Regularized MSFT action and equation of motion 

We start from Witten's string field theory action in the operator
formulation 
 
 is BRST operator, which may be written by separating out the 
 zero modes 
 
with 
 
By imposing the Siegel gauge condition  we
obtain the gauge fixed action 
 
In the regularized version of MSFT with cut-off parameters 
, we cannot write a nilpotent  operator, at least
technically for the time being, because the conformal symmetry is explicitly
broken when the parameters  are not at their
limiting values. Of course, any other approach that attempts to work with a
finite number of modes (such as level truncation) suffers from the same
problem. For complete control, what seems to be desirable is the
construction of a finite dimensional Lie algebra that would be a substitute
for the Virasoro algebra at finite  and which would tend to the Virasoro
algebra at infinite  If such an algebra could be constructed, then a
regulated version of  at finite  would be straightforward, at
least in MSFT.

On the other hand we have seen in numerous cases by now that the regulator
is indispensable. With this restriction, we are forced to work with the
gauge fixed action Eq.() where the truncation of the
oscillators can be made self-consistently. In the open string limit, we
recover the original gauge fixed action which is equivalent to the original
gauge invariant action Eq.().

In the following we rewrite the action () in the
Moyal language. We use a field 
 
in the Siegel gauge which is related to a conventional string field 
 by Fourier transformation ()(
). The kinetic term is rewritten as, 
 
where(
In this section, we use the variable 
 which was
introduced in Eq.() because this makes 
most similar to the .)  
is given by 
 
and the Moyal  product and the trace are 
 
On the other hand, the cubic term of the action becomes 
 
where 
 
After an appropriate rescaling of , we obtain the gauge fixed action (
) in MSFT language: 
 
where 
is a Grassmann odd field in the Siegel gauge. The conventional reality
condition of the string field in Fock space 
 is simply given by the usual reality of the
field in Moyal space 
.

The equation of motion in MSFT becomes 
 
which corresponds to the equation of motion in the Siegel gauge 
 in conventional language. The
counterpart of the usual classical equation of motion 
 is difficult to express in the cut-off theory as we already
commented. Similarly we meet a similar difficulty to express the BRST
invariance condition  in
the Siegel gauge in MSFT at this stage.

Computing Feynman graphs including fermionic ghost sector 

We have defined the gauge fixed action Eq.() in MSFT
language. Based on it, we discuss the Feynman rules in MSFT and show simple
examples explicitly. Computations in the matter sector have already been
presented in.

Vertex 

In MSFT the -string interaction vertex is represented by -th Moyal 
 product and its trace (). In Fourier basis, 
, this amounts to a phase
factor to represent the vertex as follows: 
 
The constant factor comes from 
 in the definition of the trace.

Propagator 

It is convenient to introduce the propagator 
 in Fourier basis. This was computed in the matter sector in
. Here we give the complete form, including the fermionic ghost sector 
 
Here  is given by setting  in 
Eq.(). 
Using Eqs.(,), we obtain the propagator in the  ghost sector 
 
where 
 
The ghost structure of the quadratic term in the exponent is similar to the
matter one.

1-loop vacuum amplitude 

By taking the trace of the propagator Eq.(), we
have 
 
This reproduces the expected partition function, with the correct spectrum,
including the ghost contribution. If we take the open string limit 
 naively in the formula of  (
,), namely at the Lagrangian level, we lose
the information on odd spectrum. This is one of the indications that the 
 term plays a nontrivial role. Of course, we obtain the correct
limiting partition function by taking the limit at the last stage of the
computation, which is given above.

External state 

As external states in Feynman graphs it is enough to consider monoid
elements such as 
 
In fact, we can compute various perturbative diagrams by preparing a
particular class of gaussian external states given by 
, where these matrices were given in Eqs.(
). If we also take 
, this external field represents perturbative vacuum 
 with momentum  which represents the perturbative tachyon with
proper normalization 
 
We omitted an overall  because it drops out in the Siegel gauge
action (). Excited states (that correspond to
polynomials multiplying this ) can be obtained by
differentiating 
 with respect to general  appropriately, and
then setting . Therefore an explicit
computation of Feynman graphs with general 
has many physical applications.

-evolved monoid element 

It is convenient to have a -evolved formula for a gaussian Eq.(
) to compute Feynman graphs in -basis. We
can derive it explicitly by evaluating: 
 
By gaussian integration we have the following formula 
 
where 
 
for the matter sector(
We supposed that  is Lorentz symmetric.)  and 
 
for ghost sector. When we consider a class of monoid such that 
 is -symmetric and twist even(
In , we defined -symmetric and twist even monoid
element which has  (). Here we permit 
 case.)  then the evolved  also has this
symmetry. We can see this explicitly by noting that 
 is a block diagonal and symmetric matrix (where  is an
arbitrary function). In this case with 
, where  is a  matrix, the above formula
becomes 
 
We can use this reduced formula to compute the -evolved monoid of 
-th product of the perturbative vacuum: 

 because the coefficient matrix 
() in the quadratic term in the exponent is proportional
to .


With the above preparation, we have all that is needed to compute the ghost
contribution in various amplitudes, by following the methods that were
developed in the matter sector in.

4-tachyon amplitude 

The 4 point amplitude for tachyons is computed by putting together several
diagrams that are related to each other by permutations of the external
legs. For a typical 4-pt diagram  the MSFT
expression is 
 
where  is the length of the propagator. When 
 are gaussians, we can compute this quantity easily by
taking the  product between the pairs of gaussians 
(-), 
evolving by  (), and computing
the trace (). At each step we only use the properties
of the monoid.

In the case of tachyons, the matter contribution was already computed in 
. For the ghost contribution, we set the external field to 

 and obtain 
 
where 
. Including the matter sector we obtain 
 
where 
 
We note that the matrices  in the determinant factors in
the matter sector come out inverted in the ghost sector. By integrating with
the measure  and adding permutations of
the diagram, we should reproduce the Veneziano amplitude(
The expressions here are slightly further simplified than the ones in
.)  when all the tachyons are on-shell,  in the
open string limit .

Our formula () has a counterpart in the operator
formalism. Although our expressions are simpler it is not easy to compare
results analytically because of the different formalisms. We have managed to
compare and agree with the determinant factor available in the computations
in in the operator formalism, by inserting the MSFT ghost
Neumann coefficients given in () and matter Neumann
coefficients taken from 
 
The difference of normalization compared to comes from that of
cubic term of the action (). We note that so far it has not
been demonstrated yet that either the operator formalism or the MSFT
approach reproduce the Veneziano amplitude analytically, although this is
expected to be true.

Discussion 

In this paper we provided the details of the Moyal star formulation for
fermionic ghosts. Following the similar construction in the matter sector,
the split string formalism was used as an intermediate step. However, as in
the matter sector, the midpoint needed additional considerations to insure
that MSFT is in agreement with the operator formulation of string field
theory. MSFT then provides an alternative method of computation in string
field theory which is in many ways simpler and more efficient.

The regularization of the fermionic ghost sector, which is needed to avoid
the associativity anomaly, is made consistently with the matter sector. The
correctness of the formulation, including the regularization, was tested by
computing the Neumann coefficients by using MSFT methods and comparing them
to an independent computation that relies on conformal field theory. The
MSFT result generalizes the Neumann coefficients by computing them for any
set of oscillator frequencies  for any finite
number of oscillators  These agree with conformal theory results in the
open string limit    The
agreement was established both analytically as well as numerically.

In numerical study of string field theory one necessarily deals with a
finite number of modes. One may debate which version of Neumann coefficients
is more consistent for such numerical study: the finite  version of the
Neumann coefficients given in MSFT, or the level truncation of the infinite
Neumann matrices practiced in previous literature? The numerical analysis
that we provided could be helpful in understanding the issue and developing
the most appropriate numerical approximation scheme. We hope to address this
point, together with numerical studies of certain quantities in the near
future.

The regularized MSFT formulation is now complete in the Siegel gauge. It has
already been applied to the computation of perturbative Feynman graphs
 as well as to the analytic study of nonperturbative classical
solutions of string theory, including the nonperturbative vacuum of open
string theory.

An open problem is the construction of a regularized  version of the
BRST operator. The regularization is indispensable to tame the associativity
anomaly and to have a well defined theory. Along with the successful
regularization in MSFT, the BRST operator is also needed to insure gauge
invariance in the general formalism, and to be able to work outside of the
Siegel gauge. In particular, the BRST operator can be used to impose the
additional gauge invariance conditions in the Siegel gauge on the
nonperturbative solutions we have obtained in. Some of the
issues surrounding this problem are outlined following Eq.(
). These remarks apply not only to MSFT, but also to any
version of string theory that uses a cutoff of the string modes (including
level truncation), since the Virasoro algebra does not close with a finite
number of modes. A substitute for the Virasoro algebra at finite  which
tends to the Virasoro algebra at infinite  is the key to solving this
problem.

 
Acknowledgments  

I.K. would like to thank H. Hata, T. Kawano and K. Ohmori for valuable
discussions and comments. I.B. is supported in part by a DOE grant
DE-FG03-84ER40168. I.K. is supported in part by JSPS Research Fellowships
for Young Scientists. Y.M. is supported in part by Grant-in-Aid (
13640267) from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of
Japan.

Brief review of MSFT in matter sector 

Half-string for cosine modes 

Here we review the split string formulation and its regularization which was
developed in and fix notation in this paper. Although it was
constructed to formulate the matter and the bosonized ghost sector, we can
apply the same formalism to fermionic functions which have a Fourier
expansion in terms of cosine mode in the full string basis.

A full string function  which satisfies Neumann boundary
conditions at the end points 
 
has a Fourier expansion in terms of cosine modes 
 
Then split string functions  for  are
defined as 
 

Dirichlet at midpoint  

Split string functions with Neumann boundary conditions at the end points
and Dirichlet boundary conditions at the midpoint 
 
have a Fourier expansion in terms of odd cosine modes  
 
The correspondence between  and 
 is 
 
where we used matrix notation for simplicity, and denoted 
 

Neumann at midpoint  

Split string functions with Neumann boundary conditions at the end points
and Neumann boundary conditions at the midpoint 
 
are expanded in terms of even cosine modes  
 
The correspondence between split string and full string modes is 
 

Regularization  

The infinite matrices  and vectors  defined in Eq.(
) satisfy the following relations 
 
As noted in, there is an ambiguity in naive computation using
these matrices and vectors. For example,  has an inverse matrix given by 
 and yet it has a zero eigenvalue . This is possible only because
they are infinite dimensional matrices. It causes associativity anomalies.
To avoid the ambiguous results that come from the associativity anomaly, a
finite matrix regularization is proposed in. We define 
matrices  and -vectors  by 
 
where a bar means transpose, and we introduced a set of  frequencies 
. These relations are identical to the ones
satisfied by the infinite matrices in Eq.(), but we now
use them as defining relations for finite dimensional matrices and arbitrary
frequencies. We can solve the equations in Eq.() explicitly in
term of the frequencies 
 
By using only the defining relations we can show the following further
relations for the regularized version of . 
 
The original  in Eq.() are reproduced by setting
the open string limit: 
 
We note that at this limit  diverges 
 

Some results in matter sector   

Here we summarize notation and conventions in the matter sector in MSFT.
(
In this subsection, we use the same symbols for matter as we did for the
ghosts in the main text for some quantities, such as positions and momenta.
We can avoid confusion from the context. We omit some definitions and
details because we can refer to Ref. for them.) 

Oscillators in MSFT 

 
Mode expansion in matter sector (): 
 
Nonzero modes in matter sector 
 
where we define the symbols .

Zero mode in matter sector, with  
 
where  is some positive constant.

Position eigenstates 
 
are given as squeezed states in Fock space 
 
They satisfy normalization and completeness conditions 
 

Oscillators as differential operators in position space 
 

Transformation from position space to Moyal space 
 
where the midpoint  is
related to the center of mass  through Eq.() 
 
The Moyal space  is given by a squeezed state 
 

Moyal  product and trace: 
 
The normalization of a field  in Moyal space coincides with the
normalization of its image in Fock space () 
 

Oscillators as differential operators in Moyal space 
 
These satisfy ordinary commutation relation: 
 

Oscillators as fields in Moyal space(
The convention for  here is the same as 
 but differs by a factor from the convention in 
 
.)  
 
We can also define odd mode fields through a Bogoliubov transformation 
 
The following relations hold 
 

Butterfly projector 

The momentum independent butterfly state  satisfies 
 
There is a unique solution in monoid 
 
It satisfies 
 

In ordinary oscillator language, Eq.() means 
 
for zero momentum state. Now we take the ansatz 
 
which corresponds to a monoid element in MSFT. 
Then we have constraints for  : 
 
At the open string limit , we can
show that the matrix  which was obtained in: 
 
satisfies Eq.(). Namely, we have obtained the
correspondence: 
 

 and   

In MSFT  in matter sector is defined as 
 
The operator  can be rewritten in terms of a field 
using Moyal star product, plus a remnant  called the "midpoint
correction term", which is multiplied with an ordinary product 
 
The  term formally  goes to zero as 
, since  However,
this is not true in computations due to contributions of the form 
 that are related to the associativity anomaly. In fact, 
is indispensable to reproduce the correct spectrum of 
. The  term depends only on one special momentum mode 
 which we call the
anomalous midpoint momentum mode. We can rewrite 
 in terms of oscillators 
 
and then, acting on the butterfly projector (), we
have 
 

-string vertex and Neumann coefficients 
 

Here we give brief review of the correspondence of -string vertex and
Neumann coefficients in MSFT. We note the properties of the momentum state
and coherent states in Fock space, together with the corresponding Moyal
images.

 
Momentum eigenstate (zero mode part): 
 

Coherent state :(
Here we introduce the bra  coherent state. This is a different
convention from that in.)  
 
where we used the reflector 
 
In particular we have the bra-ket correspondence for eigenstates of : 
 

Compute the -string vertex for coherent states in terms of unknown
Neumann coefficients  
 

Compute the trace of the Moyal images of  coherent states in MSFT 
 
where we used 
 
We note 
 
The sign is changed compared to that in because we used 
bra  coherent state  to define the Moyal 
field .

The Neumann coefficients in the matter sector are obtained by
identifying the Fock space and MSFT expressions and comparing the exponents
(
Here we defined the Witten's  product using the ket  
 as Eq.() which is different convention
from that in. Also, here we have included the overall
normalization  which does not play a role in the computation of the
Neumann coefficients.)  
 
and using momentum conservation 
. Then one has the Neumann coefficients 
 
They satisfy Neumann matrix algebra as in Ref.. For the 3-string
vertex we write them explicitly 
 
where we redefined as  using momentum
conservation. We used the notation  and
.

Fermionic ghost Neumann coefficients for the 3-vertex can be derived
from matter Neumann coefficients for the 6-vertex 
 
This gives 
 
where we defined 
 

Derivation of regularized matrix formula  

Here we sketch a derivation of fundamental formulas for regularized matrices
presented in . We begin from the defining
relations in Eq.(). The first two equations imply 
Eq.() and then from the remaining equations we have 
 
where 
 
with  and .
Now we regard  as a  matrix and compute its inverse 
 
To prove the above formula, it is convenient to define a rational function 
 which is determined by the setup 
 uniquely: 
 
Next we compute . We use contour
integration and residues, where we denote the residue of  at 
as  and assume that the frequencies 
 are nondegenerate and finite 
 
This shows that we have the correct inverse matrix .

Similarly, we can obtain  
Eqs.(,) as follows:(
We choose the sign convention of  such that they are
consistent with Eq.().
)  
 
where we assumed  are
nonzero and Eqs.().
We note that the above formula (,)
 can also be rewritten as 
 
Now we consider the open string limit (). By setting
the open string limit 
, the rational function 
 () becomes 
 
With this formula and Eq.() we can show that the regularized
quantities reduce to the original ones in Eq.().

-ghost sector in position space   

Here we consider the ghost position space representation of the -point
string vertices for  starting with the Fock space formalism.

Identity state 

 
This is BRST invariant although the form is rather complicated.

Reflector 

 

3-string vertex 

 
where we used the relation, 
 
Witten's star product in ghost position space 
 
where 
 

Moyal  for 
 split strings  

In this appendix, we examine the remaining choice of the midpoint boundary
condition for the split string variables as compared with our discussion in
section . Namely, we consider Dirichlet boundary
condition for  and Neumann for  at the midpoint 
. In this case the left and right half of  : 
 satisfy Dirichlet boundary condition at both 
, and those of  : 
 satisfy Neumann at . The 
and  are expanded in terms of even 
sine/cosine modes respectively 
 
  From Eqs.()()() (
), we have relations between split and full string variables: 
 
With this setup Witten type product in the split string formulation becomes: 
 
where the split string and full string fields in position space are the same 
 
by substituting on the right hand side the inverse maps obtained in Eqs.(
)() 
 
These relations are valid only when  in the limit: 
.

As the next step, we consider the Moyal formulation, including the
regularization with . Comparing Eqs.(
)()() with Eq.(
), we identify 
* 
and define  new variables with even index  by 
 
At the limit ,  has a zero
mode  () and we meet as usual the
associativity anomaly, but at finite  everything is well-defined. From
Eq.()() we obtain the Moyal image 
 of the position space
field  : 
 
and the corresponding Moyal  product becomes 
 
In this case, the above formula is more complicated than our previous choice
due to the additional -ghost midpoint mode .

Ghost butterfly projector with even modes 

The butterfly projector in Eq.() is based on the odd mode
oscillators in Eq.(). There is another choice using even
mode oscillators Eq.() 
 
Explicitly, we have the even butterfly state 
 
in the Siegel gauge.

As we will see in the following, the even butterfly is the one defined by
Gaiotto-Rastelli-Sen-Zwiebach(GRSZ) using twisted ghosts
. The conditions in Eq.() correspond to 
 
for all  in ordinary oscillator language. If we take a gaussian ansatz 
 



the above conditions become 
 
We can solve Eq.() by comparing it with the matter one (
) as 
 
We can check that this  satisfies Eq.(). The
ghost butterfly which we have obtained in MSFT as above can be identified
with GRSZ's (twisted) ones(
There is a correspondence for the vacuum: 
 .) : 
* 
The relation between the matter and (twisted) ghost generating functions is
obtained by using 
* 
where we defined the generating functions 
 
namely 
 
Here we have  for the conformal mapping 
 which represents (canonical) 
butterfly state 
 and the relation Eq.().


Algebra of gaussian operators  

We discuss algebraic relations for gaussians constructed from bosonic and
fermionic oscillators which we used to compute the propagator (
) in MSFT.

For bosonic oscillators: , we can prove a
formula 
 
using a similar method to Appendix A in. Here  are symmetric
matrices: . Then we have 
 
where we used the relation 
 
We obtain the formula for the propagator 
 
When the momentum is nonzero in (), we need the
modified version of the above formula: 
 

For fermionic oscillators: 
, we have a similar formula 
 
where  are antisymmetric matrices . Noting 
 
we obtain 
* 
By integration we have 
 

Neumann coefficients 

Neumann coefficients from CFT 

 In this subsection, we give a short summary of the
analytic expression of Neumann coefficients given in which are
obtained from conformal field theory. We introduce a set of numbers 
 () which appear in the Taylor expansion, 
 
 From these data, the Neumann coefficients ( for
matter sector and  for ghost sector)
 are written as follows. First when  and , 
 
For the diagonal components (), they are replaced by, 
 
For the zero mode, we use 
 

There are some differences in the convention to make direct comparison of
these quantities with the corresponding ones obtained in Moyal language
which are given in (, ). We
summarize them as follows, 
 






The sign factor in  comes in because 
we include the
multiplication of  in the MSFT definition.

Ratios of MSFT-regulated and CFT Neumann coefficients 


The MSFT-regulated Neumann coefficients are discussed in sections
, and 
. 
The numerical ratios 
 and 

 for  at  shows the
convergence of these to the CFT values in the large  limit.
 
 
 
 
 

Twist and  in the Siegel gauge  

The twist operator is usually given by . In MSFT
this becomes 
 
This follows from 
 
When we use the even variables , we
have the expression 
 
The  generators are given by 
 
by oscillator representation. In MSFT
we translate them as 
 
on the fields in the Siegel gauge. These operators satisfy the 
algebra: 
 
They are derivations with respect to the Moyal  product: 
 
In fact, the above  generators () are inner
derivations 
 
By Eqs.(,), we can restrict
solutions of the equations of motion () to the twist even
and  singlet sector: 
 
in the Siegel gauge consistently. In fact, we note that in the Siegel gauge 
 
from Eqs.(,). 
This condition () can be used to search for the
nonperturbative tachyon vacuum.
In MSFT, it is convenient to note the monoid structure (
). It consists of gaussian Moyal fields: 
. We can consider the twist
and  symmetric class within the monoid. From Eqs.(
,) the restriction by this symmetry (
) of a monoid element  is
given by 
 
in the basis (
If we use the odd basis , this condition becomes 
.) .
Namely, the coefficient matrix of the quadratic term in the exponent becomes
block diagonal and symmetric. For example, the perturbative vacuum and
butterfly states (,)
are of the form of (). Their -evolved gaussians are also
in this class (). We note that this class of gaussian
is not closed within the monoid because of twist operator which changes the
sign of noncommutative parameters  in the Moyal 
 product, while the -symmetry is conserved in the Siegel
gauge by Eq.().

 99 
  E. Witten, 

Nucl. Phys. B 268 , 253 (1986). 



  D. J. Gross and A. Jevicki, 

Nucl. Phys. B 283  (1987) 1; 

Nucl. Phys. B 287  (1987) 225.

  J. Bordes, Chan H.-M., L. Nellen, Tsou S.-T., Nucl.
Phys.  B351  (1991) 441; A. Abdurrahman, Nucl. Phys. B 411 
(1994) 693; A. Abdurrahman and J. Bordes, Phys. Rev. D 58 
(1998) 086003.

  L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach, JHEP 0111 
(2001) 035 [arXiv:hep-th/0105058].

  D. J. Gross and W. Taylor, JHEP 0108  (2001) 009
[arXiv:hep-th/0105059]; JHEP 0108  (2001) 010 [arXiv:hep-th/0106036].


T. Kawano and K. Okuyama,

JHEP 0106 , 061 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0105129].













  I. Bars, 
Phys. Lett. B 517 , 436 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0106157]. 


  I. Bars and Y. Matsuo, 

Phys. Rev. D 65 , 126006 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0202030]. 


  I. Bars and Y. Matsuo, 

Phys. Rev. D 66 , 066003 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0204260]. 



I. Bars, I. Kishimoto and Y. Matsuo,

Phys. Rev. D 67 , 066002 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0211131].






  I. Bars, 

arXiv:hep-th/0211238.



  I. Bars, I. Kishimoto and Y. Matsuo, 

arXiv:hep-th/0302151. 



  L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach, JHEP 0203 
(2002) 029 [arXiv:hep-th/0111281].

  M. R. Douglas, H. Liu, G. Moore and B. Zwiebach, 

JHEP 0204  (2002) 022 [arXiv:hep-th/0202087]. 


 


I. Y. Arefeva and A. A. Giryavets,

JHEP 0212 , 074 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0204239];




C. S. Chu, P. M. Ho and F. L. Lin,


JHEP 0209 , 003 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0205218];




D. M. Belov and A. Konechny,

JHEP 0210 , 049 (2002)
[arXiv:hep-th/0207174].






  T. G. Erler, 

arXiv:hep-th/0205107.

  A. B. Balantekin and I. Bars, J.Math.Phys. 
22  (1981) 1149; ibid. 22  (1981) 1810; ibid. 23 
(1982)1239; I. Bars, Lectures Appl.Math.21  (1983) 17.

  F. Bayen, M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, A. Lichnerowicz and
D. Sternheimer, 

Annals Phys. 111 , 61 (1978); 

Annals Phys. 111 , 111 (1978). 



  M. Bordemann, 

arXiv:q-alg/9605038. 

 H. Omori, Y. Meada, N. Miyazaki and A. Yoshioka,



	
Mathematical Physics Studies 23 , 169 (1999).












  I. Kishimoto, 
JHEP 0112 , 007 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0110124]. 




  K. Okuyama, 

JHEP 0201 , 043 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0111087]. 




  K. Okuyama, 

JHEP 0201 , 027 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0201015]. 




  K. Itoh, K. Ogawa and K. Suehiro, 

Nucl. Phys. B 289 , 127 (1987). 



  D. Gaiotto, L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach, 

arXiv:hep-th/0111129. 



M. Schnabl,

Nucl. Phys. B 649 , 101 (2003)
[arXiv:hep-th/0202139].




  D. Gaiotto, L. Rastelli, A. Sen and B. Zwiebach, 

JHEP 0204 , 060 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0202151]. 




  T. Okuda, 

Nucl. Phys. B 641 , 393 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0201149]. 




  W. Taylor, 

arXiv:hep-th/0207132. 



  D. Gaiotto and L. Rastelli, 

arXiv:hep-th/0211012. 



  B. Zwiebach, 

arXiv:hep-th/0010190. 




















  V. A. Kostelecky and R. Potting, 

Phys. Rev. D 63 , 046007 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0008252]. 






















