



  
  
 
rank   
Cok  
Ker  
Im  

C  
P  
R  
Z  
D  
E  
I  
L  
M  
N  
O  
V  
W  
Z  

 

PUPT-2081 
12pthep-th/0304115 
PUPT-2081   

Residues and World-Sheet Instantons   
Chris Beasley 
Joseph Henry Laboratories, Princeton University  
Princeton, New Jersey 08544  
and 
Edward Witten 
School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Studies  
Princeton, New Jersey 08540  
We reconsider the question of which Calabi-Yau compactifications of
the heterotic string are stable under world-sheet instanton
corrections to the effective space-time superpotential.  For instance,
compactifications described by  linear sigma models are
believed to be stable, suggesting a remarkable cancellation
among the instanton effects in these theories.  Here, we show that this
cancellation follows directly from a residue theorem, whose proof
relies only upon the right-moving world-sheet supersymmetries and
suitable compactness properties of the  linear sigma model.
Our residue theorem also extends to a new class of "half-linear"
sigma models.  Using these half-linear models, we show that heterotic
compactifications on the quintic hypersurface in  for which the
gauge bundle pulls back from a bundle on  are stable.  Finally,
we apply similar ideas to compute the superpotential contributions from
families of membrane instantons in M-theory compactifications on manifolds
of  holonomy.

April 2003 

I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain, and T. R. Taylor,
"Topological Amplitudes in String Theory," Nucl. Phys. B413 
(1994) 162-184, hep-th/9307158 . 

I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain, and T. R. Taylor,
"Topological Amplitudes in Heterotic Superstring Theory,"Nucl. Phys.
B476  (1996) 133-174, hep-th/9604077 . 

A. Basu and S. Sethi, "World-sheet Stability of 
Linear Sigma Models," hep-th/0303066 . 

K. Becker, M. Becker, and A. Strominger, "Fivebranes,
Membranes, and Non-Perturbative String Theory," Nucl. Phys. B456  (1995) 130-152, hep-th/9507158 . 

R. Bott, "A Residue Formula for Holomorphic
Vector-Fields," J. Diff. Geom. 1  (1967) 311-330. 

R. Bott and L. W. Tu, Differential Forms in
Algebraic Topology , Springer, New York, 1982. 

M. Bershadsky, V. Sadov, and C. Vafa, "D-Branes and
Topological Field Theories," Nucl Phys. B463  (1996) 420-434,
hep-th/9511222 . 

J. B. Carrell and D. I. Lieberman, "Holomorphic Vector
Fields and Kaehler Manifolds," Invent. Math. 21  (1973) 303-309. 

J. B. Carrell and D. I. Lieberman, "Vector Fields and
Chern Numbers," Math. Ann. 225  (1977) 263-273. 

S. Cordes, G. Moore, and S. Ramgoolam, "Lectures on 2D
Yang-Mills Theory, Equivariant Cohomology, and Topological Field
Theories," Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 41  (1995) 184-244,
hep-th/9411210 . 

J. Distler, "Resurrecting  Compactifications,"
Phys. Lett. B188  (1987) 431-436. 

J. Distler, "Notes on  Superconformal Field
Theories," hep-th/9502012 . 

J. Distler and B. Greene, "Aspects of  String
Compactifications, Nucl. Phys. B304  (1988) 1-62. 

S. K. Donaldson and R. P. Thomas, "Gauge Theory in
Higher Dimensions," in The Geometric Universe: Science,
Geometry, and the Work of Roger Penrose , Ed. S. A. Huggett et. al.,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998. 

T. Eguchi and S. K. Yang, "N=2 Superconformal Models as
Topological Field Theories," Mod. Phys. Lett. A5  (1990)
1693-1701. 

S. Gukov, "Solitons, Superpotentials, and Calibrations,"
Nucl. Phys. B574  (2000) 169-188, hep-th/9911011 . 

R. Harvey and H. B. Lawson, "Calibrated Geometries," Acta
Math. 148  (1982) 47-157. 

J. A. Harvey and G. Moore, "Superpotentials and
Membrane Instantons," hep-th/9907026 . 

M. Dine, N. Seiberg, X. G. Wen, and E. Witten,
"Nonperturbative Effects on the String Worldsheet, I, II,"
Nucl. Phys. B278  (1986) 769-789, Nucl. Phys. B289  (1987)
319-363. 

P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic
Geometry , John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1978. 

D. D. Joyce, Compact Manifolds with Special
Holonomy , Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2000. 

H. B. Lawson, Jr., Minimal Varieties in Real and
Complex Geometry , Seminaire de Mathematiques Superieures
Universite de Montreal, 1974. 

N. C. Leung, "Topological Quantum Field Theory for
Calabi-Yau Threefolds and  Manifolds," math.DG/0208124 . 

K. Liu, "Holomorphic Equivariant Cohomology,"
Math. Ann. 303  (1995) 125-148. 

A. Losev, N. Nekrasov, and S. Shatashvili, "The Freckled
Instantons," hep-th/9908204 . 

D. R. Morrison and M. R. Plesser, "Summing the
Instantons: Quantum Cohomology and Mirror Symmetry in Toric
Varieties," Nucl. Phys. B440  (1995) 279-354,
hep-th/9412236 . 

E. Witten, "Mirror Manifolds and Topological Field
Theory," in Essays on Mirror Manifolds , ed. S.-T. Yau, International
Press (1992) 120-160, hep-th/9112056 . 

E. Silverstein and E. Witten, "Criteria For Conformal
Invariance of  Models," Nucl. Phys. B444  (1995) 161-190,
 hep-th/9503212 . 

A. K. Tsikh, Multidimensional Residues and Their
Applications , Trans. E. J. F. Primrose, American Mathematical
Society, Providence, R. I., 1992. 

J. Polchinski and E. Witten, "Evidence for Heterotic-Type
I String Duality," Nucl. Phys. B460  525-540, hep-th/9510169 . 

E. I. Buchbinder, R. Donagi, and B. A. Ovrut,
"Superpotentials for Vector Bundle Moduli," hep-th/0205190 . 

E. I. Buchbinder, R. Donagi, and B. A. Ovrut, "Vector
Bundle Moduli Superpotentials in Heterotic Superstrings and
M-Theory," JHEP 0207  (2002) 066, hep-th/0206203 . 

E. Witten, "Branes and the Dynamics of QCD," Nucl. Phys.
B507  (1997) 658-690, hep-th/9706109 . 

E. Witten, "Phases of N=2 Theories in Two-Dimensions,"
Nucl. Phys. B403  (1993) 159-222, hep-th/9301042 . 

E. Witten, "World-Sheet Corrections via D-Instantons,"
JHEP 0002  (2000) 030, hep-th/9907041 . 

J. Simons, "Minimal Varieties of Riemannian Manifolds,"
Ann. of Math. 88  (1968) 62-105. 

E. Witten, "Topological Quantum Field Theory,"
Commun. Math. Phys. 117  (1988) 353-386. 

E. Witten, "Topological Sigma Models,"
Commun. Math. Phys. 118  (1988) 411-449. 

E. Witten, "Supersymmetry and Morse Theory," J. Differential 
Geometry 17  (1982) 661-692. 

Introduction 

String theory backgrounds which preserve only  supersymmetry in
four dimensions are of great interest both from a theoretical and a
phenomenological perspective.  A textbook way to obtain such
a background is to compactify either the  or
 heterotic string on a Calabi-Yau threefold  with
a stable, holomorphic gauge bundle .  One might suppose that these
compactifications, which admit a completely perturbative string
description, would be a natural starting point from which to study
the moduli space of  backgrounds of string theory.

However, in fact we know very little about which pairs  give
rise to consistent heterotic backgrounds, even in string perturbation
theory.  The issue, of course, is that models described by generic 
and , even though they may satisfy the classical equations of
motion to all orders in , are destabilized
non-perturbatively by world-sheet instantons .  These
instantons, arising from world-sheets which wrap rational
(i.e. holomorphic, genus zero) curves in , can each contribute to a
background superpotential  which lifts the Kahler moduli of 
and generates a cosmological constant.  So one might think that the
only stable  heterotic compactifications would arise from very
special choices of  and  - for instance corresponding to
world-sheet theories with  supersymmetry or the  models
studied by Distler and Greene ,  - for which
each  world-sheet instanton simply cannot contribute to .

In this light, the result of  that there are no non-perturbative
contributions to  that destabilize compactifications described by
 linear sigma models ,   is somewhat
surprising.  This result does not rely upon any consideration of
world-sheet instantons and instead follows from simple facts about
the linear sigma model.  One simply observes that  must always be a
holomorphic section of a complex line-bundle of strictly negative
curvature over the moduli space of the low-energy effective theory,
which is naturally a compact Kahler manifold in the case of a linear
sigma model.  The compactness of the moduli space implies that
 must have a pole somewhere on the moduli space or else vanish
identically.  However, the linear sigma model, being a two-dimensional,
super-renormalizable gauge theory, can only become singular when the
target space becomes non-compact, as some bosonic field develops a
dangerous, unsuppressed zero-mode.  In computing the linear sigma
model correlators which describe the couplings of gauge-singlet fields
in the effective theory and so probe for a background , one finds
that, after suitably twisting the model, no boson has a dangerous
zero-mode.  So  has no poles on the moduli space and thus vanishes.

Now, Calabi-Yau compactifications which are described by 
linear sigma models are certainly not generic - but nor are they so
special that each world-sheet instanton simply does not contribute to
.  So from the world-sheet perspective, the stability of 
linear sigma models implies in these compactifications a remarkable
cancellation among the contributions to  from world-sheet
instantons wrapped on rational curves in each homology class of .

For instance, the analysis of  was applied in most detail to
the simple case that  is a quintic hypersurface in 
and  is a deformation of the holomorphic tangent bundle ,
corresponding to a deformation off the locus of  supersymmetric
world-sheet theories.  In this case, the linear sigma model result
implies that, contrary to one's naive expectation, the world-sheet
instanton contributions to  from the  lines on the generic
quintic sum to zero.

Our main goal in this paper is to understand, from the world-sheet
perspective, the source of this remarkable cancellation among
instantons.  In the process, we will introduce a new  "half-linear"
sigma model and show that heterotic compactifications
described by these models form another class of stable  string
backgrounds.  For instance, using the half-linear model we show that
heterotic compactifications on the quintic hypersurface in  for
which the gauge bundle pulls back from a bundle on  are stable.

More generally, just as for the linear models, the half-linear
models can be used to describe compactification on any Calabi-Yau
threefold  which is a complete-intersection in a compact toric
variety .  However, in the half-linear models the bundle  on
 is now any stable, holomorphic bundle which pulls back from a
bundle on .  In particular,  need not be a "monad" bundle
on , the sortTechnically, a monad bundle is one which
admits a description as the cohomology of a complex 
 of three bundles , , and  on .  most
naturally described in the linear sigma model.  Conversely,
however, there are also monad bundles on  (including obvious
ones such as its tangent bundle) that do not pull back (at least
in any obvious way) from a holomorphic bundle on .  So we will
also develop a version of the vanishing argument adapted to linear
models and monad bundles on .

A Brief Sketch of the Idea 

Our essential idea can be motivated by considering the actual form
of the instanton contributions to  in the simple case that the
string world-sheet wraps once about an isolated rational curve  embedded
in .  Actually, the most direct and elegant way ,  
in this case to derive the instanton contribution to  is to evaluate the
partition function of the worldvolume theory on a single -brane
wrapped on  in the Type I theory, which is the dual description
 of a world-sheet instanton in the 
heterotic theoryAs explained in , the derivation of 
from the Type I theory most directly applies to the 
heterotic theory, but holomorphy and gauge-invariance allow us to
interpret the answer for the  heterotic theory
as well. .  Holomorphy allows us to evaluate this partition function
at one-loop, so the instanton contribution to  from  is just

W(C) = ( -A(C)  2 + i _C B
)   Pfaff '(_F)   . 

Here the exponential factor in  represents the classical action
of the -brane.  We have written this action in heterotic units,
so that  is the area of  in the heterotic string metric on ,
 is the heterotic string tension, and  is the heterotic
-field.

The other factor in  arises from the one-loop
integral over the fluctuations of the bosons and fermions living on
the worldvolume of the -brane.   and  are thus the
respective kinetic operators of the worldvolume bosons and fermions,
and the "prime" in  and 
indicates that these expressions are to be evaluated only after
omitting the zero-modes associated to the bulk symmetries which are
broken by the -brane.  Four bosonic zero-modes associated to the
broken translational symmetries in  and two right-moving
fermionic zero-modes associated to the broken supersymmetries arise in
this fashion.

The complex structure moduli of  and  are described by chiral
superfields in the low-energy, effective  theory, and 
must depend holomorphically on these fields.  Unfortunately, our
simple expression  for  is not manifestly holomorphic.
To get a manifestly holomorphic expression for , we must use
the fact that the two supersymmetries left unbroken by the -brane
imply a cancellation between the contributions of the right-moving
fermionic modes to  and the contributions of the
right-moving bosonic modes to .

To make this cancellation explicit, we write  solely
in terms of the left-moving bosonic and fermionic modes.  By convention,
the kinetic operator of a left-moving fermion on  will be a 
 operator, while the kinetic operator for a right-moving
fermion will be a  operator.  Thus, since the left-moving
worldvolume fermions transform as sections of the left-moving
spin bundleHere  is the usual notation for
the complex line-bundle of degree  on projective space.  In
particular,  is the trivial complex bundle of rank one. 
 on  tensored with the gauge bundle  as
restricted to , their contribution to  is
just the Pfaffian of the  operator coupled to
, which we denote
.

Similarly, in the formula  for , we have written the boson
kinetic operator  as a real operator acting on the eight real
bosons representing the normal directions to  in .
Since , , and  all have complex structures, we can
equally well group the eight real bosons into four complex bosons
taking values in the complex normal bundle  to  in 
.  When  is isolated in ,  is isomorphic to 
, the first two summands
representing the normal directions in  and the last two summands
representing the normal directions in .  Thus, the contribution of
the non-zero left-moving bosonic modes to  just
arises from the  operator on  coupled
to the normal bundle .

So, cancelling out the right-moving modes from  in , we
have

W(C) = ( -A(C)  2 + i _C
B )   Pfaff (_E(-1) (C))  (_ )^2 (_(-1) (C) )^2   . 
This expression for  is now manifestly holomorphic.  Specifying
a  operator on either  or  is equivalent to
specifying its complex structure, so the operators
 and 
themselves depend holomorphically on the complex structure moduli of
 and .  We have also emphasized in  that the way in
which the complex structure moduli of  and  appear in these
 operators itself depends upon which curve  in
 that the instanton wraps.  In fact, at least when  is
elliptically fibered, one can derive very explicit expressions in
given examples for the dependence of  on the moduli of  and
 ,  , although we will not be needing such
detailed expressions here.

Thus, in the case that  is a generic quintic in  and 
is a deformation of , the vanishing of  implies as a corollary
that, summing  over the  lines on ,

_i=1 ^2875   ( i _C_i   B )  
Pfaff (_E(-1) (C_i))  (_(-1) (C_i) )^2   = 0. 
In this expression, we have dropped from  an overall factor of
, which is constant for
curves on  of given degree, and a factor of 
, which is simply constant.

One is very much also tempted to drop from  the factor
of , which is at least "morally" constant
on curves of given degree.  However, as reviewed in , because
only the product of  and the fermion
Pfaffian is even well-defined, we must technically include in
 this factor involving  so that the full expression
makes sense.  Nevertheless, our interest in  resides in the
holomorphic dependence of this formula on the complex structure moduli
of  and , and we will not dwell here on the subtleties of the
heterotic -field.

At first sight, the formula  might seem like an exotic
mathematical prediction derived only indirectly from the underlying
 linear sigma model.  But in fact, this sort of formula has a
clear precedent from algebraic geometry, in the form of a residue
theorem.

To derive the simplest example of such a residue theorem, suppose that
 is a meromorphic one-form on  with simple poles
at points , .  Letting  be a holomorphic coordinate
on , we can express  as

= g(z) dz  f(z)  , 
where  and  are polynomials in ,  having non-degenerate
zeroes at the points .  Without loss, we assume
that  does not have a pole at , so that the degrees of
 and  satisfy
 g  f  - 2. 

As usual, we then define the residue of  at each point , denoted
, by integrating  over a small
contour  about the point ,

Res _P_i () = 1 2 i    __i 
= g(P_i)  f / z (P_i)   . 
We now obtain a residue theorem simply by considering the sum of contours
 = _1 + + _N. 
Since  is contractible, we have

0 = 1 2 i    _= _i=1 ^N
Res _P_i () = _i=1 ^N g(P_i)  f /
z (P_i)   . 
So the residue theorem simply states that the sum of the residues of
 is zero.

Comparing  to , we can already see a vague
similarity between these two formulae, with the Pfaffian in
 being a holomorphic function analogous to  in ,
and the bosonic determinant in  being analogous to
 in .  Our main goal in this paper is
to make the correspondence between these formulae precise, showing
directly that the instanton contributions to  vanish in
suitable models due to an infinite-dimensional generalization
of the simple one-dimensional residue theorem above.

The Plan of the Paper 

Our plan for the paper is as follows.  In Section 2, we start by
generalizing the one-dimensional residue theorem to finitely many
dimensions.  Although standard mathematical approaches exist for
studying multi-dimensional residues, as for instance in ,  ,
we will take a more physical approach by studying a certain
supersymmetric, finite-dimensional integral.  This integral is a
natural abstraction of the path-integral over the right-moving
world-sheet fields on the heterotic string, and from it we easily
prove a very general, multi-dimensional residue theorem.

At the end of Section 2, we also describe precisely how the partition
function of the worldvolume theory on a supersymmetric
-brane can be interpreted as a residue.  Unfortunately, although
the -brane formalism provides a very elegant description of the
superpotential contribution from any single instanton, the world-sheet
description of the heterotic string turns out to be better for proving
vanishing results for the sums of these instanton contributions.

So in Section 3, we apply our analysis from Section 2 to the
heterotic world-sheet theory itself.  This analysis most directly
generalizes to the "half-linear" class of heterotic
compactifications, for which  is a complete-intersection in a
compact toric variety  and the gauge bundle  on  pulls
back from a bundle on .  For these compactifications, the
vanishing of the instanton contributions to  follows from
essentially the same argument as we use in Section 2 to deduce the
multi-dimensional residue theorems.  We also show how this
argument can be applied to the  linear sigma models to
prove directly formulae such as .

Very recently, Basu and Sethi  have also given another
argument for the stability of  linear sigma models.  Their
argument focuses on showing the absence of corrections to the
world-sheet superpotential.

Finally, in Section 4 we consider the  compactification of
M-theory on a manifold  of  holonomy.  Using ideas very similar to
those in Sections 2 and 3, we extend the results of  by computing
the superpotential contribution from membranes which wrap a continuous
family of supersymmetric three-cycles in .

Residues and Supersymmetry 

Rather than trying to generalize immediately from the
one-dimensional residue theorem to an infinite-dimensional residue
theorem which is applicable to the heterotic string, we will warm
up with the simpler generalization to residue theorems in only a
finite number of dimensions.  Our strategy is to consider a
finite-dimensional, supersymmetric integral on an arbitrary
compact, complex manifold . The finite-dimensional residue
theorem then follows from the supersymmetry, which allows us to
localize the integral to a sum of terms generalizing the
one-dimensional residues, and from the compactness of , which
leads to the vanishing of the integral and hence the sum.  After
we obtain this result, we will indicate some easy generalizations
of it which also have relevance to the heterotic models we
introduce in Section 3.  Finally, we describe precisely how the
partition function of the worldvolume theory on supersymmetric
-brane can be interpreted as a residue.

Standard mathematical approaches to multi-dimensional residues and
residue theorems can be found in  and .  Mathematical
discussions somewhat more related to our approach via supersymmetry
are given in , , and .

A Finite-Dimensional Integral 

We now introduce the finite-dimensional, supersymmetric integral that
is central to our study of residues and which serves as a model for
the path-integral over the world-sheet fields of the heterotic
string.  Since the supersymmetry in our integral is essential, we will
begin by specifying how it acts on the variables of integration.

As mentioned above, we perform the integral over a compact, complex
manifold , having (complex) dimension .  So the bosonic
variables of integration will be the local holomorphic and
anti-holomorphic coordinates  and 
 on .

We also introduce a set of anti-commuting, fermionic coordinates
 and .  Here the fermions 
 transform as coordinates on the anti-holomorphic tangent bundle
, and the fermions  transform as
coordinates on a holomorphic vector bundle , of rank , over
.  The bundle  is completely arbitrary and should be
considered, like , as part of the defining data for our integral.

Besides specifying  itself, we must now also choose a global
holomorphic section  of .  We need this section  simply to
define an interesting supersymmetry transformation for the fermions
, since none of the other variables of integration
have anything to do with .  So under the supersymmetry ,
the bosonic and fermionic variables transform as

&
&z^i = 0,&^= s^, 
&
&z^i  = ^i  ,&^i  = 0 .   
Note that since  is holomorphic, , the most important
property of .

The supersymmetric integral which we consider takes the general form

Z = _M g  d  (-t  S)  , 
where  is a positive real parameter representing the
"coupling constant" for ,  is a finite-dimensional "action"
which we will soon present, and
 g  d g(z)  d^n z  d^n z 
d^n  d^r  
is the measure.  Locally,  is a function which represents the
particular choice of measure for , and to ensure that the measure
respects the supersymmetry,  must be holomorphic.

The fact that we have to worry about the measure for  may
seem slightly odd, since in many supersymmetric integrals, one can
make a canonical choice of measure (up to normalization).  The
point is that, under any change of variables, the resulting Jacobians
for the bosonic variables are cancelled by the fermionic Jacobians for
their superpartners.

In the case of  above, such a cancellation occurs
between the anti-holomorphic bosons  and their
superpartners .  So the factor 
 appearing in  indeed represents a canonical choice
of measure for these variables.

On the other hand, the bosonic variables  and the fermionic
variables  are unrelated by supersymmetry, which
means that we really must choose the factor 
 appearing in .  Globally,  is not a function but
transforms as a holomorphic section of the line-bundle 
 on , where  denotes as usual
the canonical bundle of holomorphic -forms on  and 
 is the top exterior power of .  Since we generally have no
preferred choice of such a section, we must interpret our choice
of  as another part of the input data needed to specify .

We must, of course, also specify the action  for the integrand of .
We first choose a positive-definite, hermitian metric 
 on .  Then we consider a -trivial action,
 S = ( h_  
s^  ^) , 
or expanding,
 S = h_  s^  s^+ h_  D_j  s^  
^j  ^. 
Here  is the covariant derivative associated to the canonical
connection arising from the metric  on .
Recall that the canonical connection  is the unique connection on 
for which  is covariantly constant and for
which  when acting on a holomorphic
frame of .

One easy consequence of the fact that  is -trivial is that
 is obviously supersymmetric, .  A deeper
consequence of the fact that  is -trivial is that the integral
 is formally independent of the real parameter  and the metric
 on  which we introduced.  For instance,
the invariance of  under changes in  is derived by first
observing that
d Z  d t   = - _M g  d  S (-t 
S)  = - S . 
However, if  is any function of the variables , 
, , and , then
 =
_M g  d   (-t  S)  = 0, 
which in the language of topological field theory is the decoupling of
BRST-trivial observables ,  .  Since the action 
is of the form , we deduce immediately that .  The
invariance of  under deformations of the metric 
 follows by the same argument.

Finally, we observe that  is invariant under a ghost number
symmetry, under which the anti-commuting variables  and
 carry charges  and  respectively, and
 itself carries charge .  Since the measure  thus
carries ghost number
 M - V = n - r, 
 vanishes identically unless .  So, if we wish to use  to
prove a residue theorem, we must assume that .

A Residue Theorem 

As is familiar from the study of other topological models, we can
prove an interesting theorem by using the fact that  is
independent of  and then evaluating  for 
 and .  Sometimes, a formal statement such as "
is independent of " could fail to hold if the convergence of  were
sufficiently poor.  See  for a nice demonstration of such a
failure in the context of the linear sigma model.  However, because
here  is an integral over a compact manifold , the convergence
of  is assured, even when , and there are no difficulties with
the formal statements above.

Evaluating  when  is easy.  Then
 Z = _M g  d  1 = 0, 
since neither  nor  appear in the
integrand above.

Evaluating  for , we see from the action 
in  that only points in a neighborhood of the vanishing locus 
of the section  contribute to .  In general,  will consist of
several disconnected components , and  must have an expression
 Z = _C L   Z(C) , 
where  denotes the local contribution to  from the component
.  So  and  imply as a very general vanishing theorem
that
 _C L   Z(C) = 0 . 

The power of this approach is that the vanishing theorem 
does not rely on any specific behavior of the section  of .  In
the simplest case,  has simple zeroes on a set of isolated points
of .  But we can equally well consider the case that  has
degenerate zeroes at some points, or even that  vanishes over
some components of positive dimension.  In order to translate
 into a more explicit formula, along the lines of the
one-dimensional residue theorem , we must simply evaluate the
expression  for each case.

Multi-dimensional residues To make contact with the one-dimensional residue theorem , we
will consider at first only the easiest case that  vanishes in a
non-degenerate fasion on a set of isolated points  of .

Recall that the requirement that  vanish non-degenerately at a
point  is simply the condition that the Jacobian 
be non-vanishing at ,

(ds) (P) = ( (s^1,,s^n)  (z^1,,z^n)   ) (P) 0. 
In this case, the contribution  from  can be evaluated
exactly using the Gaussian approximation to  near this point,
and we easily see thatIn the following, we suppress
overall factors of  that arise from the Gaussian integration. 
 Z(P) = g(P)  (ds) (P)   . 
Thus, the vanishing result  becomes
 _P L   g(P)  (ds) (P)   = 0. 
This expression represents a natural generalization of the
one-dimensional residue theorem .

To sharpen the correspondence between the formula  and a
multi-dimensional residue theorem, we consider the particular case
that the bundle  is a direct sum of  line bundles,
 V = (D_1) (D_n) , 
which are associated to  irreducible, effective divisors
 intersecting transversely at isolated points  in
.

To describe the appropriate section  of  for this case, we note
that each divisor  is determined as the vanishing locus
of a holomorphic section  of the line-bundle .  Then we
simply take  to be the direct sum of the , so that  has
components
 s = (s_1,,s_n) . 
We note that the section  vanishes non-degenerately at each point
, so our simple expression for 
in  is valid.

In this case, we can now give a very nice geometric interpretation
of the local contribution  from each point 
.  Near , we can trivialize all the line
bundles  as well as the canonical bundle of .  Upon
doing so, we can regard  as an ordinary holomorphic function
that is nonzero at , and the  as holomorphic functions
that vanish on .  Now we can define a meromorphic -form
 that generalizes the one-dimensional expression ,
 = g  dz^1   dz^n  s_1
s_n  . 

Given the meromorphic -form , and a real -cycle
 that links in a suitable way the locus of its poles, we
can naturally define an -dimensional residue
 that will
generalize the usual one-dimensional residue. We let  be
the real -cycle determined by  s_i =
,i=1,,n,  where  is a small
parameter. Technically, we must also orient , which we do
by the condition .

On ,  is holomorphic, so we can define 
Res _P () = (1 2 i  )^n 
_.  Since  on a neighborhood of
, this definition only depends on the homology class of
 and in particular does not depend the parameter
 above.

The residue  can be then be evaluated by a
change of variables and the iterative application of Cauchy's theorem.
We find

Res _P() = g(P)  (ds) (P)   , 
generalizing the one-dimensional expression in .  Of course,
 agrees precisely with  for the special
choices of  and  above, so our main result  is properly
interpreted as a generalized, multi-dimensional residue theorem.

A quick example Before proceeding further, we will give a quick example of the residue
theorem.

For our example, we take  and , the
holomorphic tangent bundle.  If we let  be homogeneous
coordinates on , then any holomorphic section  of
 takes the form
 s = a_0  X_0  X_0   +
a_1  X_1  X_1   + a_2  X_2 
X_2   , 
where  are complex coefficients parametrizing .
Because  are only homogeneous coordinates, the coefficients
 are only defined up to the addition of a multiple of
, which describes the zero section of .  If
 are generic coefficients, then  vanishes
non-degenerately at the three points , ,
and  of .

Since , the measure  is a section of the trivial
bundle .  Consequently, in
this example we do have a canonical measure for  and  is a
constant.

Now in the patch where , with local coordinates
,  takes the form
 s = (a_1 - a_0)  z^1 z^1  
+ (a_2 - a_0)  z^2 z^2   , 
and so the residual contribution from  to  is
 Z(P_1) = 1 (a_1 - a_0) (a_2 - a_0)  . 
Similar contributions from the points
 and  are
 Z(P_2) = 1 (a_0 - a_1) (a_2 - a_1)  ,Z(P_3) = 1 (a_0 - a_2) (a_1 - a_2)  . 
The residue theorem then simply states that ,
as one can verify directly.

Generalizations 

The ghost number symmetry preserved by  implies that  trivially
vanishes unless .  So if we wish to study bundles 
such that , we should consider not  itself
but expectation values ,

= _M  g  d   (-t S) , 
where  is any function of , , , and
 which satisfies .  Of course, 
must also have ghost number  if  is to be
any more interesting that  itself.

Globally, functions  of , , ,
and  are elements of the complex 
_(p,q)   A^(0,q) (M) ^p V^*.  Here
 is the bundle of smooth  forms on , and
 is the holomorphic bundle dual to .  A function
homogeneous and  order in  is a
-form on , while a function homogeneous and 
order in  is a section of .  We will
often refer to an element of 
for fixed  as having "type" .

The supersymmetry transformation  acts on elements of this
complex as  D = ^i  z^i    + s^^  .  More intrinsically, we can identify  with the
operator  D = + _s,  where
 is the usual Dolbeault operator on  and
 acts on sections of  by the interior
product with .  The action of  on this complex has certainly
been considered before in the mathematical literature, for
instance in , ,  , though mostly for
the case .

Since  for any , the
interesting observables  correspond to nontrivial elements of
the cohomology of .  In general, what can we say about this
cohomology?

Without placing additional conditions on , , and , in fact we
cannot say muchHowever, see  for a nice discussion of
the easiest case that  and  has zeroes at isolated points.
In this case, the cohomology of  is isomorphic to 
, where  is the ideal sheaf associated to . .  Nonetheless,
we do have a systematic procedure to compute the -cohomology, using a
spectral sequence (see  for a clear introduction to spectral
sequences).

In physical terms, we want to solve the equation , and
the spectral sequence is essentially a perturbative way to do this,
really by following one's nose.  So to construct an  which
satisfies , we start with an "order-zero" trial
solution , of type , which satisfiesIf we
wished, we could equally well start with  satsifying
 and reverse the roles of 
and  above.  We find it convenient to do this in Section 3. 
.  If 
also happens to satisfy , then 
, but generally .

To correct for this discrepancy, we then try to solve
 _s ^(0)  + ^(1)  = 0, 
to determine the "first-order" correction .  We consider
 as a correction to  in a very definite sense,
since although  is of type ,  is of type
.  Thus, if we continue to solve iteratively
 _s ^(n)  + ^(n+1)  = 0, 
we will either find an obstruction, or the procedure will terminate
after a finite number of steps with 
 satisfying .  We will find this little
procedure useful when constructing heterotic models in Section 3.

What sort of results, analogous to the generalized residue theorem
, do we then obtain by considering the expectations
 of nontrivial observables ?
Evaluating  at  now yields
 = _M g  d  , 
which need not vanish if  carries the proper ghost number.
Evaluating  in the limit ,
we again see that  can be expressed as a sum of local
contributions from each of the components  of the vanishing locus
 of ,

= _C L   (C) . 

So for instance, again in the case that  vanishes non-degenerately
over isolated points  of  and  has ghost number zero,

_M g  d  = _P L   g(P)  (P)  (ds) (P)   . 
In the above expression, we must interpret the integral over  as
picking out the component of  of type  and the evaluation
at  as picking out the component of  of type .

We can also consider the under-determined case, for which 
, as well as the over-determined case, for which 
.  In the under-determined case, the components  of  will
generically be complex submanifolds of dimension  in .  We
assume that  vanishes in a non-degenerate fashion on each ,
which means that the Jacobian  of  with respect to the
normal directions to  in  is non-vanishing along .  Then the
local contribution of  to  is
 (C) = _C g  d    (ds_N)    . 
In the above,  determines an element
of  on , and thus only the component of  of
type  now contributes to the integral over .

As we shall see in Section 3, the case of direct relevance to the
heterotic string is actually the over-determined case, 
.  In this case, one might think that it is unnatural to
consider an  that has zeroes.  However, to get a non-trivial
result in the over-determined case, we need a non-trivial ,
most simply an  of degree .  In any case, such an
 will be present when we study the half-twisted heterotic
string.  ( will be infinite, and  will be the
exponential of a fermion bilinear.) When such an  is present,
 cannot be changed freely, since one must preserve the
condition . In the presence of a
suitable , it can be natural to have an  that has zeroes
with non-trivial residues. For instance, if  again vanishes
non-degenerately at an isolated point  of , now meaning that
the matrix 
 has full rank at , then the local contribution
from  to  is  (P) = ( g  d    ds   ) (P)
( g  _i_1 i_q  ^_1
_p   __q+1  _p   _i_1  s^_1  _i_q  s^_q   ) (P) . 
Evidently, in such an example with isolated zeroes of , only the
component of type  of  contributes to
.

The -brane Partition Function as a Residue 

Our discussion of multi-dimensional residues now allows us to make
precise the manner in which the partition function of a supersymmetric
-brane can be interpreted as a residue.  We have already seen
in the Introduction a strong formal similarity between expressions
such as  and  which suggests this interpretation.
To check this idea, though, we must examine to what extent the
worldvolume theory on a supersymmetric -brane actually generalizes
our finite-dimensional model which produces the residues.

At first glance, one might be worried by the following fact.  If
we consider the bosonic action for a -brane which wraps an
arbitrary, not necessarily holomorphic, surface  in the
Calabi-Yau threefold , then this action is just the area
 of the surface.  So if the -brane action were
literally to be the obvious generalization of the action  of
the finite-dimensional model, then  would have to admit
a representation as the norm-squared of a suitable holomorphic
section  over the space  of immersed surfaces in .  But
 presumably does not admit such a representation, and
it is not even obvious that the space , which should play the
role of the complex manifold  in the finite-dimensional model,
admits a complex structure.

Thus, as far as we know, the full -brane worldvolume action
does not fit into the simple structure of the finite-dimensional
model. As a result, we cannot hope to use the -brane formalism
to prove vanishing results such as .  Physically, the
difficulty in using the -brane formalism to prove the
vanishing results is  that the -brane worldvolume description
becomes more complicated when the brane is "off-shell", i.e. not
supersymmetric.  We do not believe that these off-shell
complications are really essential, but we also do not know how to
eliminate them in the -brane framework.-branes can
be put in a gauge-invariant version of this framework.   When we
deduce these vanishing results in Section 3, we will use instead
approaches based on linear and half-linear sigma models, which are
more closely related to the finite-dimensional model.

Yet to discuss the superpotential contribution from a -brane
which wraps an isolated holomorphic curve  in  requires
considerably less than the full worldvolume action.  Since we
evaluate the partition function at one-loop, we only need to
discuss fluctuations about the holomorphic curve up to quadratic
order in the action. Considering the worldvolume theory only to
this order, we can nicely fit it into the framework of the
finite-dimensional model.  In particular, the second variation of
 away from a minimum corresponding to a holomorphic
curve indeed appears as the norm-squared of a suitable section 
and the contribution to the superpotential is indeed a residue.

Geometrically, the approach of working only to quadratic order in
the supersymmetric -brane action corresponds to linearizing
the space  over the point corresponding to the given
holomorphic curve  in .  The linearization possesses the
requisite complex structure.

We now give a thorough discussion of how this approximation to the
-brane action fits into the framework of the
finite-dimensional model.  As we have indicated, our
identification of the supersymmetric -brane partition function
as a residue is of more conceptual than practical interest here,
not only because of the off-shell complications but also because
of the lack of compactness in the -brane approach. However, in
Section 4 we will apply similar ideas to study the superpotential
contributions from continuous families of membrane instantons in
M-theory compactifications on manifolds of  holonomy.

To proceed, we begin with the general observation  that whenever
a brane wraps a supersymmetric cycle, then the worldvolume theory on
the brane is automatically twisted, implying the existence of at least
one scalar supercharge.  The existence of a scalar supercharge on the
-brane worldvolume is crucial if we are to interpret the
worldvolume theory in analogy to the finite-dimensional model, with
its scalar supersymmetry generator .

We focus our attention on the sector of the -brane worldvolume
theory describing fluctuations of the brane in , as opposed to
the trivial sector describing fluctuations in .  When the
-brane wraps a holomorphic curve  in , the worldvolume
bosons  and  which describe fluctuations of the
brane in  transform as coordinates on the holomorphic normal
bundle  and anti-holomorphic normal bundle  of
 in .  The worldvolume theory also possesses fermions
 which transform as right-moving Weyl
fermions on , as indicated by the  index, and
as coordinates on the dual bundle  of .  Equivalently,
using the hermitian metric  on , we can regard
these fermions as transforming in the anti-holomorphic normal
bundle .  The twisted model has two scalar
supercharges, described in detail later, which relate the
worldvolume fields .

Now, in the finite-dimensional model, the supersymmetry
transformations as well as the form of the action are determined by the
holomorphic section  of .  So what are the analogues of  and
 for the -brane?

As has already been observed in ,  , for a
variety of supersymmetric compactifications of string and
M-theory, the supersymmetric brane configurations can be
characterized as the critical points of a "superpotential"
, suitably interpreted as a function on the space of
arbitrary brane configurations.  (This idea has also been
discussed lately in a mathematical context in .)  For the
-brane, if  is the exterior derivative on the space
 of brane configurations, then  is a one-form
that vanishes at the point corresponding to a holomorphic curve
, and moreover  is holomorphic once we linearize
in a neighborhood of . So a natural guess is to take  to be
the holomorphic cotangent bundle  and .

To check that this identification is correct, we must describe 
explicitly.  For argument's sake, we start by defining  on
surfaces  which are homologically trivial in  - although
we note that any holomorphic surface, being calibrated by the Kahler
form on , actually resides in a nontrivial homology class.  In any case,
 is defined for a homologically trivial surface  by
 () = 1 6  _B  , 
where  is a bounding three-cycle for  and  is the
holomorphic three-form on .  The factor of  is simply
to cancel some constants that would otherwise appear in later
formulae.  If , as is always the case when 
has complex structure moduli, then  generally depends
on the class of  and is defined only up to an additive constant.

Now, if  is a surface representing a nontrivial homology class in
, then a bounding three-cycle  does not exist.  To define
 in this case, for each class in  we choose
a particular representative .  Then, if  lies in the
same class as , a bounding three-cycle  exists for
.  That is, the boundary of  has two components,
one of which is  and the other is , considered with
opposite orientation.  So now we set
 () - (_0) = 1 6  _B  . 
In this case, the additive constant in  also depends on the
representative  as well as the class of .

The fact that  is only defined up to an additive constant
does not concern us, as this constant does not affect the location
of the critical points, for which .  Explicitly,
in terms of holomorphic coordinates  on , 
() = _ _ijk   x^i 
d x^j  d x^k .  So  precisely for those
surfaces  on which the -form 
 is equal to zero. If  is holomorphic in ,
then any -form vanishes when restricted to , so
 vanishes when  is a holomorphic curve .
Because  is everywhere nonzero, holomorphy of
 is necessary as well as sufficient for vanishing of
.

While  vanishes at the point corresponding to , we
also need the linear behavior near this point.  For this, we pick
local complex coordinates on  consisting of a parameter 
that is a local complex coordinate on  as well as two local
coordinates  of the normal bundle .  We write
 for .  In , we take 
 to be a displacement of one of the , since otherwise we
are not moving  away from  at all.  So we will write
 for .  Evaluated on , we have

.  Because of the
antisymmetry in  and  (or because ),
we cannot set both  and  equal to .  To linearize
 around , we set one of them, say , to ,
and the other to .  So we get
ij y^iy^j+,  where the ellipses indicate that higher order terms
have been dropped. From this, we can also deduce that to quadratic
order,
12 _C_ij y^iy^j, 
where  is an integration constant.

In particular, we see from  that when evaluated on ,
^2   y^j(z)
y^i(z')  _C = _ij   _z 
(z,z'), 
where, more intrinsically,  represents the
 operator acting on sections of .

Since  functions like a superpotential, the unbroken
worldvolume supersymmetries in the linearized theory can be very
simply expressed in terms of . Under the twisted
supercharges , the transformations of
the fields , , and  take
the usual form  &_  y^i = 0
,_  y^i  = ^i _  ,&_  _, i  =
_     y^i   .   Since  is holomorphic, in the sense that
, these supersymmetry
transformations satisfy 
 as required. Obviously these worldvolume
supersymmetries are unbroken when ,
which we have already observed is the proper condition for the
-brane to be supersymmetric.  Further, taking 
, we see that  represents an  generalization of
the supersymmetry transformations  in the
finite-dimensional model.

The worldvolume action which describes to leading order the
fluctuations of a -brane which wraps a holomorphic curve 
in  takes a very simple form when written in terms of .
Just as for the finite-dimensional action ,
 S &= 1 4  _C  ^   _  (  g^i i     y^i    
_, i  )&= _C  ( g^i i    y^i    
  y^i   + 1 4  ^  g^i i  D^2    D
y^j  D y^i    ^j _  _, i  ) .  
Here  is the covariant derivative with respect to the metric
 on , and  is the Kahler form on  which
restricts to the volume form on . We also note from  that
 is actually a two-form on , and we
have implicitly used the induced metric to dualize
 to a scalar on .

The action  is to be interpreted by expanding to quadratic
order in the normal fluctuations  and  about
the given holomorphic curve , so that
 S = _C 
( g^i i  D^2  Dy^j  Dy^i    D^2  Dy^i Dy^j    y^j  y^j +
1 4  ^  g^i i  D^2
   D y^j  D y^i    ^j _  _, i  ). 
Using , we can write  more explicitly as
 S = _C  ( g_i i  
_z y^i   _z  y^i + ^  _i j   ^j _  _z ^i _  ). 
In the above, we have assumed that  is normalized on  so
that 
.  This action is just the free action for fluctuations which we
implicitly used in the Introduction when we evaluated the partition
function.

More geometrically, we can identify the complex linear space 
describing fluctuations of the -brane about  with the space
of sections of .  Our formula for  simply reflects the
classic fact ,   that, given a section ,
the second derivative of the area functional  along
the one-parameter family of surfaces  determined by 
, evaluated at , is just  d^2 dt^2   A[_t]_t=0  =  _C   
_z  y^i ^2,  which appears as the
bosonic term in .  This formula indicates that holomorphic
curves are always area-minimizing in , and only holomorphic
deformations of a holomorphic curve can preserve its area.

Finally, to make contact with the finite-dimensional model, we can
evaluate the partition function  of a -brane wrapped on 
exactly as we evaluated the contribution to the finite-dimensional
integral from an isolated, non-degenerate zero of  in .  We find
that

Z(C) &= _Pfaff (_E(-1) )   d  e^-S ,&= Pfaff (_E(-1) ) (C) 
(^2 / y^j y^i) (C)  .  
Here 

 is the naive path-integral
measure, and the Pfaffian factor produced by the left-moving
bundle fermions is directly analogous to the section , since
both are required for the path-integral measure to be
well-defined.  Recalling from  that 
 represents the  operator acting
on sections of , we see that 
indeed agrees with the summand in the expression .

A Residue Theorem for the Heterotic String 

We now extend our investigation of residues in Section 2 to the
heterotic stringBecause the left-moving world-sheet fermions
play only an auxiliary role in our analysis, we will not need to
distinguish between the  and 
heterotic strings.  itself.  Our goal is to prove a residue theorem,
precisely analogous to the theorems we derived in Section 2, for the
vanishing of world-sheet instanton contributions to .  A very
useful tool in our analysis is the twisted version of the
heterotic world-sheet theory, as it is the twisted theory that
directly generalizes the finite-dimensional model we introduced in Section
2.  Thus, we begin this section with a short reminder of what it
means to twist the heterotic
world-sheet theory, and we explain how this theory is related to the
finite-dimensional model of Section 2.

Preliminary Remarks on Twisting 

The twisted heterotic world-sheet theory is simply a version of the
physical (untwisted) heterotic theory in which the right-moving
world-sheet fermions are assigned unconventional spins.  To describe
the twisting, we first recall that the world-sheet theory contains
complex bosons  and 
which describe sigma model maps  from the
world-sheet  to a Kahler target space .  In the physical
theory, the superpartners of  and  are
right-moving fermions  and , which transform as
sections of the bundles  and
 respectively.  Here,
 denotes the holomorphic tangent bundle of , and 
denotes the anti-canonical bundle of .  The anti-canonical bundle can
be explicitly described as the line-bundle of  forms on
, and from this description we see that  is
a right-moving spin-bundle on .  Then in the twisted theory, we
simply take  to transform as a section of
 and  to transform as
a section of .

One way to interpret the twist is that we shift the right-moving
world-sheet stress tensor  by 
T_z z  T _z z  =
T_z z  + _z  j_z  ,  where
 is the world-sheet  current present in the
right-moving  algebra.  Upon twisting, one of the two
right-moving world-sheet supersymmetry generators becomes a
nilpotent scalar , which we interpret as a -operator on
the world-sheet. The decoupling of -trivial states from the
correlation functions of -invariant operators then greatly
simplifies the twisted theory. In particular, though the twisted
heterotic theory is not  topological, all correlation functions of
-invariant operators in the twisted theory vary holomorphically
on the world-sheet, because the twisted stress-tensor
 is -trivial.

We now explain how the general framework of Section 2 applies to the
twisted world-sheet theory.  Instead of performing an integral over a
finite-dimensional complex manifold , we now perform a
path-integral over the infinite-dimensional complex manifold 
which is the space of all sigma model maps .
The world-sheet bosons  themselves provide local holomorphic
coordinates on  and play the same role as the holomorphic
coordinates  on .  In addition, the fermions ,
as sections of , are coordinates on
 and correspond to the anti-commuting coordinates
 in Section 2.  Finally, we interpret the
fermionsWe have slightly changed notation 
 to remind ourselves that  now
transforms as a  form on .  , which
transform as sections of , as
anti-commuting coordinates on a holomorphic bundle  over , so that
these fermions play the same role as the fermionic coordinates
 on  in Section 2.  In particular, on world-sheets for which
 is trivial, we can identify the bundle  on  as
the holomorphic tangent bundle .

Under , the world-sheet fields transform as

&
&^i = 0,&^i_z  = _z  ^i , 
&
&^i  = ^i  ,&^i  = 0 .   
Comparing  to , we see that the action of  is
precisely analogous to the supersymmetry transformation in the
finite-dimensional model.  Further, we see that 
 is the holomorphic section of  corresponding to the
section  of  in Section 2.

The sigma model action for the world-sheet fields can now be written
as
 S = _d^2 z  ( g_i i  
_z ^i   ^i_z  )  +  , 
where  is the Kahler metric on .  The
-trivial expression above is a direct generalization of the
action  which we considered in Section 2.  Just as the
finite-dimensional integral localizes on the set where , so
the twisted path-integral localizes on sigma model maps satisfying
.  Such maps, being holomorphic, are
either constant or represent world-sheet instantons.

The "" appearing in  represents the additional terms in
the sigma model action which are not -trivial
(but of course are -closed).  More precisely, these additional
terms arise either from a purely topological expression which is the
integral of the complexified Kahler class of  over  or
from the kinetic terms of the left-moving bundle fermions.

Both of these sorts of terms admit an easy interpretation in light of
the results of Section 2.  First, if we restrict the world-sheet
path-integral to the sector describing maps whose images lie in a
fixed homology class of , the topological term in  is constant
and can be ignored.  Second, if we also only consider world-sheet
correlation functions which do not  involving the left-moving
bundle fermions, then at least for isolated world-sheet instantons, the
only role of the bundle fermions is to produce the Pfaffian factor that
appears in the Introduction.  As we have already observed in the
contex of the -brane, like the section  in the finite-dimensional
model, this Pfaffian factor can be interpreted as defining a suitable
measure for the path-integral over the modes of , ,
, and .

Finally we remark that, although the physical and twisted theories
are generally very different, some quantities in the physical theory can be
computed using the twisted theory.  In particular, as long as  is
the trivial bundle on , correlation functions computed on
 in the twisted theory agree with those computed on 
in the physical theory.  For instance, if  is a cylinder
with Ramond sector ground-states at each end, then correlation
functions on  compute the Yukawa couplings arising from the
superpotential  in the low-energy effective theory.  In this
fashion we can use the twisted theory to probe for a background .

The Half-Linear Heterotic String 

Our proof of the residue theorem in Section 2 only relies upon the
fact that the integral  is invariant under a nilpotent
supersymmetry and the fact that the space  over which we integrate
is compact.  We wish to generalize this residue theorem to apply to
world-sheet correlators in the twisted heterotic theory, so we
must consider models for which both of these crucial facts hold.
Since the action of the BRST-operator  on the world-sheet naturally
generalizes the supersymmetry transformation of Section 2, the first
fact holds for an arbitrary  compactification.  However,
as regards the second fact, the space  of sigma model maps
is certainly not compact, and so to generalize the finite-dimensional
residue theorem from Section 2 to a vanishing result for  of the
form , we must look for heterotic models with some special
sort of compactness.

The vanishing result of  naturally suggests that we start by
considering the linear sigma models.  Indeed, the compactness of the
moduli spaces of  and  is an essential ingredient in the
analysis of .

Moreover, the linear sigma models possess another sort of compactness
not present in an arbitrary heterotic compactification.  As discussed
extensively in  and , in compactifications for which
continuous families of world-sheet instantons exist, the instanton
moduli spaces of the linear sigma model provide natural
compactifications of the instanton moduli spaces of the corresponding
nonlinear sigma model.  The compactness of these instanton moduli
spaces turns out to be the essential ingredient in our proof of a
residue theorem for the heterotic string.

However, we do not really have to consider the linear sigma models
themselves to exploit the fact that the instanton moduli spaces of the
corresponding nonlinear sigma models have natural compactifications.
We find it technically simpler, in fact, to discuss a class of half-linear
heterotic models.  These models are like the linear models in that  is a
complete-intersection Calabi-Yau in a compact toric variety .
Unlike the linear models, the gauge bundle  on  is any bundle
which satisfies the usual consistency conditions on  and also
pulls back from a bundle on .  Thus  must generally be described
in a nonlinear fashion.

So in the remainder of this section, we first introduce the half-linear
models and demonstrate that the finite-dimensional residue theorems
of Section 2 naturally generalize to formulae of the form .
We then return to the linear sigma models themselves and give a direct
proof of the vanishing of instanton contributions to .  For
concreteness, we shall throughout this section consider only the case
that  is the quintic hypersurface in .

Half-linear fields We start by specifying the field content of the half-linear model.
The world-sheet bosons and the right-moving world-sheet fermions are the
usual fields which describe twisted nonlinear sigma model maps
.  For the case , the model
has four complex bosons  and  which
represent local  holomorphic and anti-holomorphic coordinates on
 (as opposed to the global homogeneous coordinates on  that
would appear in the corresponding linear sigma model).  Since the
half-linear model is twisted, the right-moving supersymmetry
associates to the bosons  and  corresponding
fermions  and , transforming on
 as sections of  and
 respectively.

As for the left-moving sector of the world-sheet, the bundle 
on  is represented in the usual nonlinear fashion by a set of
thirty-two left-moving fermions  coupled to the pull
back of  to .  We assume that  satisfies the
standard topological conditions for anomaly-cancellation and
stability on .  Thus,   satisfies  
(and, if the structure group of  reduces to a subgroup with
 factors, there are restrictions on the corresponding first
Chern classes).

However, the field content of the half-linear model, as it stands,
cannot be correct.  As in the linear sigma model, to localize the
half-linear model from  onto , we must introduce a potential
 on the world-sheet.  Geometrically,  transforms as a
holomorphic section of the line-bundle  on .  Supersymmetry
requires that  couple to the right-moving fermions as well as the bosons,
but we currently have no way to couple  to these fermions.

A more fundamental problem is that, although we choose the bundle
 so as to cancel sigma model anomalies on , the half-linear
model on  is currently anomalous as .

We can elegantly fix both of these problems by adding a pair of
left-moving fermions to the model.  These fermions,
which we denote by  and , transform on the
world-sheet as sections of  and
.  Thus we can directly include the required Yukawa terms
for  in the model.

As for the anomalies, since  and  are
also "twisted" in the sense of having non-standard world-sheet
spins, they cancel the excess left-moving central charge from the
new boson.  Also, upon adding  and  to
the left-moving sector of the model, we cancel the sigma model
anomalies, since near , the adjunction formula implies that
 splits as a smooth bundle into the sum .
Explicitly, relative to the model on , the half-linear model on
 has an additional pair of twisted, right-moving fermions which
arise from the directions in the normal bundle  to  in
. These fermions transform as sections of 
 and .  Since  and
 transform as the complex conjugates of these two
fermions, they cancel the corresponding anomalies.
Half-linear supersymmetry In the half-linear model, the action of the scalar supercharge 
slightly generalizes , due to the transformations of the
left-moving fermions  and  - the other
left-moving fermions are invariant.  So  acts as

&
&^i = 0 ,&^i_z  = _z  ^i ,&= J(^i) ,&_z = 0 . 
&
&^i  = ^i ,&^i  = 0,   
As we have mentioned,  is locally a quintic polynomial in the holomorphic
coordinates  and globally a holomorphic section of  on
.  Of course,  represents the data needed to determine  as a
hypersurface in .

We see from the action of  that the fermions ,
, and  in the half-linear model can all
be identified as the analogues of the fermions  in
the finite-dimensional model.  In this basis, 
.  So, if we construct an action for the
half-linear model analogous to  in the finite-dimensional
model, the half-linear model will localize on sigma model maps
 satisfying 
 _z  ^i = J(^i) = 0. 
The first condition requires that  be holomorphic,
and the second condition requires that the image of  lie in the
subset  of , which can be identified with .  So the half-linear
model localizes on world-sheet instantons in .

The half-linear action To complete our description of the half-linear model, we must finally
specify its world-sheet action .

First, in complete analogy to the action of the finite-dimensional
integral,  includes the terms

S_0 &= t _ d^2 z  ( g_i i  
_z ^i  ^i_z +
 J     ) &= t _ d^2 z ( g_i i   _z ^i  
_z  ^i + g_i i   D_z ^i  
^i_z +J  J + ^i  D_i 
J     ).    Here  is a
coupling parameter as in Section 2, and  is a
Kahler metric on .  Because  is -exact, quantities
which we compute in the half-linear model are unchanged under
deformations of , , and .  We also
observe parenthetically that, since the expression 
 transforms as a smooth section of the trivial
bundle on , we do not actually need to specify a hermitian
bundle metric on  to make sense of this expression.

The action  for the left-moving fermions  which describe 
is the standard action, which we record for completeness below,

S_E = _ d^2 z  ( _a D_z  ^a
+ F_i i b ^  a   _a ^b ^i 
^i_z  ), 
where

_a D_z  ^a = _a _z  ^a
+ _a  _z  ^i A_i b ^ a  
^b . 
In the above,  is a holomorphic connection on ,
having components only of type  on , and
 is the curvature of this connection.  Since
 is the usual action for the left-moving bundle fermions, and
since  acts in the usual way  on the fields
appearing in , this action is clearly -invariant.

A more nontrivial fact is that we can also write a -invariant action for
the fermions  and .  Abstractly, the presence
of  and  in the half-linear model implies
that we are dealing with the over-determined case 
discussed in Section 2.3.  So we must add some -invariant observable
 involving  and  to the action if we wish to
compute something nontrivial in the half-linear model.

Physically, this -invariant observable  must introduce a kinetic term
 for  and
.  To find a -invariant extension of this kinetic
term, we follow the philosophy of Section 2.3 and attempt to solve
 perturbatively.  We begin by noting that the
expression ,

^(0)  &= D_z     _z
- ^i_z   D_i J  _z &= ( _z  + _z  ^i A_i )
   _z - ^i_z  ( _i
+ A_i )  J  _z ,  
is trivially invariant under the variations of  and
.  That is, in analogy to the finite-dimensional
model, .

In the expression for  above, we have introduced the
canonical holomorphic connection  on the line-bundle  on
.  Because  depends on  as well as
, we have that
 ^(0)  = ^(0)  0 . 
Rather,

^(0)  =
F_i i   ^i   _z  ^i 
   _z - F_i i   ^i 
^i_z   J  _z , 
where  is the curvature of .  However, introducing
,

^(1)  = F_i i   ^i  ^i_z  
   _z , 
we easily see that
 ^(0)  + _s ^(1)  = 0. 
Because  is a holomorphic connection on , the curvature
satisfies , so that
.  Consequently,
 is -invariant (but not -trivial).

Thus, we can add kinetic terms for  and  to
the action  by including

S_&= _ d^2 z  = _ d^2 z  (
^(0)  + ^(1)  ) &= _ d^2 z  ( D_z     _z
- ^i_z   D_i J  _z + F_i i   ^i 
^i_z      _z ) .  

Finally, we include in  the purely topological term which describes
the action of the world-sheet instanton itself,
 S_top  = _^*( _), 
where  is the complexified Kahler class of .  This
term simply reproduces the exponential factor in , but we
include it for completeness.

Thus, the action for the half-linear model is
 S = S_0 + S_E + S_+ S_top . 

A Half-Linear Residue Theorem 

We now show in the half-linear model that world-sheet instanton
contributions to the superpotential  vanish by a residue theorem
precisely analogous to the finite-dimensional residue theorem of
Section 2.

Before we discuss a residue theorem for the half-linear model, though,
we must first demonstrate the general fact that the half-linear model on
 is equivalent to the usual twisted non-linear sigma model on
.  Only then does the residue theorem for the half-linear model
imply the vanishing of the instanton contributions to  in the
non-linear sigma model.

Relative to the non-linear model on , the half-linear model on 
possesses additional world-sheet degrees of freedom described by the
left-moving fermions , , and the complex
boson and associated right-moving fermions describing fluctuations of
the world-sheet normal to  in .  We will denote these normal
fields simply by , , ,
and , suppressing indices associated to the tangent
bundle .

The additional world-sheet fields present in the half-linear model on
 relative to the non-linear model on  are all massive due to the
terms in the action involving  and .  For instance, the
normal bosons  and  gain a mass from the
 term that appears in the -trivial action ,
t _ d^2 z 
( J    ) =
t _ d^2 z  ( J  J +
^i  D_i  J     ) . 
Similarly, the fermions , , ,
and  all gain masses from the  term in
 and the conjugate term appearing in  in .

The mass terms for , , ,
, , and  thus appear in the
half-linear action as
 _ d^2 z  (   
DJ  DJ  +    DJ    
- _z   DJ  _z ), 
where  is the (holomorphic) normal derivative of  along ,
and we have absorbed the coupling  in  into
.  Because we assume that  is a non-singular quintic
hypersurface,  is everywhere non-vanishing on  and consequently
transforms in the trivial line-bundle on .  Also, because  is
holomorphic and vanishes on , the  operator of
 acts on  as 
, so that  is holomorphic on .  As such, once we choose
a non-vanishing holomorphic section of the trivial bundle on , a
choice which we must make in defining the fermionic measure of
the path-integral, we can regard  as merely a constant mass
parameter for the normal modes.

As we have already remarked, since  only appears in
the half-linear model through the -trivial terms in ,
the half-linear model is invariant under deformations of
.  Scaling  by a large constant, the
massive world-volume fields in  all acquire arbitrarily
large masses.Looking back at , the 
term is a mass for scalars of order .  The
 term is part of a
fermion mass matrix 
 where the upper right entry comes from the 
 term; it again leads to masses of order . 
As such, we can integrate out these massive world-sheet fields at
one-loop with arbitrary precision.  From , we see that the
one-loop contributions from the massive modes of ,
, , , ,
and  all cancel but for a finite, anomalous
factor associated to the index of the  operator
acting on the pull back of the normal bundle  to the
world-sheet.  This one-loop contribution can be absorbed into a
renormalization of the string coupling constant and the Kahler
class of  and is not relevant for the vanishing argument.
Finally, upon integrating out the massive fields, we set them to
zero in the half-linear action and in all observables, so that the
half-linear model on  clearly localizes to the non-linear model
on .

For completeness, we give in this paragraph a brief description of
the renormalization.  Massive modes with nonzero momentum cancel
in the path integral, so the renormalization comes from the
constant modes.   The constant modes contribute a factor
 1 (D  J  DJ)^n_1    
DJ ^n_2   DJ^n_3 ,  where  formally denotes
the number of modes of ,  the number of modes of
, and  the number of modes of .
Since  and  both transform in the pull back
 of the normal bundle  to the world-sheet,
 equals .  However,  transforms in the bundle 
, and thus the difference  is equal
to the index of the  operator on the
world-sheet acting on the bundle .  If the world-sheet
is a Riemann surface  of genus  and  is a map of
degree  into , then the index theorem (or simply the
Riemann-Roch theorem) implies that . Thus,
in this situation the one-loop contribution of the massive modes
is a factor .  In the non-linear model on
, this one-loop contribution can be written as 
( 1 DJ   )^(5d+1-g)  = [ -1 2    _ (DJ)   ( 5 ^*() 
+ R )] ,  where  is the pull back of
the Kahler class from , which we assume is normalized to
satisfy , and  is the
world-sheet curvature, which satisfies 
. The expression in  manifestly represents the 
renormalization of the Kahler class of  and the string coupling 
constant upon integrating out the massive modes.

Having shown that the half-linear model on  is equivalent to the
non-linear sigma model on , we now establish a residue theorem for
the half-linear model which implies the vanishing of world-sheet
instanton contributions to the superpotential .

The half-linear model is a closer cousin to the usual world-sheet
CFT description of the heterotic string than to the dual
-brane description which we explored in Section 2.4.  As such,
in neither the world-sheet CFT nor the half-linear model can we
compute  directly.  Rather, because of the presence of three
left- and right-moving fermion zero-modes arising from
fluctuations tangent to the world-sheet, we must indirectly probe
for  by computing a cubic correlator of vertex operators on the
world-sheet.  In the terminology of Section 2.3, the half-linear
model describes the over-determined case , due
to the presence of the fermions  and  in
the model, but the section 
 still vanishes over a locus on  of
complex dimension three, due to the  action on the
world-sheet.  So we must insert a suitable observable , the
cubic correlator of vertex operators, to compute something
non-trivial.

The easiest way to probe for  is to compute the correlator
, where  is the vertex operator for the
(unique) Kahler modulus of .  Explicitly,  R =
_i i  _z ^i ^i  ,  where
 is a harmonic representative of the Kahler
class of , implying that  is -invariant.  Since the
half-linear model arises from a sigma model on  (and only
restricts to  when  is large), we must consider
operators such as  which are actually defined on .  Note as
claimed that each of the three right-moving fermion zero-modes
from  can be soaked up with the fermion 
that appears in .

Of course, the Kahler class of  determines by restriction the Kahler
class of  and thus the radius of the compactification.  The only
dependence of  on this Kahler modulus is through the exponential
factor  arising
from the classical action of the instanton itself.  If we let  be
the  chiral field in the low-energy effective theory associated
to the Kahler modulus, then the correlator 
computes the third derivative  of  with respect
to .  Thus, given the simple exponential dependence of  on
, the vanishing of  is equivalent to the vanishing of the
correlator .

In the case of the finite-dimensional model in Section 2, we deduced a
residue theorem by taking .  Although we have already
interpreted the half-linear model as being formally analogous to the
finite-dimensional model, unlike the case of the finite-dimensional
model, we cannot simply take  in the half-linear model to deduce
that  vanishes.  Clearly with no
exponential suppression of the fluctuating modes in the half-linear
model, the half-linear path-integral ceases to be defined.

However, in localizing the half-linear model on  to the non-linear
model on , we have already used the fact that the -invariance of
the half-linear model implies that the model is formally independent
of  as well as .  So rather than taking , we
consider taking  instead.

When , the half-linear model no longer localizes on
instantons contained in .  Instead, after integrating out at weak
coupling all fluctuating modes of the fields, the half-linear model
localizes onto the moduli space of instantons in .

If we restrict attention to a given instanton sector of degree 
holomorphic maps  from  to , then the
moduli space of these instantons has a natural compactification to
. Because of this compactness, the half-linear
path-integral over each instanton sector can be defined even when
. Thus, the correlator 
can be computed either at large , where it is
proportional to  as computed in the non-linear model on , or
it can be computed at , where we will easily see
that it vanishes order by order in .  Morally speaking, the
vanishing of the instanton contribution to the superpotential
follows by applying the residue theorem of section 2 to the
compact manifold .  Rather than invoking this theorem
(which could lead one to worry about singularities in
), we will imitate its proof and just look at what
happens at .

We now review in detail how  arises as a
compactification of the moduli space of degree  instantons in ,
following , ,  .  In fact, even though we
focus here on the case , the existence of such a
compactification generalizes whenever  is a compact toric variety,
as already applied in ,  .

We first introduce homogeneous coordinates
 on  and homogeneous coordinates  on
.  In terms of the homogeneous coordinates, any degree 
holomorphic map  is specified by a set of
homogeneous, degree  polynomials ,

&^0 = p^0(U,V) = a^0_0  U^d + a^0_1  U^d-1  V + +
a^0_d  V^d,&&^4 = p^4(U,V) = a^4_0  U^d + a^4_1  U^d-1  V + +
a^4_d  V^d.  

Each polynomial  is determined by its  coefficients
, and the space of polynomials
 can be parametrized by these coefficients as
.  Since the coordinates  are
merely homogeneous coordinates on , defined only up to scaling, an
overall scaling of  does not affect the map
.  Subtracting from  the point at the origin which
does not describe an actual map into  and then taking the quotient
by the overall scaling, we find the projective space 
.

The only subtlety in this example is that, as just observed,
 does not correspond to any point in
, so that the moduli space of instantons of degree  on  is
actually the subset of the parameter space  for which
the polynomials  have no common zeroes on .
The polynomials which do have at least one common zero appear as an
algebraic locus of codimension four in , since we
must tune one complex parameter in any four of  to
reach this locus.  Thus, the moduli space of "true" instantons in
 is a complicated but nonetheless dense, open subset of
.  In particular,  gives a natural
compactification of the true moduli space.

We now consider evaluating the correlator  in
the half-linear model with .  In this case, if we
consider the contribution to the correlator from the topological
sector of degree  world-sheet maps, we must integrate over the
moduli space of degree  instantons in  described
globally above.

This integral over the instanton moduli space is actually a
supersymmetric integral just as in Section 2, since both the
world-sheet bosons and fermions possess zero-modes when 
.  As our global discussion above implies, the bosons ,
, and their superpartners  all have
 zero-modes.  Of these  zero-modes, three zero-modes arise
from the  action on  and are immediately soaked up
by the cubic correlator.  The other  zero-modes represent the
non-trivial holomorphic deformations of degree  rational curves in
.  The left-moving fermion  also has  zero-modes,
which arise from holomorphic sections of the bundle
.  Neither the right-moving
fermions  nor the left-moving fermion  have
any zero-modes in the instanton background.

When  is non-vanishing, these  interesting modes
of , , , and 
enter the half-linear model action through the -trivial terms involving
 in  and through the four-fermion
interactions in  and .  In the weak coupling limit 
, the four-fermion interactions are irrelevant,
since they always involve the fermions  which have no
zero-modes.  So the only way to absorb the zero-modes of 
 and  is through the quadratic mass terms that
arise from .

In fact, if we consider integrating out all of the fluctuating modes
at weak coupling, to reduce the half-linear path-integral to a
finite-dimensional supersymmetric integral over these  modes,
then the -trivial terms involving  in 
implicitly represent the same finite-dimensional action  which
we considered in Section 2.  In this case, the modes of 
 represent the fermionic coordinates , the modes
of  represent the bundle fermions , and
 implicitly determines a holomorphic section  of a rank 
bundle over the moduli space of instantons in  which vanishes
precisely over those instantons contained in .

Just as in Section 2, once we set  to zero, then the 
fermion zero-modes of  and  cannot be
absorbed when computing the correlator .
Hence,  vanishes order by order for
each sector of degree  maps.  Finally, since our vanishing result
follows exactly as the residue theorem in Section 2, we naturally interpret
it as a residue theorem for instanton contributions to .

Extension to the Linear Sigma Model 

Just as in the finite-dimensional case, the argument for the
vanishing of the instanton contributions to  in the half-linear
model relies only upon the right-moving world-sheet
supersymmetries and suitable compactness.  These ingredients are
also present in the  linear sigma models themselves, so we
should also be able to give a similar, direct argument for the
vanishing of instanton contributions to  in these models.  The
reason for doing so is that the linear sigma model version of the
argument applies to a somewhat different class of models -
bundles constructed in a simple way from polynomials, but which do
not necessarily extend over .

We now present just such an argument.  Although the gist of the
vanishing argument for the linear sigma model is exactly the same
as for the half-linear model, we must present the details of the
argument in a slightly different way, since the specifics of the
linear model and the half-linear model are very different.
Nonetheless, the fact that the general argument does extend from
the half-linear to the linear model, despite the obvious
differences between these world-sheet theories, indicates that
this argument is robust.

As in the previous section, we once more focus on the case that
 is a quintic hypersurface in .  However, we now
assume that the bundle  on  is a deformation of the
holomorphic tangent bundle , which corresponds in the linear
sigma model to a deformation away from the locus of theories with
 world-sheet supersymmetry.  Since neither  nor 
pulls back (in any obvious way) from any bundle on , the
compactifications cannot necessarily be described by the
half-linear model.

Background We must recall a few facts about the  linear sigma model which
describes heterotic compactification on  with gauge bundle .
Useful background can be found in , , and .
We will be rather brief in our description of the linear sigma model,
both because this material is well-known and also because the
vanishing argument which we present does not rely on many details of
the model.

We first recall the field contentWe ignore the decoupled current
algebra degrees of freedom which represent the unbroken space-time
gauge group.  for this model.  On the  locus itself, the linear
sigma model which describes a quintic  in  is a
two-dimensional  gauge theory with five chiral superfields
, , of charge  and one chiral superfield  of
charge .

Once this model is deformed away from the  locus, the 
gauge multiplet decomposes into a  gauge multiplet and a
neutral  chiral multiplet.  Similarly, each  chiral
multiplet decomposes into a  chiral multiplet and a 
Fermi multiplet.  We denote again by  and  the corresponding
 chiral superfields, with components  and
, and by  and  the associated Fermi
superfields, with components  and .

The action of the  model contains many interactions, but the
only interactions relevant to our vanishing argument arise from the
 superpotential.  Recall that these interactions can be written
as integrals over half of  superspace, in the form
 S_J = 1 2   
_d ^+  ( ^i_- J_i + ^0_- J_0 ) +
h.c.  
In general,  and  are holomorphic functions of the chiral
fields  and .  More specifically,  and  take the
form

J_i &= P  ( F  S^i   + F_i ),
i=1,,5,J_0 &= F ,  
where  is a quintic polynomial in the  which
determines  as a hypersurface in , and the  are quartic
polynomials in the  that are assumed to satisfy 
and which determine  as a deformation of .

In terms of the component fields, the  superpotential 
leads to a bosonic potential ,
 U = _i=0 ^5  J_i^2 , 
and Yukawa interactions of the form
 _-^i _+^j  J_i  S^j  
+ _-^i _+^0  J_i  P  
+ h.c.  

The superpotential  also preserves a right-moving 
-symmetry, under which the lowest components of  and
 carry charge , and the lowest components of 
and  are neutral.

The vanishing theorem The first step in our vanishing argument is to twist the 
linear sigma model so that the supersymmetry generator usually denoted
 becomes a scalar, exactly as described in .
Under this twisting, the world-sheet spin of each field is shifted
by , where  is the -symmetry
generator and  is the gauge-symmetry generator.  Since the gauge current
corresponding to  is of the form , the
fact that  appears in the twist is irrelevant and is
merely for convenience, so that upon twisting all fields have integral
or half-integral world-sheet spins.

Upon twisting the model, the spins of the bosons  are unaffected,
but the boson  now has spin  and transforms as a section of
 on .  Here  is the canonical
bundle on  as earlier, and  is the line-bundle
on  associated to a degree  instanton configuration in the
gauge field.  Also, just as in the half-twisted model, the fermions
 and , for , now have spins
 and  and transform as sections of  and
.  Finally, the left-moving fermions  and
 are unaffected by the twisting and transform as
sections of  and .

To proceed with the argument, we must compute the linear sigma model
correlator analogous to  in the half-linear
model.  As explained in , the linear sigma model representative
of the vertex operator  describing deformations of the
Kahler class of  (hence also ) is , the left-moving
gaugino.  This fact can be motivated by observing that, since the
Kahler class of  is represented in the linear model by a
Fayet-Iliopolous -term, the linear sigma model representative for
 must come from the  gauge multiplet.  The supersymmetry and
-symmetry then determine this representative to be .
So we must compute the instanton contributions to
 in the linear sigma model.

As in the half-linear model, the twisted linear model is formally
invariant under deformations of , ,
so we consider taking .  At first glance, one
might worry that this deformation would be singular in the linear
model, since at least in the untwisted theory, the boson  has an
unbounded zero-mode which only receives a mass from the potential term
 in .  However, because  has spin  in the twisted
theory, this dangerous zero-mode is not present.  This observation was also
central to the vanishing argument of , so we certainly expect
it to play a role in our argument as well.  Thus, we can compute
 in the theory with
, provided we perform the twist.

In the half-linear model, once we performed the analogous
deformation by taking , we easily saw that the
correlator  vanished due to the presence of
excess fermion zero-modes which could no longer be absorbed through
world-sheet interactions.  We will now argue that the correlator
 vanishes when
 in the linear sigma model, again due to excess
fermion zero-modes.

The relevant zero-modes arise from the fermions  and
, for .  In the background of a degree 
instanton, each fermion  has 
zero-modes, and each fermion  has  zero-modes (and the
conjugate partners of these fermions have no zero-modes).

To show that these fermion zero-modes cannot be absorbed in computing
the correlator  with
, we first make a few general remarks about
the computation of 
even when the  are not assumed to vanish.  First,
since all kinetic terms in the linear model are
-trivial, we can by a field rescaling assume that the
couplings appearing in  and  are arbitrarily
small.  Hence we can compute 
 perturbatively in  and .

As a special case of our vanishing result, we now observe that
 trivially vanishes
when .  In this case, the model with no
superpotential describes, instead of , the total space of the
line-bundle  over .  As such, the model possesses
a classical global symmetry which rotates the fiber of this space
leaving fixed the base.  Under this symmetry, the superfields 
and , for , transform with charge  while
all other fields are uncharged.  In particular, the gaugino
 is uncharged, which distinguishes this global symmetry
from the -symmetry.

The fermion zero-modes we discussed above are relevant precisely
because they cause this classical symmetry to be anomalous.  Due to
these zero-modes, regardless of the degree , the path-integral
measure transforms with net charge  under this symmetry.  This anomaly
immediately implies that 
 vanishes in the theory with no superpotential.  For instance,
computing 
perturbatively at weak coupling, all interactions respect the
classical symmetry and so there is no way to absorb the fermion
zero-modes by pulling down fermion interaction terms from the action.
This fact is why the detailed structure of the linear model is largely
irrelevant for our argument.

We now consider the general case that  and  are
non-zero.  Since the superpotential breaks the classical symmetry we
used above, the fermion Yukawa terms involving  and
 in  are candidates to soak up the zero-modes of
 and  above.  However, whatever interaction
terms we bring down from the action to soak up the fermion zero-modes,
the anomaly implies that these terms must carry net charge  to
cancel the charge of the measure.  We now observe from  that the
interactions involving  all carry charge  and those involving
 carry charge .

Thus, when  vanishes, the zero-modes of the fermions 
 and  cannot be absorbed, since perturbation 
theory in the  can only bring down interactions of positive charge.  
This observation merely reflects the fact that the twisted fermions 
, which give rise to the anomaly, appear in the Yukawa 
couplings involving , not , in .  Thus 
 vanishes in an arbitrary 
degree  instanton background, and instantons in the linear sigma model do 
not contribute to the space-time superpotential.

Of course, when  is non-zero, the linear model sums over 
individual instantons in , and the contribution of each instanton should 
generically be non-zero.  Our argument is consistent with this fact, 
since insertions of the Yukawa couplings involving both  and 
 can carry the proper charge to absorb the zero-modes.

This vanishing argument is at its heart very similar to the vanishing
argument of  that we reviewed in the Introduction.  A key fact
there is that  transforms as a section of a
line-bundle of strictly negative curvature on the moduli space of
the low-energy effective theory.  Now in the context of the present
argument, the complex coefficients which define the quintic polynomial 
 and the quartic polynomials , and thus appear as couplings in the 
, can be considered as projective coordinates on the moduli space 
of complex structures of  and .  

Our perturbative argument above can be rephrased as a selection rule for the 
dependence of the correlator  
on these coefficients.  This selection rule follows from formally assigning 
the complex coefficients appearing in  and  charge  under the 
anomalous symmetry, so that formally the  are uncharged.  The anomaly 
implies that the correlator , 
as a function of these coefficients, transforms homogeneously with charge 
.  As a result, the selection rule implies that 
 (and hence ) must 
transform as a section of a line-bundle of strictly negative curvature over 
the complex structure moduli space which these 
coefficients parametrize.  In this language, our vanishing theorem follows 
simply because, when  vanishes, a perturbative calculation of 
 in terms of the 
 can only produce a polynomial in the complex coefficients, which 
has negative charge under the anomalous symmetry and does not have the 
required pole on the complex structure moduli space.  

Families of Membrane Instantons 

The vanishing result which we derived for world-sheet instanton
contributions to the superpotential is a manifestation of the rigidity
inherent in holomorphic objects.  As an interesting contrast to this
result, we now consider how M-theory membranes which wrap a continuous
family of supersymmetric three-cycles in a manifold  of  holonomy
contribute to the superpotential.  The approach which we take here is
very similar to our discussion of -brane contributions to the
superpotential at the end of Section 2.  We note that the
superpotential contribution from an isolated membrane in  has
already been thoroughly discussed in .

Just as in the case of a -brane which wraps a holomorphic curve,
the worldvolume theory on a membrane which wraps a supersymmetric
three-cycle on  is naturally twisted.  Unlike the case of the
-brane though, in the case of a supersymmetric membrane, the
sector of the worldvolume theory describing fluctuations in  is
topological, as opposed to holomorphic, in character.  This fact could
hardly be otherwise, since  is not a complex manifold, but it
represents a key distinction between -brane and membrane instantons.

Thus, if  represents a continuous family of supersymmetric
membrane configurations within the space  of all membrane
configurations in , then the contribution to the superpotential
from the family  only depends upon topological data
associated to .  Our main result here is to show that the
contribution of the family  to the superpotential is
proportional to the Euler character  of .

Our analysis ignores singularities.  We suspect that it remain
valid even if some of the membrane instantons parametrized by
 are singular, as long as  itself is smooth.  A simple
example in which this is the case is that  is a -fibered
 manifold, in which case  is a K3 surface, of Euler
character 24.

The membrane worldvolume theory Just as in the Introduction, the most elegant way to determine the
superpotential contribution from a membrane instanton (or a family of
such instantons) is to compute the partition function of the membrane
worldvolume theory.  The structure of this theory is largely
determined by supersymmetry.  More specifically, it is determined by
the requirement that only supersymmetric membrane configurations
contribute to the partition function.  So we begin by recalling a few
facts about supersymmetric three-cycles in .

To describe which three-cycles in  are supersymmetric, we first
recall that , as a manifold of  holonomy, possesses a
canonical, covariantly constant three-form .  Then, as
emphasized generally in , the supersymmetric three-cycles are
those which are calibrated by  and hence are of minimal volume
within each homology class.  That is, if  is a supersymmetric
three-cycle, then the calibration condition states that on ,
 _= vol _, 
where  is the volume form
associated to the metric on .

Just as for supersymmetric -brane configurations, the
supersymmetric membrane configurations in  can be characterized as
the critical points of a superpotential  on .   is
defined in a manner precisely analogous to the superpotential for
-brane configurations in a Calabi-Yau threefold.  Thus, we define
 for any three-cycle  by
 () - (_0) = 1 12 
_B   . 
Here  is the four-form on  dual to ,  is a
fixed representative in the homology class of , and  is a
four-cycle bounding .  Again,  is
defined only up to an additive constant, depending on the choices of
 and .

But again, the fact that  is only defined up to an additive
constant does not concern us, as this constant does not affect the location of
the critical points, for which .  In terms of local
coordinates , , on ,
 () = 1 3  _  _ijkl  
x^i  d x^j  d x^k  d x^l . 
Thus,  when 
 on .  As observed in , this condition is
equivalent to the condition  that  be calibrated by
.  So the critical points of  correspond to supersymmetric
three-cycles in .

Thus,  is a one-form on the space  of arbitrary membrane
configurations in  which vanishes precisely over the supersymmetric
configurations.  So in this sense,  plays much the same role
as the section  we introduced in Section 2, and we expect the
action of the worldvolume theory on a supersymmetric membrane to be
expressed in terms of , much as the action  is expressed
in terms of .

Unlike , though,  is not holomorphic, and the
space  of membrane configurations is not even complex, even
on-shell. As a result, the supersymmetry algebra on the membrane
worldvolume takes a form slightly different from the supersymmetry
 considered in Section 2.

We focus on the sector of the worldvolume theory which describes
fluctuations of the membrane in .  As explicitly demonstrated in
, this sector is automatically twisted when the membrane wraps a
supersymmetric cycle .  Normal fluctuations of the membrane in  are
described on the worldvolume by four real bosons ,
, taking values in the (real) normal bundle 
of  in .  Associated to these four bosons are four fermions
 also taking values in  and transforming as
right-moving Weyl fermions in , as indicated by the 
 index.

The worldvolume theory on the supersymmetric membrane then possesses two
scalar supercharges .  The action of these
supercharges on the worldvolume fields can be neatly summarized by
introducing  superfields , where
 Y^i = y^i + ^  ^i_ 
+ _  ^ 
^  F^i. 
In defining the superfield , we have introduced an auxiliary
boson  taking values in .  Even though the membrane worldvolume is
three-dimensional, the appropriate superspace is only the 
superspace because, just as for the -brane, we regard the bosonic
fields  as being an infinite set of tangential coordinates to the
membrane configuration space  at the point corresponding to a
given supersymmetric membrane configuration.

In the  superspace, the action of the supercharges 
 is exceedingly simple.  Namely, the supercharges
 act as the fermionic derivatives
, corresponding to the component transformations
 _  y^i = ^i_ ,_  ^i_  = _  F^i,_  F^i = 0. 
We note that  
trivially vanishes.

The supersymmetry algebra, along with the requirement that the
membrane partition function localize on configurations for which
, determines the form of the worldvolume action on a
supersymmetric membrane.  As for the -brane, this action is really
the leading order action for fluctuations around a supersymmetric
configuration - but given the topological nature of the membrane
worldvolume theory, the leading order action certainly suffices to
determine the partition function.

When written in terms of the  superspace, the membrane
worldvolume action thus appears as

S &= _ d^2  ( g_ij (Y) 
^  _  Y^i
_  Y^j + (Y) )&= _ ( g^ij    y^i     y^j   + 2 D^2   Dy^i
Dy^j   (^i ^j) + R_ikjl  (^i ^j) (^k
^l) ).  
In this expression,  is the metric on ,  is the 
curvature, and the canonical three-form  appears simply to 
represent the volume-form on the supersymmetric three-cycle .  We 
also note from  that  is actually a 
three-form on , and so we have implicitly used the induced 
metric to dualize  to a scalar above.  Finally, 
we have used the shorthand  to indicate the  singlet 
combination 
, and in passing to the second line of  we 
integrated out the auxiliary bosons .

The membrane worldvolume action  has a very familiar look.
Formally, we can interpret this action as the reduction to 
dimensions of the standard supersymmetric quantum mechanics  on the
membrane configuration space , with Morse function .  As is well
known, the partition function of supersymmetric quantum mechanics on a
finite-dimensional Riemannian manifold  computes the Euler class
 of .  Thus, our claim that the membrane partition
function is proportional to the Euler class  of the family
 follows almost immediately now, though we still discuss
this result in detail below.

We can also compare the form of the membrane worldvolume theory to the
form of the -brane worldvolume theory (or more generally to the
holomorphic models we considered in Section 2).  Upon integrating out
the auxiliary bosons , the supersymmetries on the membrane
worldvolume act as

_   y^i &= ^i_  ,_   ^i_  &= - ^i_jk 
^j_  ^k_  + _  g^ij    y^j  .  
In the above,  is the usual torsion-free affine
connection associated to the metric  on ; this connection
must appear so that the fermions  transform
covariantly under reparametrizations of the .  Comparing the
supersymmetries  and action  of the membrane worldvolume
theory to the general supersymmetry  and action  from
Section 2, we see that the membrane worldvolume theory is just a real,
 version of the holomorphic models relevant for world-sheet
instantons which we considered earlier.  Clearly the one-form
 on  plays exactly the same role as the holomorphic
section  on the complex manifold , and from  we see that
at weak coupling the membrane partition function localizes on the
zeroes of .  We also note that the  supersymmetry
present in the membrane worldvolume theory determines a canonical
choice for the measure of the membrane partition function, as all
bosons are paired by supersymmetry with all fermions in .  So there
is no analogue here of the section  which was necessary to define
a measure for the holomorphic models.

The membrane partition function Our simple description of the membrane worldvolume theory allows us to
easily evaluate the membrane partition function, even in the
degenerate case that the membranes wrap a continuous family of
supersymmetric three-cycles in .

We first observe that, because 
, the worldvolume action  is evidently
-trivial. As a result, the membrane
partition function  is clearly topological in character.  In
particular,  is unchanged if we multiply 
, so that taking  to be large we can evaluate  at weak
coupling.  Furthermore,  is unchanged under deformations of the
metric  and even the one-form .  This latter
observation is in clear contrast to the holomorphic models in Section
2, which were unchanged under deformations of  but
certainly depended upon .

Thus, we suppose that  contains a continuous family of supersymmetric
three-cycles.  Then the vanishing locus of  on 
contains a component  of positive dimension representing this
continuous family.  To evaluate  for membranes which wrap
three-cycles in , we simply make a generic deformation of 
, which is small in the sense that  still grows
sufficiently fast away from  so that  is defined.  Under such
a deformation, we lift the degeneracy of , which now has
a finite set of isolated zeroes on .

At weak coupling, we can directly evaluate the contribution to  from
each non-degenerate zero of  as a one-loop integral
over the fluctuating bosons and fermions.  Generally speaking, if 
is such a zero, then the contribution to  from  takes the form
 Z_P = Z() Z()_P , 
where  represents the one-loop integral over modes normal to
, and  represents the one-loop integral over the
finite number of modes tangent to  at .  Because of the topological
invariance of , the factor  in  does not depend on
, so that
 Z = Z() _P Z()_P. 

Clearly the second factor in  captures the interesting
dependence of the superpotential on .  In the Gaussian
approximation, we can express the contribution  from each
point  as
 Z()_P = _(_i _j
)(P)   _(_i _j
)(P)    = 1 , 
where the subscript  indicates that the determinants are only
evaluated over the modes tangent to .  Geometrically, we
recognize the expression  as the index of the vector field
 (projected onto ) at the point , where it
vanishes.  Thus,
 _P Z()_P = (), 
and  is proportional to the Euler character  of  as
claimed.  We could also derive this result, without explicitly
deforming  to lift its degeneracy, by using
the four-fermion interaction in  to absorb the fermion
zero-modes tangent to , producing the Chern-Weil representation
of the Euler character.

Finally, we remark that the factor , studied in  for
the case of an isolated membrane instanton, is simply the formal
generalization of  from the phase of a determinant on the
tangential directions of  to the normal directions.  
can thus be expressed as the sign of the Dirac operator acting on
the membrane worldvolume spinors multiplied by a factor coming
from the -field. 

Acknowledgements  The work of C.B. is supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate
Fellowship and under NSF Grant PHY-9802484.  The work of E.W. is supported
in part by NSF Grant PHY-0070928.

Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

