


 
 
 
 L   
    
_  
^  
ln  
diag  
tr  
 1l    
 
 
 
 
 1 2    



             Inline comments hidden. 











Twisted Alice Loops as Monopoles 


Katherine M. Benson 
benson@physics.emory.edu 

Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study,
Putnam House, 10 Garden St,
Cambridge, MA  02138 
[Permanent Address: ]
Department of Physics,
Emory University,  400 Dowman Drive, Suite N202,Atlanta, GA 30322 
Tom Imbo imbo@uic.edu 
Department of Physics,
University of Illinois at Chicago,
845 W. Taylor St,  m/c 273,
Chicago, IL 60607-7059 



 

 
Symmetry breaking can produce "Alice" strings, which alter scattered
charges and carry monopole number and charge when twisted into loops.
We apply recent topological results, fixing Alice strings' stability
and prescribing their twisting into loops with monopole charge, to
several models.  We show that Alice strings of condensed matter
systems (nematic liquid crystals, He-A, and related systems of
non-chiral Bose condensates and amorphous chiral superconductors) are
topological, and carry fundamental monopole charge when twisted into
loops. Other models yield Alice loops that carry only deposited, and not
fundamental, charge.












Introduction 




Among the defects created in spontaneous symmetry breakdown are Alice
strings. Like monopoles
, Alice strings obstruct the global extension of
unbroken symmetries, making them multivalued when parallel transported
around the string. This algebraic obstruction causes nonconservation
of associated charges, when Aharonov-Bohm scattered around the string;
it also induces monopoles, as twisted loops of Alice string.

For gauged theories, these Alice features arise as follows. Gauge flux
on the string's core generates the condensate winding, and acts on
asymptotic particles, through the Wilson line . This
action fixes Aharonov-Bohm scattering around the string, to one
changing both charge and monopole number. Loops of string leave charge
and monopole number well-defined asymptotically, and thus support
nonlocalizable deposited charge ("Cheshire charge") and deposited
monopole number. Alice loops carry this
deposited monopole number by twisting.
Condensed matter Alice strings are global, rather than gauged,
defects. No gauge flux fixes their Aharonov-Bohm scattering,
guaranteeing alteration of charge and monopole number upon string
traversal. However, their Aharonov-Bohm scattering was shown in
 to generically induce the Alice behaviors of their
gauged counterparts: they alter charge and monopole number on string
traversal, with twisted loops supporting both Cheshire charge and
deposited monopole number.

The algebraic condition for Alice behavior is noncommutation of a
string's untraced Wilson loop, , with some unbroken symmetry
generator .  In we established a topological
criterion for Alice behavior, stating when Alice strings must 
form, and when their Alice features may be deformed away. A
topological string, whose untraced Wilson loop  induces Alice
behavior - by not commuting with some  - has homotopy
; that is, it has flux  in a disconnected component
of the unbroken symmetry group .  Similarly, for  and  Lie
groups, monopoles have homotopy , describing loops
 of different winding in . Our criterion labels strings
with flux  topologically Alice if they alter the topological
charge of monopoles circumnavigating them:

 This is a topological criterion,  corresponding to a nontrivial action of  on , where 
 alters the topological winding of loop
: h 
() = h_o h() h_o^-1      h() 
.Using this criterion we constructed a prescription for twisting
Alice strings into loops carrying monopole charge. We showed that the
twisted Wilson line
U(, ) = h^-1 () U() h()
h_o^-1  ,with  and  as in our criterion above,
generates a single-valued twisted Alice loop.  
interpolates between the point  at  and the
loop  at . The
twisted Alice loop thus carries a nontrivial monopole charge 
 if and only if the Alice string
obeys our topological criterion. This monopole charge corresponds to
that deposited on the Alice loop in the monopole circumnavigation

.
Two points are key. First, our topological arguments above only indicate
that deposited  monopole charge can be carried by a twisted Alice
loop. Monopole charge is typically not deposited in single
fundamental units, leaving open the question of whether twisted
Alice loops can carry fundamental  monopole charge. Second, the
function  in our construction of twisted Wilson line
 need not be the loop in  representing a fundamental
monopole: it can be any function in  that renders 
singlevalued in the angle .

We exploit both points here, in examining the monopole charge carried
by model twisted Alice loops. We find that whether a twisted Alice
loop can support fundamental monopole charge depends closely on the
symmetry-breaking pattern.  Specifically, it depends on the initial
symmetry group , through the identification of loops in  with
monopoles via the exact sequence for ; and it depends on
algebraic commutations in the model, which may allow an accidental
choice of twisted Wilson line , which unwinds in
 the fundamental monopole's associated loop in .


We explore these possibilities in an intuition-building gallery of
Alice string models.  These include the original Alice string of
Schwarz, coinciding with the Alice string of liquid crystals and of
non-chiral Bose condensates; the Alice string
of He-A, arising anew for unconventional
spin-triplet superconductors; a nontopological Alice
string introduced in; and a new topological Alice
string which forms in the symmetry breakdown 
. For the Schwarz and He-A Alice strings, we show that
twisted Alice loops can support fundamental monopole charge, even
though monopole charge is deposited on string loops in even
increments.  Thus, for the Alice strings of interest to condensed
matter, even the most fundamental singular point defect, or monopole,
can take the form of a twisted Alice loop. In contrast, in the 
 model, twisted Alice loops support only the even
deposited monopole charge, and cannot form fundamental monopoles.




The Schwarz, or Nematic,  Alice String 

We start with the simplest example, the canonical Schwarz Alice
string, whose symmetry-breaking pattern coincides with
Alice strings in nematic liquid crystals and in non-chiral Bose
condensates.
Here  is , with 
Higgs  transforming in the adjoint representation. 
When  develops the vev


 breaks to the residual symmetry , containing  z-rotations  and the discrete symmetry element

Here  and  so we have topological strings and monopoles. The canonical Alice string has Wilson line

with . This string is Alice, as  fails to commute
with the unbroken symmetry generator ; in fact, on parallel
transport around the string,
T_z U (2)   T_z   U^-1  (2) = -T_z   .
This canonical Alice string meets our topological criterion, of changing
topological monopole charge upon circumnavigation. By the exact
sequence for , topological monopoles are associated with
nontrivial loops in  which can be unwound in . Since only
even winding loops in  can be unwound in , the
fundamental monopole in this canonical Alice model has a loop in
 of winding 2.

In applying our topological criterion, we choose  as our
representative of the string, a nontrivial element of
, and  as our representative of
the fundamental Alice monopole, a winding 2 element of . This gives

from equation (). Note that  has  winding -2, topologically distinct from  of  winding 2. Thus 

 and our topological criterion is fulfilled.

We now construct a monopole as a twisted Alice loop. From Eq. (), the twisted Wilson line 

 generates an Alice loop with single-valued condensate. (We take
 because we need only for  to be single-valued in
, and , the winding 1 loop in , first
fulfills that requirement.)   interpolates between
 at  and  at 
. It is thus the fundamental antimonopole in the model. Note that
the inverse twisted Alice loop, with twisted Wilson line 
, generates the fundamental monopole.

The  Alice String of He-A 

A more complicated global symmetry-breaking pattern describes the
Alice string expected in He-A, and more recently
predicted in amorphous chiral superconductors with p-wave pairing,
such as SrRuO.
Here  is , describing spatial
rotations, spin rotations, and a  phase symmetry associated with
number conservation of helium atoms. (The U(1) symmetry is
approximate, as is independence of spin and orbital rotations due to
minimal spin-orbit coupling, but both describe He-A well.)  The
matrix order parameter  transforms under symmetry transformations
as

where  and  are spin and orbital rotations, respectively.

The order parameter develops the form
 where
 and  are perpendicular, determining 
 the direction of the
condensate's angular momentum vector. This breaks  to the residual symmetry

consisting of spin rotations about the  axis; spatial
rotations about the  axis when compensated by a matching
 phase rotation, and the discrete  transformation , with



Identifying the defect topology requires care in this setting, as the
exact sequences relating  and , the monopole
and string homotopy groups, to  and  are highly
nontrivial.  Note that , corresponding to the loops
, which can be unwound in . (Loops of
the other  factor cannot be unwound in , as they contain
unshrinkable  loops.) , which describes
strings of two different origins. First, the Alice strings, called
half-quantum vortices, have Wilson lines ending in a disconnected
component of , getting topological stability from
. Second, a  winding one vortex, nontrivial in
 in , induces as its image a  winding one vortex in
, with topological stability inherited from . These
two classes of vortices are not independent: instead winding twice
about a half-quantum vortex is equivalent to once around a winding
one vortex, and the full string homotopy is , or
windings , and  modulo 2, with Alice strings corresponding to
windings .

The Volovik-Mineev Alice string, of winding , has order
parameter  with  in spin space, and
 in ordinary
space. This is acted on by Wilson line

to give, asymptotically in , 
 
single-valued in . Note that   lies in the same homotopy class as . This string is Alice, making 
unbroken symmetry generator  double-valued
Physically, this means that a particle flips its spin, and hence its magnetization, on circumnavigating the Alice string.

This long-studied Alice string meets our topological criterion, of changing
topological monopole charge upon circumnavigation. By the exact
sequence for , topological monopoles are associated with
nontrivial loops in  which can be unwound in . As in the nematic case,  only
even winding loops in  can be unwound in . Thus the
fundamental monopole in He-A corresponds to  a loop in
 of winding 2.

In applying our topological criterion, we choose  as our
representative of the string, a nontrivial element of
, and  as our representative of
the fundamental monopole, a winding 2 element of . This gives

since . Note that  has  winding -2, topologically distinct from  of  with winding 2. Thus 

, meeting our topological criterion.

As in the nematic case, we construct a monopole as a twisted Alice loop. From Eq. (), the twisted Wilson line 


generates an Alice loop with single-valued condensate. (Again 
 appears,  the winding 1 loop in , as our minimal single-valued choice in  constructing  .)   interpolates between
 at  and  at 
. It is thus the fundamental antimonopole in the model, which
contains monopoles and antimonopoles of even winding in 
only. Note that the inverse twisted Alice loop, with twisted Wilson
line , again generates the fundamental monopole.


A Nontopological Alice string 

A nontopological Alice string arises when a Higgs , transforming
in the adjoint representation under , acquires the vev 
. As discussed in, this
condensate leaves unbroken an  subgroup of 
and a discrete  transformation , so
.  Here  and 
, so topological strings and monopoles form, with
monopoles and antimonopoles topologically identified.  As noted in
, strings in this model can have algebraic Alice
behavior, for 
, which makes generators  and  of
rotations in the - and -planes double-valued. Yet that Alice
behavior fails our topological criterion.  Taking as our nontrivial
monopole loop , with monopole charge
(1,0), we find 
, since . Thus the
(1,0) monopole transforms into its antimonopole on traversing the
string. However,  as monopoles and antimonopoles are identified,
that transformation is nontopological. This string's Alice behavior is
thus nontopological; it can be deformed away by deforming  to the
topologically equivalent value , with no algebraic Alice behavior.

We might still hope to construct a (1,0) monopole as a twisted string
loop, taking for our string the algebraic, but nontopological Alice
string , with
algebraic Alice flux  as above. From
Eq. (),the twisted Wilson line


generates an Alice loop with single-valued condensate.  
 interpolates between  at  and 
 at . This is a loop in  of winding
(2,0); however, winding (2,0) loops are deformable to the identity in , so
this twisted nontopological Alice loop fails to carry topological
monopole charge.

Recall that, in building singlevalued twisted Alice loops, we required
 to be singlevalued in ; we thus
identified  as a loop in . Strictly, we do not need
 to be a loop; all we need is
h^-1 (2) U() h(2) = U()  .We might still hope to build the  fundamental (1,0) monopole as a twisted Alice loop, exploiting this freedom in . Were the twisted loop


single-valued, it would carry fundamental (-1,0) monopole charge, as it  interpolates between
 at  and the nontrivial (-1,0) antimonopole  at 
. However, this twisted loop candidate is not single-valued; it obeys instead
 We 
thus cannot build a fundamental (1,0) monopole as a twisted Alice loop in
this model, where Alice behavior is nontopological and monopole
charge is .

This possibility to construct  single-valued in
, without  forcing  to be a loop, always
merits investigating. Indeed, in, one of us
constructed what is essentially the fundamental monopole in this
model, by exploiting exactly such an accidental algebraic
singlevaluedness. That construction (most clearly in section IIIA of
, taking  as the spherical coordinates
 at spatial infinity),is quite similar to the
twisting constructions here. However, it describes a fundamentally
point-like defect, and cannot be interpreted as a twisted loop. 

A Topological Alice Loop Carrying only Deposited Monopole Charge  

We consider a slightly modified canonical Alice string. Take  to be
, with Higgs  transforming according to 
 (giving fermions in this model a Majorana mass).
When  develops the vev


 breaks to the residual symmetry , 
identical to that of the canonical Schwarz Alice string.
Again we have  and ,
with topological strings and monopoles. We have the same Alice string
as in the canonical case, making the  generator 
double-valued. This Alice behavior is again topological, as our topological
criterion, that  acts nontrivially on , depends
only on the unbroken symmetry group .

Where we deviate from the canonical Alice string model is in the
identification of twisted Alice loops as monopoles. Here, by the exact
sequence for , topological monopoles are associated with
nontrivial loops in  which can be unwound in , here
. All  nontrivial loops in  can be unwound in
; thus the fundamental monopole in this model  has a loop
in  of winding 1.

We now construct a monopole as a twisted Alice loop. We take
, as in the canonical Alice case, and
, a loop of winding 1. From
Eq. (), the twisted Wilson line

 generates a twisted Alice loop with single-valued condensate.
 interpolates between  at 
and  at . This twisted Alice loop
carries monopole charge of , which while nontrivial is not 
the fundamental antimonopole in this model. (Similarly, the inverse
twisted Alice loop, with Wilson line ,
carries monopole charge +2).

Again, we might still hope to build a fundamental monopole as a
twisted Alice loop, by allowing  above to be not a loop,
but a curve obeying Eq. ()
This looser
constraint still guarantees singlevaluedness in  of 
.  Indeed, were the twisted loop

 single-valued in , with  as above,
it would carry fundamental antimonopole charge. This is because it
interpolates between  at  and the winding 
loop  at . However, this twisted loop
candidate is not single-valued in ; it obeys instead

 We thus cannot build a fundamental monopole as a twisted Alice loop
in this model. Instead twisted Alice loops carry only the monopole
charge which topological arguments ensure they must carry: because
monopoles scatter into antimonopoles on transiting Alice loops, Alice
loops must  support deposited monopole charge, which arises in
units of 2. Our twisting construction creates twisted Alice loops
supporting exactly that deposited charge.


 
Early stages of this work were supported by NSF grant PHY-9631182 and
by the University Research Committee of Emory University. 

 9999 
16pt


 A. S. Schwarz, 
Nucl. Phys.  B208  (1982) 141;
A. Balachandran, F. Lizzi, V. Rodgers, 
Phys. Rev. Lett.  52 
(1984) 1818.


 M. Alford, K. Benson, S. Coleman, J. March-Russell
and F. Wilczek,   
Phys. Rev. Lett.   64  (1990) 1632; 
 Nucl. Phys.  B349  (1991) 414.

 J. Preskill and L. Krauss, 
Nucl.
Phys.  B341  (1990) 50; M. Bucher, H. K. Lo, and J. Preskill,
Nucl. Phys.  B386  (1992) 3.


 P. Nelson and S. Coleman, 
Nucl. Phys.  B237  (1984) 1.

  M. Bucher, H. K. Lo, and J. Preskill,
Nucl. Phys.  B386  (1992) 3.


K. Benson and T. Imbo, "A Topological Criterion for Alice Strings," submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.  .


P. McGraw, 
Phys. Rev.  D50  (1994) 952;
 J. March-Russell and F. Wilczek,  Phys. Rev. Lett.   68  (1992) 2567; A. Davis and A. Martin, Nucl. Phys.  B419  (1994) 341.


K. Benson,

Phys. Rev. D 64 , 085002 (2001)
[arXiv:hep-th/0103238].




U. Leonhardt and G. E. Volovik,

JETP Lett.  72 , 46 (2000)
[arXiv:cond-mat/0003428].


G. Volovik and V. Mineev, JETP Lett. 
24 , 561 (1976).


H. Kee, Y. Kim, and K. Maki,

Phys. Rev. B 62, R9275 (2000)
[arXiv:cond-mat/0005510];
T. M. Rive and M. Sigrist, J. Phys. Cond. Matter, 7, L643 (1995);
M. Sigrist et al, Physica C 317-318, 134 (1999). 


G. Volovik,
The Universe in a Helium Droplet  Oxford University Press (2003) 
[http://ice.hut.fi/Volovik/book.pdf].

 K. Benson, A. Manohar, and M. Saadi,  Phys. Rev. Lett.   74  (1995)
 1932 [arXiv:hep-th/9409042]; K. Benson and M. Saadi,
  Phys.
 Rev.  D51  (1995) 3096 [arXiv: hep-th/9409109].







