


Th Theorem 
lem Lemma 
Lem Lemma 
Prop Proposition 
Cor Corollary 

Ex Example 
Def Definition 
Rem Remark 

 


  

_D   
  
O  
 C   
 C   
 C  [z] 
Z  
  
M_ 
L  
 
 
K  
R  
M  
T  

  
ITEP-TH-22/03

Riemann bilinear form and Poisson structure 
in Hitchin-type systems. 
D. Talalaev (E-mail:
talalaev@gate.itep.ru)   
Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics
(ITEP, 25 B. Cheremushkinskaya, Moscow, 117259, Russia.)  
Abstract.  In this paper we reinterpret the Poisson
structure of the Hitchin-type system in cohomological terms.
The principal ingredient of a new interpretation in the case of the Beauville system
is the meromorphic cohomology
of the spectral curve, and the main result is the identification of the
Riemann bilinear form and the symplectic structure of the model.
Eventual perspectives of this approach lie in the quantization domain.


Introduction 
For the moment there are too many different examples of integrable systems.
The methods of resolution whenever exist bear no resemblance. However the
so-called Hitchin-type description fits into such systems as the Toda
chain, the Neumann system, all versions of the spin Calogero-Moser system
,
the rational and
elliptic Gaudin model with spin.
This observation encourage us to develop this language and use this
type of coordinates in the quantization problem due to its relative generality.

This paper is organized as follows. In the first section we describe two
types of considered models - the Hitchin system and the dynamical system
on the space of rational matrices. We recall the construction of
separated variables and "action-angle" variables. In this section we
represent the Calogero-Moser system in terms of rational matrices. The
second section is devoted to the symplectic structure of the Hichin system. We
construct such a factorization of the tangent space to the phase space of
the system which identify the symplectic form with the Serre pairing on the
spectral curve between  and  In the third section
we give the analogous but more explicit factorization of the tangent space
to the phase space of the integrable system on the space of rational
matrices. In this case we also relate the tangent space with the
meromorphic cohomology group of the spectral curve and show that the
symplectic structure coincides with the Riemann bilinear form.
The conclusion contains some open
questions in the problem of quantization.
Acknowledgments.  The author is grateful to O. Babelon and F. Smirnov
for fruitful discussions along the work on this paper; to I. Krichever for
numerous advises, especially for the example of the lagrangian connection; to
A. Chervov, A. Gorodentsev, A. Samohin and S. Loktev for useful remarks.
A part of this work was done during the author's staying at LPTHE
(Universite Paris 6).
This work was partly supported by RFBR grant 01-01-00546, RFBR grant for
support of young scientist 03-01-06236.

Model description 
Hitchin-type systems 
Originally the Hitchin system was defined in as an integrable
system on the
cotangent bundle of the moduli space of stable holomorphic bundles of fixed
rank  and degree  over the algebraic curve 
The Poisson structure is the canonical one on the cotangent bundle.
The space of function in involution is constructed
as follows: a cotangent vector at a point  of the moduli space
 is an element 
There is a well defined function 
 such that  The map


is called Hitchin map and realize the algebraic integrability, which means
that the fibers are abelian lagrangian varieties of half dimension.
The crucial role is played by the spectral curve that is defined as follows.
One can define the bundle morphism (non-linear) 
 by

where  is a local section of  and  is the
identical global section of  The spectral curve is the
preimage of the zero section in  It is an
algebraic curve  in the projectivization of the total space of 

The main problem in this description is the explicit parameterization of the
moduli space. There are several achievements in this direction. Firstly one
can parameterize holomorphic bundles by C ech cochains. A problematic
step is an infinite dimensional reduction to cohomologies.
Another approach works in some specific situations and
relates to the Narasimhan-Ramanan parameterization. The
Hecke-Turin coordinates provide another geometrical way to parameterize the
moduli space.

The first level generalization of the Hitchin construction occurs when the
base curve is singular.
This remarkable situation provides the
explicit parameterization of the moduli space
in purely linear-algebraic terms. By the other hand it is rather general:
such systems as the rational, trigonometric, and elliptic Calogero-Moser
models,the
rational and elliptic Gaudin systems, the Neumann system and the
Toda chain arise in the framework of the Hitchin description on singular curves.
This approach appeared in
 and was elaborated in.

The second level generalization crops up in the
context of the space of Higgs pairs. A Higgs pair consists of
a holomorphic bundle  on
 and a bundles homomorphism  where
 is some fixed line bundle on  not necessarily the canonical class. The
Poisson structure is less geometric in this case, it is given by the
Kostant-Kirillov
brackets on orbits of the loop group. We show that
both generalizations coincide in several examples and it is the subject of
future works to establish their general correspondence.

Rational matrices and separated variables 
In the following description of integrable
systems was proposed: let us consider a family  of
spectral curves  defined by the equation
 
where  are parameters and  are fixed polynomials on two variables.
An analog of the Hitchin fibration can be obtained in these terms: one
takes the space  which is the space of -tuples of points 
in  with coordinates  A condition that a curve 
 contains  points  determines this curve  where
 and 
Additionally,  points  gives us a divisor  of degree  on this
curve. Hence one has the following fibration






The total space is endowed with a family of Poisson structures
 One of the propositions of
 is that this construction provides an integrable system for all
choices of such Poisson brackets, i.e. that the quantities  are in
involution. In this case the problem of constructing "angle" variables
can be solved by the following
The quantities 
 are conjugated to 
 


Proof.  Indeed, the equation () at the point  imply
 and

 Introducing the notation

 one obtains equivalently
 where  is the identity matrix. Now we calculate
the Poisson bracket 

 due to uniqueness of an
inverse matrix.

Let us show that such kind of description in terms of separated
variables arises from a generalization of the Hitchin system - the
dynamical system on the space of Higgs pairs. We consider a specific case
of the so-called Beauville system. Let us
consider the rational curve  and the degree
 linear bundle   on it. The semistable bundles on  can be
represented in the form  where  is the trivial
holomorphic bundle of rank  A Higgs field is an element of 
 due to the fact that  is trivial. On the space of such
sections there is a family of Poisson structures given as follows: for
a divisor  of degree  there is a realization of the space of
holomorphic section  by rational matrices with poles
at  This can be done by taking a trivialization
of the bundle  over the affine part 
On the space of rational matrices with prescribed poles


there is a Poisson structure given by the
Kostant-Kirillov form on co-adjoint orbits of the loop group represented
by polar parts  The involutive subalgebra of functions is spanned
by coefficients of the characteristic polynomial. The casimirs
of co-adjoint orbits are among them.
There are too many integrals and that is why one fixes some of them to be central.
Different choices of a divisor and central elements imply different
integrable systems. Let us demonstrate it on examples.

  Consider a divisor  of degree  The
corresponding Higgs field is

with the condition  Let us choose central
elements to be   and fix its value 
These conditions mean that  and  belong to
the same orbit. In other
words there exists such  that 
Resolving the condition  one
obtains the traditional parameterization of the trigonometric Calogero-Moser
system (see for details).

One can easily see that the spectral
curve  of the model  which is constructed as a covering
of the rational curve  can be considered as a covering of a
singular curve with the double point. Indeed, the points of  over  and
 coincide, this implies that  is a function on  where
the singularities on  arise from the double point on 
The Higgs field in this case corresponds to an element of
 on the rational curve with the double point for some
holomorphic bundle  over it given by 

  Consider a divisor  of degree  The
corresponding Higgs field is

with the condition  Let us choose central
elements to be  and fix its values  It means
that the orbit of  contains an element of the
form  In other
words there exists such  that 
Resolving the condition   one
obtains the traditional parameterization of the rational Calogero-Moser
system (see for details).

By analogy with the trigonometric
case the spectral
curve  of the model, which is constructed as a covering
of the rational curve  can be projected to a covering of a
singular curve with the cusp singularity. The Higgs field in this case
can be realized as an element of
 on the rational curve with the cusp singularity for some
holomorphic bundle  over it given by . Coincidence of the
canonical  form on co-adjoint orbits and the form in
terms of separated variables was proved in.

Canonical symplectic form. Hitchin system 
Factorization 
We start with an identification between deformations of
the spectral curve and holomorphic differentials on it. For a general
algebraic curve this relationship can not be established,
one has -dimensional
space of deformations and only -dimensional space
of holomorphic differentials. The spectral curves of considered
systems are special; they are parameterized by a -dimensional
space. One has the Hitchin map

 where the right
hand side corresponds to the space of spectral curves  It is a linear space
and one can identify its tangent space  with itself.
One also has that the direct image of the structure sheaf  of the
spectral curve is
 
where we have denoted  and  and
 is the base curve. This expresses the fact that locally any function
on  is a polynomial of degree  on a fiber of the canonical class
with coefficients which are functions on the base curve 
This consideration provides the following isomorphisms

due to the fact that the spectral sequence 
converges on the first term for coverings of curves.
By virtue of Serre duality the second isomorphism is equivalent to the
following
 
The differential of the Hitchin map 
 has an explicit description occurred in the
context of the Whitham hierarchy in.
As it was mentioned in the introduction the spectral curve  lies in the
compactification  of the total space of the canonical class
of the base curve


One has the tautological section 
Its restriction to the spectral curve gives us a holomorphic differential
over  The infinitesimal form of the Hitchin map becomes more clear in
a local picture. Let  be an open set in  and  - a local
parameter on . The canonical class trivializes over  and the Higgs field
 can be represented as 
where  is a matrix valued function on  The spectral curve over 
is a set of pairs  which solve the characteristic equation
 The tautological section in these terms is  which is
a well defined holomorphic differential over the spectral curve. Now deforming
 one obtains a deformation  where by
 we denote a variation of eigenvalues of  Furthermore one has the
following
 Let  be a tangent vertical vector
deforming  then  under the
identification ()
 


Proof.  Let us choose such a covering of the base
curve  with two charts   that the intersection
 does not contain brunching points. We choose also a
local parameter  on  The canonical class  trivializes over
 and we can choose a parameter  along fibers. The representation
() means that  consists of functions  of
the type 

We will prove that 
where on both sides we use appropriate Serre pairings.


where  are
distinct preimages of  Using the fact that
 takes the eigenvalues of  over  one obtains


Let us note that the expression on the right hand side is indeed the pairing
between  and

Now we return to the Poisson description of the Hitchin system. Hamiltonian
flows correspond to the
dynamics of a line
bundle  over  constructed from the following exact sequence


where  is the branching divisor of  over 
The line bundle  varies over 

Hence the phase space can be fibered over  by  where over a
point  the fiber is 
A tangent vector to  is an element of   Let us combine
the natural imbedding of vectors tangent to fibers to the tangent space of 
at the point  and the differential of the Hitchin map
to the exact sequence of vector spaces:
 
 The exact sequence () respects the special concordance
between the canonical symplectic
form  on  and the Serre pairing

 Namely, for an element  and
 one has:

 


Proof.  We consider the same
covering as in the previous lemma. Let us call "vertical"
a tangent vector  which projects to 
on  by the differential of  
One can see that each element of  can be decomposed
into the sum of a vertical vector field and a hamiltonian vector field at a
point 

The statement is obvious when  is a value of a hamiltonian vector field.
It is equivalent to the fact that
the image  is
lagrangian. Indeed, there is a -dimensional space of hamiltonian vector
fields which span the tangent space to the Jacobian at each point.
Such fields are orthogonal because the hamiltonians are in involution.

Let  be a vertical tangent vector

and  be a cocycle deforming
the line bundle on  The direct image gives us a
deformation  of a holomorphic bundle  on the
base curve  Let us calculate the symplectic form:




where the last equality is due to lemma .

We present here the interpretation of the previous lemma
in terms of quasi-isomorphisms. Let us consider the diagram







where  is a factorization subject to the diagonal embedding



and  Let  be the canonical symplectic form on
 defined by Serre duality. Then the lemma
above says that 
 
Splitting 
One of principal questions in the context of the decomposition ()
is a construction of a symplectic splitting of the exact sequence.
This means an embedding
 such that

and

 is a symplectomorphism, where on the left hand side
the symplectic form is defined by Serre duality.
The space of such splittings is an open subset in the space of
lagrangian subspaces in  


Proof.  Let us note that the image  is a lagrangian subspace.
Inversely, let  be a lagrangian subspace in  such
that  (it is an open condition). Then, choosing
a basis  in  and the dual basis
 in  let us construct the splitting 
as follows:  where 
is the basis in  dual to
 The condition 
 fulfills due to lemma . 
In the rest of the paper we will consider several natural ways to
construct such a splitting. We also hope that the main ingredient
- "lagrangian connection" - plays a crucial role in the problem
of quantization.
 

Canonical symplectic form. Rational matrices 
Firstly let us show that there is a natural lagrangian
connection in the case of Beauville system. The phase space is the space of
 points  in  There is an exact sequence similar to the case
of the Hitchin system:
 
The first injection is lagrangian. A splitting
is an injection  inverting :
 such that  and  is lagrangian. Let
us fix  and obtain a deformation of the spectral curve
and the divisor on it by varying only the -coordinates of points. This
deformation is obviously lagrangian due to the description of the Poisson
structure in terms of separated variables. This allows us to use the
following identification

In this section we also identify tangent vectors to the
Jacobian with meromorphic differentials on the spectral curve by means of
the Baker-Akhiezer function and construct the isomorphism
 
where  is the sheaf of meromorphic -forms
of the second kind on the
spectral curve. We prove that the symplectic
structure coincides with the Riemann bilinear form
in terms of the right hand side of ().

Linear dynamics on  and Baker-Akhiezer function 
Here we demonstrate the correspondence between the
Jacobian which is isomorphic to  and the C ech
realization of the group of holomorphic degree  line bundles in
 We have to construct a representative
cocycle for the point of  The main
technique is the Abel transform and its inverse.
 
For the first let us consider the situation of
the dynamics linearized on the Jacobian by
components of the standard Abel transform. It means that
the coefficients  define holomorphic differentials
on the spectral curve  The dynamics on  can
be represented by  The vector  corresponds to
the line bundle  on  of degree  constructed as follows.
The line bundles on  can be obtained by the inverse image of the
Abel transform  from the line bundles on  The expression
 defines a line bundle on the
Jacobian and has monodromy properties

where  and  is the matrix of -periods of
holomorphic differentials. Now we fix a point  on the
spectral curve and consider the space of normalized
meromorphic differentials
of the second kind with poles at  Its factor by exact
differentials is
-dimensional. We can find such a
differential  which has specific -periods
 
Now the expression
 is a
well defined function on the spectral curve which
has an essential singularity at  and
apart from   its divisor is the Abel inverse of
 This function defines a line bundle on the spectral curve
with the same divisor as follows: we define a
covering  of  such that  and  is a disk centered
at  which is sufficiently small to do not contain points of the
divisor. We take the principal part  of the function
 at the point  and declare it to be a transition
function for the chosen covering.
There is a meromorphic section  on  and  on
 It has the same divisor. We arrive to the classical lemma
(see and references therein)
The linear dynamics on the Jacobian can be represented in
terms of the transition function  subject to the chosen
covering  by follows
 
 


This lemma finishes the construction of the correspondence between the
tangent space of the Jacobian and meromorphic differentials of the second
kind with poles at  The choice of a family of spectral curves and a
divisor of poles of meromorphic differentials characterizes different types
of integrable systems. For example in the case of the Calogero-Moser system
one needs to take meromorphic differentials with poles of the second order
at points  on the spectral curve which lie over  But
in all cases there is the correspondence obtained above in terms of
cohomologies.

Deformations of the spectral curve 
Let us consider the special case  of a spectral curve

where the differentials

are holomorphic.
Let us note that all mentioned systems can be represented
in this form, at least birationally. An interesting question is
geometric interpretation of the dynamics when the differentials
linearizing hamiltonian flows are meromorphic. The case of the spin
generalization of the Calogero-Moser system gives us a partial response to
this question. In fact one should consider the generalized Jacobian where
the lattice is generated by the periods of holomorphic and
some meromorphic differentials.
And it can be identified with the Jacobian of a singular spectral curve
obtained by singularization of the base rational curve.
 

In this case the identification between differentials and tangent vectors
can be realized in a more direct way. The space of spectral curves is
parameterized by coordinates  one can identify  with
the tangent vector in  -th direction. This assignment is invariant: a
linear change of coordinates  involves an inverse linear change
in terms of differentials due to the equation of the curve. This
is in agreement with the tensor low for the tangent
space. Hence a tangent vector deforming the spectral curve is identified with
a holomorphic differential 

Riemann bilinear form and dynamics 
Another point of view on the phase space of the
system on the space of rational matrices
involves holomorphic and meromorphic differentials.
As we have already seen the meromorphic differentials
on the spectral curve correspond to
the deformations of the line bundle and the holomorphic differentials
give the deformations of the spectral curve.
Using the splitting of the exact sequence () we can establish an
isomorphism between the tangent space to the phase space
and the meromorphic cohomology space 
where  is the space of meromorphic differentials
of the second kind.
There is a natural bilinear form on 
 
Now we choose the normalized bases of differentials:  - holomorphic
differentials and   -  meromorphic differentials of the second kind
with poles of order  at the chosen point  such that

In this basis the matrix of the Riemann bilinear form () is








where 
 The symplectic structure associated with the canonical
Poisson structure on   viewed
as a bilinear form on the space of meromorphic differentials coincides
with the Riemann bilinear form  


Proof.  We proceed by evaluating the Hamiltonian map.
As we have seen a flow corresponding
to the Hamiltonian  linearizes by
 where 
One has a linear decomposition 
A tangent vector  on the Jacobian defined as the hamiltonian flow of 
can be represented as the -th column of  in the
basis related to chosen holomorphic differentials 
Let us note that  has the same coordinates in terms of
 where  correspond to 
The  meromorphic differential
deforming the line bundle  defined by ()
 for the -th flow,
can be given in coordinates associated with the chosen basis of differentials
by 
It demonstrates that the Hamiltonian vector field related to the
meromorphic differential  is obtained by  where  is the
bivector corresponding to the symplectic form  This verifies that
the off-diagonal blocks of comparing symplectic structures coincide. The diagonal
blocks are zero in both cases.


In the dual language this bilinear form can be represented by a
very natural structure. The cotangent space to the phase space of
considered system can be identified with 
 The Poisson
bivector is the intersection index form in terms of cycles  


Proof.  A bivector corresponding to the symplectic
form  is defined as follows: the symplectic form defines a
map  

Now a bivector is defined by

A covector  can be represented by


one has a similar expression for  
Inserting these covectors into  for all  one obtains


This bivector coincides with the intersection index.
The proof of the theorem was given in the case of meromorphic
differentials with one fixed pole of high order. We used this condition
only to normalize differentials. The proof in the general case is strictly analogous. 

Conclusion 

 
  Lemma  gives us intuition of a geometric interpretation of
the quantization: locally the classical Poisson algebra can be identified with
a free commutative algebra generated by -cycles  with the
Poisson structure given by the intersection index.
There is an obvious but rather tautological quantization of this Poisson
algebra in geometric terms. One has a noncommutative
multiplication on  which is just a wedge product.
On the first cohomologies it restricts as 
 Due to Poincare duality one can identify  with
 and  with  In fact this
anticommutative multiplication on cycles coincides with the intersection
index  It corresponds to the quantization condition up to
the constant  

A question here is to investigate different ways of quantizing this Poisson
algebra and to understand its geometric meaning. Some recent advances in
this direction were realized in where the deformed
abelian differentials were introduced and a noncommutative multiplication
over them was constructed. Let us mention that this multiplication is far
from being trivial, however it is anticommutative.
  We hope that the appearance of the new object in the context of Hitchin-type
systems - the lagrangian connection, which we used for splitting the
factorization of the tangent space to the phase space, is not accidental.
Eventually it is not significant on the classical level. However it contains
some intrinsic geometrical data which could be responsible for quantum
deformations.

 50 

I. Krichever, O. Babelon, E. Billey, M. Talon, Spin
generalization of the Calogero-Moser system and the Matrix KP
equation.  Preprint LPTHE 94/42. Amer. Math. Transl. 170 
(1995) N2 , 83-119.

D. Talalaev
The elliptic Gaudin system with spin.  Theor.Math.Phys. 130 
(2002) 361-374

N. Hitchin, Stable bundles and integrable systems.  Duke
Math. Journal 1987 V 54  N1  91-114.

Bert van Geemen, Emma Previato, On the Hitchin System.  Duke
Math. J. 85  (1996) 659-684.

Krzysztof Gawedzki, Pascal Tran-Ngoc-Bich, Hitchin Systems at
Low Genera.  J.Math.Phys. 41  (2000) 4695-4712.

 M.S. Narasimhan, S. Ramanan, Moduli of vector
bundles on a compact Riemann surface.  Ann. of Math. 89 
(1969), pp. 19-51.

 M.S. Narasimhan, S. Ramanan,  linear
systems on Abelian varieties.  in Vector Bundles on algebraic
varieties, Oxford Univ. Press, 1987, pp. 415-427.

I. Krichever, Vector bundles and Lax equations on algebraic curves. 
Commun.Math.Phys. 229  (2002) 229-269;
hep-th/0108110.

B. Enriquez, V. Rubtsov, Hecke-Tyurin parametrization
of the Hitchin and KZB systems.  math.AG/9911087

N. Nekrasov, Holomorphic bundles and many-body systems. 
PUPT-1534, Comm. Math. Phys.,180  (1996) 587-604;
hep-th/9503157.

A. Chervov, D. Talalaev, Hitchin system on singular curves I. 
hep-th/0303069

A. Chervov, D. Talalaev, Hitchin system on syngular curves II. Schematic points 
to appear

A. Beauville, Jacobiennes des courbes spectrales et systemes
hamiltoniens completement integrables.  Acta Math.
164 (1990), 211-235.

R. Donagi, E. Markman, Spectral cover, algebraically
completely integrable, Hamiltonian  systems, and moduli of
bundles.  alg-geom/9507017.

J. Harnad, J.C. Hurtubise, Multi-hamiltonian structures for
-matrix systems.  math-ph/0211076.

O. Babelon, M. Talon, Riemann surfaces, separated
variables and quantum integrability.  hep-th/0209071

O. Babelon, M. Talon, The symplectic structure of rational Lax pair
systems.  solv-int/9812009

I. Krichever, The -function of the universal Whitham
hierarchy, matrix models and topological field theories. 
hep-th/9205110; LPTENS-92/18.

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky, Integrable systems and factorization problem. 
nlin.SI/0209057.

 F.A. Smirnov, Baxter equation and deformation of abelian
differentials.  math-ph/0302014.


